Thank you 

for purchasing this e-book.

To receive special offers and news 

about our latest products,  

sign up below.

 

Sign Up

Or visit LWW.com

NEUROSCIENCE
E X P L O R I N G   T H E   B R A I N

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   i
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   i

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   ii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   ii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

NEUROSCIENCE
E X P L O R I N G   T H E   B R A I N

FOURTH EDITION

 MARK F. BEAR, Ph.D. 
 Picower Professor of Neuroscience 
 The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory 
 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 

 BARRY W. CONNORS, Ph.D. 
L. Herbert Ballou University Professor
 Professor of Neuroscience and Chair 
 Department of Neuroscience 
 Brown University 
 Providence, Rhode Island 

 MICHAEL A. PARADISO, Ph.D. 
 Sidney A. Fox and Dorothea Doctors Fox Professor of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science 
 Department of Neuroscience 
 Brown University 
 Providence, Rhode Island 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   iii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   iii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

Acquisitions Editor: Jonathan Joyce 
Product Development Editor: Linda G. Francis
Development Editor: Tom Lochhaas 
Editorial Assistant: Tish Rogers
Production Project Manager: Alicia Jackson
Design Coordinator: Joan Wendt
Illustration Coordinator: Jennifer Clements 
Manufacturing Coordinator: Margie Orzech
Marketing Manager: Shauna Kelley
Prepress Vendor: Absolute Service, Inc.

Fourth Edition

Copyright © 2016 Wolters Kluwer
Copyright © 2007 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Copyright © 2001 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Copyright © 1996 Williams & Wilkins

All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, including as photocopies or scanned-in or other electronic copies, or utilized by any information storage and retrieval 
system without written permission from the copyright owner, except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and re-
views. Materials appearing in this book prepared by individuals as part of their ofﬁ cial duties as U.S. government employees are 
not covered by the above-mentioned copyright. To request permission, please contact Wolters Kluwer at Two Commerce Square, 
2001 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103, via email at permissions@lww.com, or via our website at lww.com (products and 
services).

9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

Printed in China

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Bear, Mark F., author.
  Neuroscience : exploring the brain / Mark F. Bear, Barry W. Connors, Michael A. Paradiso. — Fourth edition.

p. ; cm.

  Includes bibliographical references and index.
    ISBN 978-0-7817-7817-6 (hardback : alk. paper)
  I. Connors, Barry W., author. II. Paradiso, Michael A., author. III. Title. 
  [DNLM: 1.  Brain. 2.  Neurosciences. 3.  Spinal Cord.  WL 300]
  QP355.2
  612.8—dc23

Proudly sourced and uploaded by [StormRG]
    Kickass Torrents | TPB | ET | h33t

2014047026

This work is provided “as is,” and the publisher disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, including any warranties 
as to accuracy, comprehensiveness, or currency of the content of this work. 

This work is no substitute for individual patient assessment based upon healthcare professionals’ examination of each patient 
and consideration of, among other things, age, weight, gender, current or prior medical conditions, medication history, laboratory 
data and other factors unique to the patient.  The publisher does not provide medical advice or guidance and this work is merely 
a reference tool.  Healthcare professionals, and not the publisher, are solely responsible for the use of this work including all 
medical judgments and for any resulting diagnosis and treatments.  

Given continuous, rapid advances in medical science and health information, independent professional veriﬁ cation of medical 
diagnoses, indications, appropriate pharmaceutical selections and dosages, and treatment options should be made and health-
care professionals should consult a variety of sources. When prescribing medication, healthcare professionals are advised to con-
sult the product information sheet (the manufacturer’s package insert) accompanying each drug to verify, among other things, 
conditions of use, warnings and side effects and identify any changes in dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the 
medication to be administered is new, infrequently used or has a narrow therapeutic range. To the maximum extent permitted 
under applicable law, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property, as a 
matter of products liability, negligence law or otherwise, or from any reference to or use by any person of this work.

LWW.com

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   iv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   iv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

DEDICATION

Anne, David, and Daniel
Ashley, Justin, and Kendall

Brian and Jeffrey

Wendy, Bear, and Boo

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   v
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   v

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   vi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   vi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

PREFACE

THE ORIGINS OF  NEUROSCIENCE: EXPLORING 
THE OORIGINS OF  NEUROSCIEENCE: EXPLORING 
THE BBRAINN
THE BRAIN  

  

 For  over  30  years,  we  have  taught  a  course  called  Neuroscience  1: 
An Introduction to the Nervous System. “Neuro 1” has been remarkably 
successful. At Brown University, where the course originated, approxi-
mately one out of every four undergraduates takes it. For a few students, 
this is the beginning of a career in neuroscience; for others, it is the only 
science course they take in college. 

 The success of introductory neuroscience reﬂ ects the fascination and 
curiosity everyone has for how we sense, move, feel, and think. However, 
the success of our course also derives from the way it is taught and what 
is emphasized. First, there are no prerequisites, so the elements of biol-
ogy, chemistry, and physics required for understanding neuroscience are 
covered as the course progresses. This approach ensures that no students 
are  left  behind.  Second,  liberal  use  of  commonsense  metaphors,  real-
world examples, humor, and anecdotes remind students that science is 
interesting, approachable, exciting, and fun. Third, the course does not 
survey  all  of  neurobiology.  Instead,  the  focus  is  on  mammalian  brains 
and, whenever possible, the human brain. In this sense, the course closely 
resembles  what  is  taught  to  most  beginning  medical  students.  Similar 
courses are now offered at many colleges and universities by psychology, 
biology, and neuroscience departments. 

 The ﬁ rst edition of  Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain  was written to 
provide a suitable textbook for Neuro 1, incorporating the subject matter 
and philosophy that made this course successful. Based on feedback from 
our students and colleagues at other universities, we expanded the second 
edition to include more topics in behavioral neuroscience and some new 
features to help students understand the structure of the brain. In the 
third edition, we shortened chapters when possible by emphasizing prin-
ciples more and details less and made the book even more user-friendly 
by improving the layout and clarity of the illustrations. We must have 
gotten it right because the book now ranks as one of the most popular in-
troductory neuroscience books in the world. It has been particularly grati-
fying to see our book used as a catalyst for the creation of new courses in 
introductory neuroscience. 

NEW IN THE FOURTH EDITION 
NEW IN THHE FOURTH EDITION 

 The advances in neuroscience since publication of the third edition have 
been  nothing  short  of  breathtaking.  The  elucidation  of  the  human  ge-
nome has lived up to its promise to “change everything” we know about 
our brains. We now have insight into how neurons differ at the molecu-
lar level, and this knowledge has been exploited to develop revolutionary 
technologies  to  trace  their  connections  and  interrogate  their  functions. 
The genetic basis for many neurological and psychiatric diseases has been 
revealed.  The  methods  of  genetic  engineering  have  made  it  possible  to 
create animal models to examine how genes and genetically deﬁ ned cir-
cuits contribute to brain function. Skin cells derived from patients have 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   vii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   vii

vii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

viii

PREFACE

been transformed into stem cells, and these have been transformed into 
neurons that reveal how cellular functions go awry in diseases and how 
the brain might be repaired. New imaging and computational methods 
now put within reach the dream of creating a “wiring diagram” for the en-
tire brain. A goal for the fourth edition was to make these and other excit-
ing new developments accessible to the ﬁ rst-time neuroscience student. 

 We authors are all active neuroscientists, and we want our readers to 
understand the allure of brain research. A unique feature of our book is 
the  Path of Discovery  boxes, in which famous neuroscientists tell stories 
about their own research. These essays serve several purposes: to give a 
ﬂ avor of the thrill of discovery; to show the importance of hard work and 
patience, as well as serendipity and intuition; to reveal the human side 
of  science;  and  to  entertain  and  amuse.  We  have  continued  this  tradi-
tion in the fourth edition, with contributions from 26 esteemed scientists. 
Included  in  this  illustrious  group  are  Nobel  laureates  Mario  Capecchi, 
Eric Kandel, Leon Cooper, May-Britt Moser, and Edvard Moser. 

 AN OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK 
AN OOVERVIEW OF THE BOOKK 

  Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain  surveys the organization and function 
of the human nervous system. We present material at the cutting edge 
of neuroscience in a way that is accessible to both science and nonscience 
students alike. The level of the material is comparable to an introductory 
college text in general biology. 

 The book is divided into four parts: Part I, Foundations; Part II, Sensory 
and Motor Systems; Part III, The Brain and Behavior; and Part IV, The 
Changing Brain. We begin Part I by introducing the modern ﬁ eld of neuro-
science and tracing some of its historical antecedents. Then we take a close 
look at the structure and function of individual neurons, how they commu-
nicate chemically, and how these building blocks are arranged to form a 
nervous system. In Part II, we go inside the brain to examine the structure 
and function of the systems that serve the senses and command voluntary 
movements. In Part III, we explore the neurobiology of human behavior, 
including motivation, sex, emotion, sleep, language, attention, and mental 
illness. Finally, in Part IV, we look at how the environment modiﬁ es the 
brain, both during development and in adult learning and memory. 

 The human nervous system is examined at several different scales, rang-
ing from the molecules that determine the functional properties of neurons 
to  the  large  systems  in  the  brain  that  underlie  cognition  and   behavior. 
Many disorders of the human nervous system are introduced as the book 
progresses, usually within the context of the speciﬁ c neural system under 
discussion. Indeed, many insights into the normal functions of neural sys-
tems have come from the study of diseases that cause speciﬁ c malfunctions 
of these systems. In addition, we discuss the actions of drugs and toxins on 
the brain using this information to illustrate how different brain systems 
contribute to behavior and how drugs may alter brain function. 
 Organization of Part I: Foundations (Chapters 1–7) 
 The goal of Part I is to build a strong base of general knowledge in neurobi-
ology. The chapters should be covered sequentially, although Chapters 1 
and 6 can be skipped without a loss of continuity. 

 In Chapter 1, we use an historical approach to review some basic prin-
ciples of nervous system function and then turn to the topic of how neu-
roscience research is conducted today. We directly confront the ethics of 
neuroscience research, particularly that which involves animals. 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   viii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   viii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

PREFACE

ix

 In Chapter 2, we focus mainly on the cell biology of the neuron. This is 
essential information for students inexperienced in biology, and we ﬁ nd 
that even those with a strong biology background ﬁ nd this review helpful. 
After touring the cell and its organelles, we go on to discuss the structural 
features that make neurons and their supporting cells unique, emphasiz-
ing the correlation of structure and function. We also introduce some of 
the feats of genetic engineering that neuroscientists now use routinely to 
study the functions of different types of nerve cell. 

 Chapters 3 and 4 are devoted to the physiology of the neuronal mem-
brane. We cover the essential chemical, physical, and molecular  properties 
that enable neurons to conduct electrical signals. We discuss the princi-
ples behind the revolutionary new methods of optogenetics. Throughout 
the  chapter,  we  appeal  to  students’  intuition  by  using  a  commonsense 
 approach, with a liberal use of metaphors and real-life analogies. 

 Chapters  5  and  6  cover  interneuronal  communication,  particularly 
chemical  synaptic  transmission.  Chapter  5  presents  the  general  prin-
ciples  of  chemical  synaptic  transmission,  and  Chapter  6  discusses  the 
neurotransmitters and their modes of action in greater detail. We also 
describe many of the modern methods for studying the chemistry of syn-
aptic  transmission.  Later  chapters  do  not  assume  an  understanding  of 
synaptic transmission at the depth of Chapter 6, however, so this chapter 
can  be  skipped  at  the  instructor’s  discretion.  Most  coverage  of  psycho-
pharmacology appears in Chapter 15, after the general organization of 
the brain and its sensory and motor systems have been presented. In our 
experience, students wish to know where, in addition to how, drugs act on 
the nervous system and behavior. 

 Chapter 7 covers the gross anatomy of the nervous system. Here we focus 
on the common organizational plan of the mammalian nervous system by 
tracing the brain’s embryological development. (Cellular aspects of develop-
ment are covered in Chapter 23.) We show that the specializations of the 
human brain are simple variations on the basic plan that  applies to all mam-
mals. We introduce the cerebral cortex and the new ﬁ eld of connectomics. 

 Chapter 7’s appendix, An Illustrated Guide to Human Neuroanatomy, 
covers the surface and cross-sectional anatomy of the brain, the spinal 
cord,  the  autonomic  nervous  system,  the  cranial  nerves,  and  the  blood 
supply. A self-quiz will help students learn the terminology. We recom-
mend that students become familiar with the anatomy in the guide before 
moving on to Part II. The coverage of anatomy is selective,  emphasizing 
the relationship of structures that will be covered in later chapters. We 
ﬁ nd that students love to learn the anatomy. 

 Organization of Part II: Sensory and Motor Systems 
(Chapters 8–14) 
 Part II surveys the systems within the brain that control sensation and 
movement. In general, these chapters do not need to be covered sequen-
tially, except for Chapters 9 and 10 on vision and Chapters 13 and 14 on 
the control of movement. 

 We chose to begin Part II with a discussion of the chemical senses—smell 
and taste—in Chapter 8. These are good systems for illustrating the gen-
eral principles and problems in the encoding of sensory information, and 
the transduction mechanisms have strong parallels with other  systems. 

 Chapters 9 and 10 cover the visual system, an essential topic for all 
 introductory neuroscience courses. Many details of visual system organi-
zation are presented, illustrating not only the depth of current knowledge 
but also the principles that apply across sensory systems. 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   ix
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   ix

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

x

PREFACE

 Chapter 11 explores the auditory system, and Chapter 12 introduces 
the  somatic  sensory  system.  Audition  and  somatic  sensation  are  such 
 important parts of everyday life; it is hard to imagine teaching introduc-
tory neuroscience without discussing them. The vestibular sense of bal-
ance is covered in a separate section of Chapter 11. This placement offers 
 instructors the option to skip the vestibular system at their discretion. 

 In  Chapters  13  and  14,  we  discuss  the  motor  systems  of  the  brain. 
Considering how much of the brain is devoted to the control of movement, 
this more extensive treatment is clearly justiﬁ ed. However, we are well 
aware  that  the  complexities  of  the  motor  systems  are  daunting  to  stu-
dents and instructors alike. We have tried to keep our discussion sharply 
focused, using numerous examples to connect with personal experience. 

 Organization of Part III: The Brain and Behavior 
(Chapters 15–22) 
 Part III explores how different neural systems contribute to different be-
haviors, focusing on the systems where the connection between the brain 
and  behavior  can  be  made  most  strongly.  We  cover  the  systems  that 
control  visceral  function  and  homeostasis,  simple  motivated  behaviors 
such  as  eating  and  drinking,  sex,  mood,  emotion,  sleep,  consciousness, 
language, and attention. Finally, we discuss what happens when these 
 systems fail during mental illness. 

 Chapters 15–19 describe a number of neural systems that orchestrate 
widespread responses throughout the brain and the body. In Chapter 15, 
we focus on three systems that are characterized by their broad  inﬂ uence 
and  their  interesting  neurotransmitter  chemistry:  the  secretory  hypo-
thalamus,  the  autonomic  nervous  system,  and  the  diffuse  modulatory 
systems of the brain. We discuss how the behavioral manifestations of 
various drugs may result from disruptions of these systems. 

 In Chapter 16, we look at the physiological factors that motivate speciﬁ c 
behaviors, focusing mainly on recent research about the control of eating 
habits. We also discuss the role of dopamine in motivation and  addiction, 
and we introduce the new ﬁ eld of “neuroeconomics.” Chapter 17 inves-
tigates the inﬂ uence of sex on the brain, and the inﬂ uence of the brain 
on sexual behavior. Chapter 18 examines the neural systems believed to 
underlie emotional experience and expression, speciﬁ cally emphasizing 
fear and anxiety, anger, and aggression. 

 In Chapter 19, we investigate the systems that give rise to the rhythms of 
the brain, ranging from the rapid electrical rhythms during sleep and wake-
fulness to the slow circadian rhythms controlling hormones, temperature, 
alertness,  and  metabolism.  We  next  explore  aspects  of  brain  processing 
that are highly developed in the human brain. Chapter 20 investigates the 
 neural basis of language and Chapter 21 discusses changes in brain activity 
associated with rest, attention, and consciousness. Part III ends with a dis-
cussion of mental illness in Chapter 22. We introduce the promise of molecu-
lar medicine to develop new treatments for serious psychiatric disorders. 

 Organization of Part IV: The Changing Brain 
(Chapters 23–25) 
 Part IV explores the cellular and molecular basis of brain development 
and learning and memory. These subjects represent two of the most excit-
ing frontiers of modern neuroscience. 

 Chapter 23 examines the mechanisms used during brain development 
to ensure that the correct connections are made between neurons. The 
cellular aspects of development are discussed here rather than in Part I 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   x
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   x

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

PREFACE

xi

for several reasons. First, by this point in the book, students fully appre-
ciate that normal brain function depends on its precise wiring. Because 
we use the visual system as a concrete example, the chapter must also 
follow a discussion of the visual pathways in Part II. Second, we survey 
aspects of experience-dependent development of the visual system that 
are regulated by behavioral state, so this chapter is placed after the early 
chapters  of  Part  III.  Finally,  an  exploration  of  the  role  of  the  sensory 
 environment in brain development in Chapter 23 is followed in the next 
two chapters by discussions of how experience-dependent modiﬁ cations 
of the brain form the basis for learning and memory. We see that many of 
the mechanisms are similar, illustrating the unity of biology. 

 Chapters 24 and 25 cover learning and memory. Chapter 24 focuses on 
the anatomy of memory, exploring how different parts of the brain con-
tribute to the storage of different types of information. Chapter 25 takes 
a deeper look into the molecular and cellular mechanisms of learning and 
memory, focusing on changes in synaptic connections. 

HELPING STUDENTS LEARN 
HELPPING SSTUDENTS LEARN 

Neuroscience:  Exploring  the  Brain   is  not  an  exhaustive  study.  It  is 
 intended  to  be  a  readable  textbook  that  communicates  to  students  the 
important principles of neuroscience clearly and effectively. To help stu-
dents  learn  neuroscience,  we  include  a  number  of  features  designed  to 
enhance comprehension: 
 •   Chapter Outlines and Introductory and Concluding Remarks.
These elements preview the organization of each chapter, set the stage, 
and place the material into broader perspective. 

 •   Of Special Interest Boxes.  These boxes are designed to illuminate 

the relevance of the material to the students’ everyday lives. 

 •   Brain Food Boxes.  More advanced material that might be optional 
in many introductory courses is set aside for students who want to go 
deeper. 

•  Path of Discovery Boxes. These essays, written by leading research-
ers, demonstrate a broad range of discoveries and the combination of 
hard work and serendipity that led to them. These boxes both personal-
ize scientiﬁ c exploration and deepen the reader’s understanding of the 
chapter material and its implications.

 •   Key Terms and Glossary . Neuroscience has a language of its own, 
and  to  comprehend  it,  one  must  learn  the  vocabulary.  In  the  text  of 
each chapter, important terms are highlighted in boldface type. To fa-
cilitate review, these terms appear in a list at the end of each chapter 
in the order in which they appeared in the text, along with page ref-
erences. The same terms are assembled at the end of the book, with 
deﬁ nitions, in a glossary. 

 •   Review  Questions.   At  the  end  of  each  chapter,  a  brief  set  of  ques-
tions for review are speciﬁ cally designed to provoke thought and help 
students integrate the material. 

 •   Further Reading.  We include a list of several recent review articles 
at  the  end  of  each  chapter  to  guide  study  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
textbook. 

 •   Internal Reviews of Neuroanatomical Terms.  In Chapter 7, where 
nervous  system  anatomy  is  discussed,  the  narrative  is  interrupted 
 periodically with brief self-quiz vocabulary reviews to enhance under-
standing. In Chapter 7’s appendix, an extensive self-quiz is provided in 
the form of a workbook with labeling exercises. 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xii

PREFACE

 •  References  and  Resources.   At  the  end  of  the  book,  we  provide
 selected readings and online resources that will lead students into the
research literature associated with each chapter. Rather than includ-
ing  citations  in  the  body  of  the  chapters,  where  they  would  compro-
mise the readability of the text, we have organized the references and
 resources by chapter and listed them at the end of the book.

 •  Full-Color Illustrations.  We believe in the power of illustrations—not 
those that “speak a thousand words” but those that each make a single
point. The ﬁ rst edition of this book set a new standard for  illustrations
in a neuroscience text. The fourth edition reﬂ ects improvements in the
pedagogical design of many ﬁ gures from earlier editions and includes
many superb new illustrations as well.

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

USER’S GUIDE

Succeed in your course and discover the 
excitement of the dynamic, rapidly chang-
ing ﬁ eld of neuroscience with this fourth 
edition of Neuroscience: Exploring the 
Brain.  This  user’s  guide  will  help  you 
discover  how  to  best  use  the  features  of 
this book.

Chapter Outline
This “road map” to the content 
outlines what you will learn in 
each  chapter and can serve as 
a valuable review tool.

CHAPTER ONE

Neuroscience: 
Past, Present, and Future

INTRODUCTION
THE ORIGINS OF NEUROSCIENCE

Views of the Brain in Ancient Greece
Views of the Brain During the Roman Empire
Views of the Brain from the Renaissance to the Nineteenth Century
Nineteenth-Century Views of the Brain

Nerves as Wires
Localization of Speciﬁ c Functions to Different Parts of the Brain
The Evolution of Nervous Systems
The Neuron: The Basic Functional Unit of the Brain

NEUROSCIENCE TODAY

Levels of Analysis

Molecular Neuroscience
Cellular Neuroscience
Systems Neuroscience
Behavioral Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience

Neuroscientists
The Scientiﬁ c Process

Observation
Replication
Interpretation
Veriﬁ cation

The Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research

The Animals
Animal Welfare
Animal Rights

The Cost of Ignorance: Nervous System Disorders

CONCLUDING REMARKS

BOX 2.2

B R A I N   F O O D

 Expressing One’s Mind in the Post-Genomic Era 

 Sequencing  the  human  genome  was  a  truly  monumen-

tal  achievement,  completed  in  2003.  The  Human  Genome 
Project  identiﬁ ed  all  of  the  approximately  25,000  genes  in 
human DNA. We now live in what has been called the “post-
genomic  era,”  in  which  information  about  the  genes  ex-
pressed  in  our  tissues  can  be  used  to  diagnose  and  treat 
diseases. Neuroscientists are using this information to tackle 
long-standing questions about the biological basis of neuro-
logical and psychiatric disorders as well as to probe deeper 
into the origins of individuality. The logic goes as follows. The 
brain is a product of the genes expressed in it. Differences 
in gene expression between a normal brain and a diseased 
brain, or a brain of unusual ability, can be used to identify the 
molecular basis of the observed symptoms or traits. 

 The  level  of  gene  expression  is  usually  deﬁ ned  as  the 
number  of  mRNA  transcripts  synthesized  by  different  cells 
and tissues to direct the synthesis of speciﬁ c proteins. Thus, 
the analysis of gene expression requires comparing the rela-
tive abundance of various mRNAs in the brains of two groups 
of humans or animals. One way to perform such a compari-
son is to use DNA  microarrays , which are created by robotic 
machines that arrange thousands of small spots of synthetic 
DNA  on  a  microscope  slide.  Each  spot  contains  a  unique 
DNA sequence that will recognize and stick to a different spe-
ciﬁ c  mRNA  sequence.  To  compare  the  gene  expression  in 
two brains, one begins by collecting a sample of mRNAs from 
each brain. The mRNA of one brain is labeled with a chemical 
tag that ﬂ uoresces green, and the mRNA of the other brain 
is labeled with a tag that ﬂ uoresces red. These samples are 
then applied to the microarray. Highly expressed genes will 
produce brightly ﬂ uorescent spots, and differences in the rel-
ative gene expression between the brains will be revealed by 
differences in the color of the ﬂ uorescence (Figure A). 

Brainn 1
Brain 1

Brain 2
Brain 2

Bear_01_revised.indd   3

Vial of mRNA
Vial of mRNA
from brain 2,
from brain 2,
labeled green
labeled green

Spot of synthetic
Spot of synthetic
DNA with gene-
DNA with gene-
specific sequence
specific sequence

Microscopic
Microscopic
slide
slide

Vial of mRNA
Vial of mRNA
from brain 1,
from brain 1,
labeled red
labeled red

ix applie
Mix applied
ix applie
MixMMiMiMix applied
ededied
to DNA microarray
roar
A micr
A micr
A m
to DDDNNAAA m crocr
rray
rocrocr

Gene with
Gene with
reduced
reduced
expression
expression
in brain 2
in brain 2

Gene with
Genne with
equivalent
equivalent
expression
expression
in both
in both
brains
brains

Gene with
Gene wwith
reduced
reducedd
expression
expresssion
in brain 1
in brain 1

 Figure A
 Figure A
 Proﬁ ling differences in gene expression. 
Proﬁ ling differences in gene expression. 

Brain Food Boxes
Want  to  expand  your  under-
standing?  These  boxes  offer 
optional advanced material so 
you can expand on what you’ve 
learned. 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xiii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xiii

33333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333

12/5/14   1:36 AM

xiii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

Of Special Interest Boxes
Wondering  how  key  concepts 
appear in the real world? These 
boxes  complement  the  text  by 
showing some of the more prac-
tical  applications  of  concepts. 
Topics include brain disorders, 
human case studies, drugs, new 
technology, and more. 

xiv

USER’S GUIDE

BOX 16.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Marijuana and the Munchies

A  well-known  consequence  of  marijuana 

intoxica-
tion  is  stimulation  of  appetite,  an  effect  known  by  users 
as  “the  munchies.”  The  active  ingredient  in  marijuana  is 
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC),  which  alters  neuronal  func-
tions  by  stimulating  a  receptor  called  cannabinoid  receptor 
1 (CB1). CB1 receptors are abundant throughout the brain, 
so  it  is  overly  simplistic  to  view  these  receptors  as  serving 
only appetite regulation. Nevertheless, “medical marijuana” is 
often  prescribed  (where  legal)  as  a  means  to  stimulate  ap-
petite in patients with chronic diseases, such as cancer and 
AIDS. A compound that inhibits CB1 receptors, rimonabant, 
was  also  developed  as  an  appetite  suppressant.  However, 
human  drug  trials  had  to  be  discontinued  because  of  psy-
chiatric  side  effects.  Although  this  ﬁ nding  underscores  the 
fact  that  these  receptors  do  much  more  than  mediate  the 
munchies, it is still of interest to know where in the brain CB1 
receptors act to stimulate appetite. Not surprisingly, the CB1 
receptors are associated with neurons in many regions of the 
brain  that  control  feeding,  such  as  the  hypothalamus,  and 
some of the orexigenic effects of THC are related to changing 
the activity of these neurons. However, neuroscientists were 
surprised to learn in 2014 that much of the appetite stimula-
tion  comes  from  enhancing  the  sense  of  smell,  at  least  in 

mice. Collaborative research conducted by neuroscientists in 
France and Spain, countries incidentally known for their ap-
preciation of good tastes and smells, revealed that activation 
of CB1 receptors in the olfactory bulb increases odor detec-
tion and is necessary for the increase in food intake stimu-
lated in hungry mice by cannabinoids.

In Chapter 8, we discussed how smells activate neurons 
in the olfactory bulb which, in turn, relay information to the ol-
factory cortex. The cortex also sends feedback projections to 
the bulb that synapse on inhibitory interneurons called gran-
ule cells. By activating the inhibitory granule cells, this feed-
back from the cortex dampens ascending olfactory activity. 
These corticofugal synapses use glutamate as a neurotrans-
mitter. The brain’s own endocannabinoids (anandamide and 
2-arachidonoylglycerol) are synthesized under fasting condi-
tions,  and  they  inhibit  glutamate  release  by  acting  on  CB1 
receptors on the corticofugal axon terminals. Reducing gran-
ule cell activation by glutamate in the bulb has the net effect 
of enhancing the sense of smell (Figure A). It remains to be 
determined if the munchies arise from enhanced olfaction in 
marijuana  users,  but  a  simple  experiment,  such  as  holding 
your  nose  while  eating,  conﬁ rms  that  much  of  the  hedonic 
value of food derives from the sense of smell.

Olfactory bulb

Second-order
olfactory neuron

Inhibitory
granule cell

To olfactory cortex

From olfactory cortex

CB1 receptor

Inhibitory
granule
cell

Glutamatergic
excitatory
synapse

Olfactory
receptor cells

Figure A 
 Activation of CB1 receptors by THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, enhances olfaction by suppressing the release of glutamate 
from corticofugal inputs to inhibitory granule cells in the olfactory bulb. (Source: Adapted from Soria-Gomez et al., 2014.)

Bear_16_revised.indd   563

Path of Discovery Boxes
Learn  about  some  of  the  su-
perstars in the ﬁ eld with these 
boxes.  Leading 
researchers 
describe  their  discoveries  and 
achievements and tell the story 
of how they arrived at them. 

BOX 2.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

 Gene Targeting in Mice 
 by Mario Capecchi 

12/10/14   1:57 AM

 How  did  I  ﬁ rst  get  the  idea  to  pursue  gene  targeting  in

mice? From a simple observation. Mike Wigler, now at Cold 
Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  and  Richard  Axel,  at  Columbia 
University, had published a paper in 1979 showing that ex-
posing  mammalian  cells  to  a  mixture  of  DNA  and  calcium 
phosphate  would  cause  some  cells  to  take  up  the  DNA  in 
functional  form  and  express  the  encoded  genes.  This  was 
exciting because they had clearly demonstrated that exog-
enous, functional DNA could be introduced into mammalian 
cells. But I wondered why their efﬁ ciency was so low. Was it 
a problem of delivery, insertion of exogenous DNA into the 
chromosome, or expression of the genes once inserted into 
the host chromosome? What would happen if puriﬁ ed DNA 
was directly injected into the nucleus of mammalian cells in 
culture? 

 To ﬁ nd out, I converted a colleague’s electrophysiology 
station into a miniature hypodermic needle to directly inject 
DNA into the nucleus of a living cell using mechanical micro-
manipulators and light microscopy (Figure A). The procedure 
worked with amazing efﬁ ciency (Capecchi, 1980). With this 
method,  the  frequency  of  successful  integration  was  now 
one  in  three  cells  rather  than  one  in  a  million  cells  as  for-
merly.  This  high  efﬁ ciency  directly  led  to  the   development 

of  transgenic  mice  through  the  injection  and  random  inte-
gration  of  exogenous  DNA  into  chromosomes  of  fertilized 
mouse  eggs,  or  zygotes.  To  achieve  the  high  efﬁ ciency  of 
expression of the exogenous DNA in the recipient cell, I had 
to attach small fragments of viral DNA, which we now un-
derstand to contain enhancers that are critical in eukaryotic 
gene expression. 

 But  what  fascinated  me  most  was  our  observation  that 
when many copies of a gene were injected into a cell nucleus, 
all  of  these  molecules  ended  up  in  an  ordered  head-to-tail 
arrangement, called a concatemer (Figure B). This was as-
tonishing and could not have occurred as a random event. 
We went on to unequivocally prove that homologous recom-
bination, the process by which chromosomes share genetic 
information  during  cell  division,  was  responsible  for  the  in-
corporation  of  the  foreign  DNA  (Folger  et  al.,  1982).  These 
experiments demonstrated that all mammalian somatic cells 
contain a very efﬁ cient machinery for swapping segments of 
DNA that have similar sequences of nucleotides. Injection of 
a thousand copies of a gene sequence into the nucleus of a 
cell resulted in chromosomal insertion of a concatemer con-
taining  a  thousand  copies  of  that  sequence,  all  oriented  in 
the same direction. This simple observation directly led me to 

Holding 
pipette

Fertilized
mouse

egg

Figure A
 Fertilized mouse egg receiving an injection of foreign DNA. (Image 
courtesy of Dr. Peimin Qi, Division of Comparative Medicine, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

Micropipette

with DNA
solution

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xiv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xiv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

Bear_02_revised.indd   34

12/5/14   1:41 AM

USER’S GUIDE

xv

 The Nucleus.  Its name derived from the Latin word for “nut,” the  nucleus  
of  the  cell  is  spherical,  centrally  located,  and  about  5–10   ␮ m  across.  It 
is contained within a double membrane called the  nuclear envelope . The 
nuclear envelope is perforated by pores about 0.1  ␮ m across. 

 Within the nucleus are  chromosomes  which contain the genetic ma-
terial  DNA  ( deoxyribonucleic acid ). Your DNA was passed on to you 
from your parents and it contains the blueprint for your entire body. The 
DNA in each of your neurons is the same, and it is the same as the DNA 
in the cells of your liver and kidney and other organs. What distinguishes 
a neuron from a liver cell are the speciﬁ c parts of the DNA that are used 
to assemble the cell. These segments of DNA are called  genes . 

 Each  chromosome  contains  an  uninterrupted  double-strand  braid  of 
DNA, 2 nm wide. If the DNA from the 46 human chromosomes were laid 
out straight, end to end, it would measure more than 2 m in length. If we 
were to compare this total length of DNA to the total string of letters that 
make up this book, the genes would be analogous to the individual words. 
Genes are from 0.1 to several micrometers in length. 

 The  “reading”  of  the  DNA  is  known  as   gene  expression .  The  ﬁ nal 
product of gene expression is the synthesis of molecules called  proteins , 
which exist in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, perform many different 
functions, and bestow upon neurons virtually all of their unique charac-
teristics.  Protein synthesis , the assembly of protein molecules, occurs 
in the cytoplasm. Because the DNA never leaves the nucleus, an interme-
diary must carry the genetic message to the sites of protein synthesis in 
the cytoplasm. This function is performed by another long molecule called 

Bear_02_revised.indd   29

Key Terms
Appearing  in  bold  throughout 
the  text,  key  terms  are  also 
listed at the end of each chap-
ter and deﬁ ned in the glossary. 
These can help you study and 
ensure  you’ve  mastered  the 
terminology  as  you  progress 
through your course.

12/5/14   1:40 AM

12/5/14   1:40 AM

the anatomical study of brain cells had to await a method to harden the 
tissue  without  disturbing  its  structure  and  an  instrument  that  could 
produce very thin slices. Early in the nineteenth century, scientists dis-
covered how to harden, or “ﬁ x,” tissues by immersing them in formalde-
hyde, and they developed a special device called a microtome to make 
very thin slices. 

 These technical advances spawned the ﬁ eld of  histology , the micro-
scopic  study  of  the  structure  of  tissues.  But  scientists  studying  brain 
structure faced yet another obstacle. Freshly prepared brain tissue has 
a  uniform,  cream-colored  appearance  under  the  microscope,  with  no 
differences in pigmentation to enable histologists to resolve individual 
cells. The ﬁ nal breakthrough in neurohistology was the introduction of 
stains that selectively color some, but not all, parts of the cells in brain 
tissue. 

 One stain still used today was introduced by the German neurologist 
Franz Nissl in the late nineteenth century. Nissl showed that a class of 
basic dyes would stain the nuclei of all cells as well as clumps of material 
surrounding the nuclei of neurons (Figure 2.1). These clumps are called 
 Nissl bodies , and the stain is known as the  Nissl stain . The Nissl stain is 
extremely useful for two reasons: It distinguishes between neurons and 
glia, and it enables histologists to study the arrangement, or  cytoarchi-
tecture ,  of  neurons  in  different  parts  of  the  brain.  (The  preﬁ x   cyto-   is 
from the Greek word for “cell.”) The study of cytoarchitecture led to the 
realization that the brain consists of many specialized regions. We now 
know that each region performs a different function. 

 synaptic cleft (p. 43) 
 synaptic transmission (p. 43) 
 neurotransmitter (p. 43) 
 axoplasmic transport (p. 43) 
 anterograde transport (p. 44) 
 retrograde transport (p. 44) 
 dendritic tree (p. 44) 
 receptor (p. 46) 
 dendritic spine (p. 46) 

 Classifying Neurons 
 unipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 bipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 multipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 stellate cell (p. 46) 
 pyramidal cell (p. 46) 
 spiny neuron (p. 46) 
 aspinous neuron (p. 46) 
 primary sensory neuron (p. 48) 
 motor neuron (p. 48) 
 interneuron (p. 48) 
 green ﬂ uorescent protein (GFP) 

(p. 48) 

 Glia 
 astrocyte (p. 49) 
 oligodendroglial cell (p. 49) 
 Schwann cell (p. 49) 
 myelin (p. 49) 
 node of Ranvier (p. 49) 
 ependymal cell (p. 52) 
 microglial cell (p. 52) 

Bear_02_revised.indd   25

K E Y   T E R M S

 Introduction 
 neuron (p. 24) 
 glial cell (p. 24) 

 The Neuron Doctrine 
 histology (p. 25) 
 Nissl stain (p. 25) 
 cytoarchitecture (p. 25) 
 Golgi stain (p. 26) 
 cell body (p. 26) 
 soma (p. 26) 
 perikaryon (p. 26) 
 neurite (p. 26) 
 axon (p. 26) 
 dendrite (p. 26) 
 neuron doctrine (p. 27) 

 The Prototypical Neuron 
 cytosol (p. 29) 
 organelle (p. 29) 
 cytoplasm (p. 29) 
 nucleus (p. 29) 
 chromosome (p. 29) 
 DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 

(p. 29) 

 gene (p. 29) 
 gene expression (p. 29) 
 protein (p. 29) 
 protein synthesis (p. 29) 
 mRNA (messenger 

ribonucleic acid) (p. 29) 

 transcription (p. 29) 
 promoter (p. 31) 

 transcription factor (p. 31) 
 RNA splicing (p. 31) 
 amino acid (p. 32) 
 translation (p. 32) 
 genome (p. 32) 
 genetic engineering (p. 32) 
 knockout mice (p. 33) 
 transgenic mice (p. 33) 
 knock-in mice (p. 33) 
 ribosome (p. 36) 
 rough endoplasmic reticulum 

(rough ER) (p. 36) 
 polyribosome (p. 36) 
 smooth endoplasmic reticulum 

(smooth ER) (p. 36) 
 Golgi apparatus (p. 36) 
 mitochondrion (p. 36) 
 ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 

(p. 38) 

 neuronal membrane (p. 38) 
 cytoskeleton (p. 38) 
 microtubule (p. 38) 
 microﬁ lament (p. 39) 
 neuroﬁ lament (p. 39) 
 axon hillock (p. 39) 
 axon collateral (p. 39) 
 axon terminal (p. 41) 
 terminal bouton (p. 41) 
 synapse (p. 42) 
 terminal arbor (p. 42) 
 innervation (p. 42) 
 synaptic vesicle (p. 42) 

Bear_02_revised.indd   53

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

12/5/14   1:41 AM

   1.  State the neuron doctrine in a single sentence. To whom is this insight credited? 
 2.  Which parts of a neuron are shown by a Golgi stain that are not shown by a Nissl stain? 
 3.  What are three physical characteristics that distinguish axons from dendrites? 
 4.  Of the following structures, state which ones are unique to neurons and which are not: nucleus, 

mitochondria, rough ER, synaptic vesicle, Golgi apparatus. 

 5.  What are the steps by which the information in the DNA of the nucleus directs the synthesis of 

a membrane-associated protein molecule? 

 6.  Colchicine is a drug that causes microtubules to break apart (depolymerize). What effect would 

this drug have on anterograde transport? What would happen in the axon terminal? 

 7.  Classify the cortical pyramidal cell based on (1) the number of neurites, (2) the presence or ab-

sence of dendritic spines, (3) connections, and (4) axon length. 

 8.  Knowledge of genes uniquely expressed in a particular category of neurons can be used to under-
stand how those neurons function. Give one example of how you could use genetic information to 
study a category of neuron. 

 9.  What is myelin? What does it do? Which cells provide it in the central nervous system? 

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

 De Vos KJ, Grierson AJ, Ackerley S, Miller CCJ. 

2008. Role of axoplasmic transport in neu-
rodegenerative diseases.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  31:151–173. 

 Eroglu C, Barres BA. 2010. Regulation of synap-
tic connectivity by glia.  Nature  468:223–231. 

 Jones EG. 1999. Golgi, Cajal and the Neuron 

Doctrine.  Journal of the History of Neuroscience  
8:170–178. 

 Lent R, Azevedo FAC, Andrade-Moraes CH, 

Pinto AVO. 2012. How many neurons do you 
have? Some dogmas of quantitative neurosci-
ence under revision.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  35:1–9. 

 Nelson SB, Hempel C, Sugino K. 2006. Probing 

the transcriptome of neuronal cell types. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology  16:571–576. 

 Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H deF. 1991.  The 

Fine Structure of the Nervous System , 3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

 Sadava D, Hills DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum 

MR. 2011.  Life: The Science of Biology , 9th ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Shepherd GM, Erulkar SD. 1997. Centenary of 
the synapse: from Sherrington to the molecu-
lar biology of the synapse and beyond.  Trends 
in Neurosciences  20:385–392. 

 Wilt BA, Burns LD, Ho ETW, Ghosh KK, 

Mukamel EA, Schnitzer MJ. 2009. Advances 
in light microscopy for neuroscience.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  32:435–506. 

Review Questions
Test your comprehension of each 
of  the  chapter’s  major  concepts 
with these review questions.

Further Reading
Interested  in  learning  more? 
Recent review articles are iden-
tiﬁ ed at the end of each chapter 
so  you  can  delve  further  into 
the content.

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

Bear_02_revised.indd   54

12/17/14   4:01 AM

xvi

USER’S GUIDE

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

223

 (b)  Selected  Gyri,  Sulci,  and  Fissures.  The  cerebrum 
is noteworthy for its convoluted surface. The bumps are 
called gyri, and the grooves are called sulci or, if they are 
especially deep, ﬁ ssures. The precise pattern of gyri and 
sulci can vary considerably from individual to individual, 
but many features are common to all human brains. Some 
of the important landmarks are labeled here. Notice that 

the  postcentral  gyrus  lies  immediately  posterior  to  the 
central sulcus, and that the precentral gyrus lies immedi-
ately anterior to it. The neurons of the postcentral gyrus 
are  involved  in  somatic  sensation  (touch;  Chapter  12), 
and  those  of  the  precentral  gyrus  control  voluntary 
movement (Chapter 14). Neurons in the superior tempo-
ral gyrus are involved in audition (hearing; Chapter 11). 

Central sulcus

Precentral gyrus

Postcentral gyrus

Lateral (Sylvian)
fissure

Superior temporal
gyrus

(0.5X)

 (c)  Cerebral  Lobes  and  the  Insula.  By  convention, 
the cerebrum is subdivided into lobes named after the 
bones of the skull that lie over them. The central sulcus 
divides the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe. The tem-
poral lobe lies immediately ventral to the deep lateral 
(Sylvian) ﬁ ssure. The occipital lobe lies at the very back 

of the cerebrum, bordering both parietal and temporal 
lobes. A buried piece of the cerebral cortex, called the 
insula (Latin for “island”), is revealed if the margins of 
the lateral ﬁ ssure are gently pulled apart (inset). The 
insula borders and separates the temporal and frontal 
lobes. 

Frontal lobe

Parietal lobe

An Illustrated Guide to 
Human Neuroanatomy
This appendix to Chapter 7 in-
cludes  an  extensive  self-quiz 
with labeling exercises that en-
able  you  to  assess  your  knowl-
edge of neuroanatomy.

250

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Temporal lobe

(0.6X)

Insula

Occipital lobe

 SELF-QUIZ 
 This review workbook is designed to help you learn the neuroanatomy 
that has been presented. Here, we have reproduced the images from the 
Guide; however, instead of labels, numbered leader lines (arranged in a 
clockwise fashion) point to the structures of interest. Test your knowledge 
by  ﬁ lling  in  the  appropriate  names  in  the  spaces  provided.  To  review 
what  you  have  learned,  quiz  yourself  by  putting  your  hand  over  the 
names. Experience has shown that this technique greatly facilitates the 
learning and retention of anatomical terms. Mastery of the vocabulary 
of  neuroanatomy  will  serve  you  well  as  you  learn  about  the  functional 
organization of the brain in the remainder of the book. 

Bear_7A_revised.indd   223

12/5/14   3:31 AM

The Lateral Surface of the Brain
(a) Gross Features

Self-Quiz
Found in Chapter 7, these brief 
vocabulary  reviews  can  help 
enhance  your  understanding 
of nervous system anatomy.

2

1

4

3

(b) Selected Gyri, Sulci, and Fissures

7

8

SELF-QUIZ
SELFF-QQUIZ
Take  a  few  moments  right  now  and  be  sure  you 
 understand the meaning of these terms:

anterior
rostral
posterior
caudal
dorsal

ventral
midline
medial
lateral
ipsilateral

contralateral
midsagittal plane
sagittal plane
horizontal plane
coronal plane

6

5

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

9

Bear_7A_revised.indd   250

12/5/14   3:32 AM

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xvi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xvi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

 Back in 1993, when we began in earnest to write the ﬁ rst edition of this 
textbook,  we  had  the  good  fortune  to  work  closely  with  a  remarkably 
dedicated and talented group of individuals—Betsy Dilernia, Caitlin and 
Rob Duckwall, and Suzanne Meagher—who helped us bring the book to 
fruition. Betsy continued as our developmental editor for the ﬁ rst three 
editions. We attribute much of our success to her extraordinary efforts 
to improve the clarity and consistency of the writing and the layout of 
the book. Betsy’s well-deserved retirement caused considerable conster-
nation among the author team, but good fortune struck again with the 
recruitment of Tom Lochhaas for this new edition. Tom, an accomplished 
author himself, shares Betsy’s attention to detail and challenged us to not 
rest on our laurels. We are proud of the fourth edition and very grateful to 
Tom for holding us to a high standard of excellence. We would be remiss 
for not thanking him also for his good cheer and patience  despite a chal-
lenging schedule and occasionally distracted authors. 

 It  is  noteworthy  that  despite  the  passage  of  time— 21  years! —we  were 
able to continue working with Caitlin, Rob, and Suzanne in this edition. 
Caitlin’s and Rob’s Dragonﬂ y Media Group produced the art, with help 
and coordination from Jennifer Clements, and the results speak for them-
selves. The artists took our sometimes fuzzy concepts and made them a 
beautiful reality. The quality of the art has always been a high priority 
for the authors, and we are very pleased that they have again delivered 
an art program that ensures we will continue to enjoy the distinction of 
having produced the most richly illustrated neuroscience textbook in the 
world. Finally, we are forever indebted to Suzanne, who assisted us at 
every step. Without her incredible assistance, loyalty, and dedication to 
this project, the book would never have been completed. That statement 
is as true today as it was in 1993. Suzanne, you are—still—the best! 

 For  the  current  edition,  we  have  the  pleasure  of  acknowledging  a  new 
team member, Linda Francis. Linda is an editorial project manager at 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, and she worked closely with us from start 
to ﬁ nish, helping us to meet a demanding schedule. Her efﬁ ciency, ﬂ ex-
ibility, and good humor are all greatly appreciated. Linda, it has been a 
pleasure working with you. 

 In the publishing industry, editors seem to come and go with alarming 
 frequency. Yet one senior editor at Lippincott Williams & Wilkins stayed 
the course and continued to be an unwavering advocate for our project: 
Emily Lupash. We thank you Emily and the entire staff under your direc-
tion for your patience and determination to get this edition published. 

 We again would like to acknowledge the architects and current trustees 
of the undergraduate neuroscience curriculum at Brown University. We 
thank  Mitchell  Glickstein,  Ford  Ebner,  James  McIlwain,  Leon  Cooper, 
James  Anderson,  Leslie  Smith,  John  Donoghue,  Bob  Patrick,  and 
John  Stein  for  all  they  did  to  make  undergraduate  neuroscience  great 
at  Brown.  Similarly,  we  thank  Sebastian  Seung  and  Monica  Linden 
for  their  innovative  contributions  to  introductory  neuroscience  at  the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Monica, who is now on the faculty 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xvii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xvii

xvii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xviii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

of Brown’s Department of Neuroscience, also made numerous suggestions 
for improvements in the fourth edition of this book for which we are par-
ticularly grateful. 

 We gratefully acknowledge the research support provided to us over the 
years by the National Institutes of Health, the Whitehall Foundation, the 
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Klingenstein Foundation, the Charles A. 
Dana Foundation, the National Science Foundation, the Keck Foundation, 
the  Human  Frontiers  Science  Program,  the  Ofﬁ ce  of  Naval  Research, 
DARPA,  the  Simons  Foundation,  the  JPB  Foundation,  the  Picower 
Institute for Learning and Memory, the Brown Institute for Brain Science, 
and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 

 We  thank  our  colleagues  in  the  Brown  University  Department  of 
Neuroscience and in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at 
MIT for their ongoing support of this project and helpful advice. We thank 
the anonymous but very helpful colleagues at other institutions who gave 
us comments on the earlier editions. We gratefully acknowledge the sci-
entists who provided us with ﬁ gures illustrating their research results 
and, in particular, Satrajit Ghosh and John Gabrieli of MIT for providing 
the striking image that appears on the cover of the new edition (to learn 
about the image, see p. xxi). In addition, many students and colleagues 
helped us to improve the new edition by informing us about recent re-
search, pointing out errors in earlier editions, and suggesting better ways 
to  describe  or  illustrate  concepts.  Special  thanks  to  Peter  Kind  of  the 
University of Edinburgh and Weifeng Xu of MIT. 

 We  are  very  grateful  to  our  many  colleagues  who  contributed  “Path  of 
Discovery” stories. You inspire us. 

 We thank our loved ones, not only for standing by us as countless week-
ends  and  evenings  were  spent  preparing  this  book,  but  also  for  their 
 encouragement and helpful suggestions for improving it. 

 Finally,  we  wish  to  thank  the  thousands  of  students  we  have  had  the 
privilege to teach neuroscience over the past 35 years. 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xviii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xviii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

PATH OF DISCOVERY AUTHORS

Floyd Bloom, M.D.
Scripps Research Institute
La Jolla, California
Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons

Stephanie R. Jones, Ph.D.
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island 
The Puzzle of Brain Rhythms

Mario Capecchi, Ph.D.
University of Utah
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Salt Lake City, Utah
Gene Targeting in Mice

Leon N Cooper, Ph.D.
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island
Memories of Memory

Timothy C. Cope, Ph.D. 
Wright State University
Dayton, Ohio
Nerve Regeneration Does Not Ensure 
Full Recovery

Antonio Damasio, Ph.D. 
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
Concepts and Names in Everyday Science

Nina Dronkers, Ph.D.
University of California
Davis, California
Uncovering Language Areas of the Brain

Geoffrey Gold, Ph.D. 
Monell Chemical Senses Center
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Channels of Vision and Smell

Kristen M. Harris, Ph.D.
University of Texas
Austin, Texas 
For the Love of Dendritic Spines

Eric Kandel, M.D. 
Columbia University
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
New York, New York
What Attracted Me to the Study of Learning and Memory in Aplysia?

Nancy Kanwisher, Ph.D. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Finding Faces in the Brain

Julie Kauer, Ph.D.
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island
Learning to Crave

Christof Koch, Ph.D. 
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Seattle, Washington
Tracking the Neuronal Footprints of Consciousness

Helen Mayberg, M.D. 
Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, Georgia 
Tuning Depression Circuits

James T. McIlwain, M.D. 
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island
Distributed Coding in the Superior Colliculus

Chris Miller, Ph.D.
Brandeis University
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Waltham, Massachusetts
Feeling Around Inside Ion Channels in the Dark

Thomas Insel, M.D., Director
United States National Institute of 
Mental Health
Rockville, Maryland
Bonding with Voles

Edvard Moser, Ph.D., and May-Britt Moser, Ph.D.
Kavli Institute for Neural Systems
University of Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway 
How the Brain Makes Maps

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xix
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xix

xix

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xx

PATH OF DISCOVERY AUTHORS

Georg Nagel, Ph.D. 
University of Würzburg
Würzburg, Germany
The Discovery of the Channelrhodopsins

Solomon H. Snyder, M.D. 
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Baltimore, Maryland
Finding Opiate Receptors

Donata Oertel, Ph.D.
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine 
and Public Health
Madison, Wisconsin 
Capturing the Beat

Pasko Rakic, M.D., Ph.D. 
Yale University School of Medicine
New Haven, Connecticut
Making a Map of the Mind

Sebastian Seung, Ph.D. 
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 
Connecting with the Connectome

David Williams, Ph.D. 
University of Rochester
Rochester, New York
Seeing Through the Photoreceptor Mosaic

Thomas Woolsey, M.D. 
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Cortical Barrels

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xx
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xx

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

IMAGES

Cover: An image of a living human brain acquired by magnetic 
resonance  tomography  to  reveal  the  diffusion  of  water  mole-
cules. Water diffusion in the brain occurs preferentially along bundles of 
axons. Axons are the “wires” of the nervous system and conduct electrical 
 impulses generated by brain cells. Thus, this image reveals some of the 
paths of long-range communication between different parts of the brain. 
The image, acquired at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical 
Imaging  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  was  processed 
by a computer algorithm to display bundles of axons traveling together 
as pseudo-colored noodles. The colors vary depending on the direction of 
water diffusion. (Source: Courtesy of Satrajit Ghosh and John Gabrieli, 
McGovern  Institute  for  Brain  Research  and  Department  of  Brain  and 
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

Part  One  Chapter  Opener:  Neurons  and  their  neurites.  Serial 
 images were taken using an electron microscope of a small piece of the 
retina as thin slices were shaved off. Then, a computer algorithm, aided 
by thousands of people worldwide playing an online game called EyeWire, 
reconstructed each neuron and their synaptic connections—the “connec-
tome”  of  this  volume  of  tissue.  In  this  image,  the  neurons  are  pseudo-
colored by the computer, and their neurites, the axons and dendrites from 
each cell, are displayed in their entirety. (Source: Courtesy of Sebastian 
Seung, Princeton University, and Kris Krug, Pop Tech.)

Part Two Chapter Opener: The mouse cerebral cortex. The cere-
bral  cortex  lies  just  under  the  skull.  It  is  critical  for  conscious  sensory 
perception  and  voluntary  control  of  movement.  The  major  subcortical 
input to the cortex arises from the thalamus, a structure that lies deep 
inside the brain. Stained red are thalamic axons that bring to the cortex 
information  about  the  whiskers  on  the  animal’s  snout.  These  are  clus-
tered  into  “barrels”  that  each  represent  a  single  whisker.  The  neurons 
that project axons back to the thalamus have been genetically engineered 
to ﬂ uoresce green. Blue indicates the nuclei of other cells stained with a 
DNA marker. (Source: Courtesy of Shane Crandall, Saundra Patrick, and 
Barry Connors, Department of Neuroscience, Brown University.)

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxi

xxi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxii

IMAGES

Part Three Chapter Opener: Gray matter loss in the cerebral cor-
tex  of  adolescents  with  schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia  is  a  severe 
mental illness characterized by a loss of contact with reality and a disrup-
tion of thought, perception, mood, and movement. The disorder typically 
becomes apparent during adolescence or early adulthood and persists for 
life. Symptoms may arise in part from shrinkage of speciﬁ c parts of the 
brain, including the cerebral cortex. High-resolution magnetic resonance 
imaging of the brains of adolescents with schizophrenia has been used 
to  track  the  location  and  progression  of  tissue  loss.  In  this  image,  the 
regions of gray matter loss are color coded. Severe tissue loss, up to 5% 
annually, is indicated in red and pink. Regions colored blue are relatively 
stable over time. (Source: Courtesy of Arthur Toga and Paul Thompson, 
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California.)

Part Four Chapter Opener: Neurons of the hippocampus. The hip-
pocampus is a brain structure that is critical for our ability to form memo-
ries. One way that information is stored in the brain is by modiﬁ cation of 
synapses, the specialized junctions between the axons of one neuron and 
the dendrites of another. Synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus has been 
studied to reveal the molecular basis of memory formation. This image 
shows the neurites of a subset of hippocampal neurons using a time hon-
ored method introduced in 1873 by Italian scientist Emilio Golgi. (Source: 
Courtesy  of  Miquel  Bosch  and  Mark  Bear,  The  Picower  Institute  for 
Learning and Memory and Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

CONTENTS IN BRIEF

Preface   vii
User’s Guide   xiii
Acknowledgments   xvii
Path of Discovery Authors   xix
Images   xxi

PART ONE   Foundations   1
CHAPTER ONE   Neuroscience: Past, Present, and Future   3
CHAPTER TWO   Neurons and Glia   23
CHAPTER THREE   The Neuronal Membrane at Rest   55
CHAPTER FOUR   The Action Potential   81
CHAPTER FIVE   Synaptic Transmission   109
CHAPTER SIX   Neurotransmitter Systems   143
CHAPTER SEVEN   The Structure of the Nervous System   179
Appendix: An Illustrated Guide to Human Neuroanatomy   219

PART TWO   Sensory and Motor Systems   263
CHAPTER EIGHT   The Chemical Senses   265
CHAPTER NINE    The Eye   293
CHAPTER TEN   The Central Visual System   331
CHAPTER ELEVEN   The Auditory and Vestibular Systems   369
CHAPTER TWELVE   The Somatic Sensory System   415
CHAPTER THIRTEEN   Spinal Control of Movement   453
CHAPTER FOURTEEN   Brain Control of Movement   483

PART THREE   The Brain and Behavior   519 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN   Chemical Control of the Brain and Behavior   521
CHAPTER SIXTEEN   Motivation   551
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN   Sex and the Brain   579
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN   Brain Mechanisms of Emotion   615
CHAPTER NINETEEN   Brain Rhythms and Sleep   645
CHAPTER TWENTY   Language   685
CHAPTER  TWENTY-ONE   The Resting Brain, Attention, and Consciousness   719
CHAPTER  TWENTY-TWO   Mental Illness   751

PART FOUR   The Changing Brain   781 
CHAPTER  TWENTY-THREE   Wiring the Brain   783
CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOUR   Memory Systems   823
CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIVE   Molecular Mechanisms of Learning and Memory   865

Glossary   901
References and Resources   925
Index   953

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxiii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxiii

xxiii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxiv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxiv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

Preface   vii
User’s Guide   xiii
Acknowledgments   xvii
Path of Discovery Authors   xix
Images   xxi

PART ONE   Foundations   1
CHAPTER ONE   Neuroscience: Past, Present, and Future   3
INTRODUCTION   4
THE ORIGINS OF NEUROSCIENCE   4

Views of the Brain in Ancient Greece   5
Views of the Brain During the Roman Empire   5
Views of the Brain from the Renaissance to the Nineteenth Century   6
Nineteenth-Century Views of the Brain   8

Nerves as Wires   9
Localization of Speciﬁ c Functions to Different Parts of the Brain   10
The Evolution of Nervous Systems   11
The Neuron: The Basic Functional Unit of the Brain   12

NEUROSCIENCE TODAY   13

Levels of Analysis   13

Molecular Neuroscience   13
Cellular Neuroscience   13
Systems Neuroscience   13
Behavioral Neuroscience   13
Cognitive Neuroscience   14

Neuroscientists   14
The Scientiﬁ c Process   15

Observation   15
Replication   15
Interpretation   15
Veriﬁ cation   16

The Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research   16

The Animals   16
Animal Welfare   17
Animal Rights   17

The Cost of Ignorance: Nervous System Disorders   19

CONCLUDING REMARKS   20
CHAPTER TWO   Neurons and Glia   23
INTRODUCTION   24
THE NEURON DOCTRINE   24

The Golgi Stain   25
Cajal’s Contribution   27

 BOX 2.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Advances in Microscopy   28

THE PROTOTYPICAL NEURON   29

The Soma   29

The Nucleus   29
Neuronal Genes, Genetic Variation, and Genetic Engineering   32

 BOX 2.2   BRAIN FOOD: Expressing One’s Mind in the Post-Genomic Era   33
 BOX 2.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Gene Targeting in Mice, by Mario Capecchi   34

Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum   36
Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum and the Golgi Apparatus   36
The Mitochondrion   36

The Neuronal Membrane   38

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxv

xxv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxvi

EXPANDED CONTENTS

The Cytoskeleton   38

Microtubules   38

 BOX 2.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Alzheimer’s Disease and the 

Neuronal Cytoskeleton   40

Microﬁ laments   39
Neuroﬁ laments   39

The Axon   39

The Axon Terminal   41
The Synapse   43
Axoplasmic Transport   43

 BOX 2.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hitching a Ride with Retrograde Transport   45

Dendrites   44

 BOX 2.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Intellectual Disability and Dendritic Spines   47

CLASSIFYING NEURONS   46

Classiﬁ cation Based on Neuronal Structure   46

Number of Neurites   46
Dendrites   46
Connections   48
Axon Length   48

Classiﬁ cation Based on Gene Expression   48

 BOX 2.7   BRAIN FOOD:  Understanding Neuronal Structure and Function with 

Incredible Cre   50

GLIA   49

Astrocytes   49
Myelinating Glia   49
Other Non-Neuronal Cells   52

CONCLUDING REMARKS   53
CHAPTER THREE   The Neuronal Membrane at Rest   55
INTRODUCTION   56
THE CAST OF CHEMICALS   57

Cytosol and Extracellular Fluid   57

Water   58
Ions   58

The Phospholipid Membrane   59
Protein   59

Protein Structure   59
Channel Proteins   62
Ion Pumps   63

THE MOVEMENT OF IONS   64

Diffusion   64

 BOX 3.1   BRAIN FOOD: A Review of Moles and Molarity   65

Electricity   64

THE IONIC BASIS OF THE RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL   66

Equilibrium Potentials   67

 BOX 3.2    BRAIN FOOD: The Nernst Equation   70
The Distribution of Ions Across the Membrane   70
Relative Ion Permeabilities of the Membrane at Rest   72

 BOX 3.3   BRAIN FOOD: The Goldman Equation   73

The Wide World of Potassium Channels   73

 BOX 3.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Feeling Around Inside Ion Channels in the Dark, 

The Importance of Regulating the External Potassium Concentration   75

 BOX 3.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Death by Lethal Injection   78

by Chris Miller   76

CONCLUDING REMARKS   78
CHAPTER FOUR   The Action Potential   81
INTRODUCTION   82
PROPERTIES OF THE ACTION POTENTIAL   82

The Ups and Downs of an Action Potential   82

 BOX 4.1   BRAIN FOOD: Methods of Recording Action Potentials   83

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxvi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxvi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxvii

The Generation of an Action Potential   82
The Generation of Multiple Action Potentials   84

Optogenetics: Controlling Neural Activity with Light   86

 BOX 4.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  The Discovery of the Channelrhodopsins, 

by Georg Nagel   86

THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN THEORY   88

Membrane Currents and Conductances   88
The Ins and Outs of an Action Potential   90

THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN REALITY   90
The Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel   92

Sodium Channel Structure   92
Functional Properties of the Sodium Channel   94

 BOX 4.3   BRAIN FOOD: The Patch-Clamp Method   95

The Effects of Toxins on the Sodium Channel   96

Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels   97
Putting the Pieces Together   98

ACTION POTENTIAL CONDUCTION   100

Factors Inﬂ uencing Conduction Velocity   101

 BOX 4.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Local Anesthesia   102

Myelin and Saltatory Conduction   103

 BOX 4.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Multiple Sclerosis, a Demyelinating Disease   103

ACTION POTENTIALS, AXONS, AND DENDRITES   104

 BOX 4.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Eclectic Electric Behavior of Neurons   106

CONCLUDING REMARKS   107
CHAPTER FIVE   Synaptic Transmission   109
 INTRODUCTION    110

  BOX 5.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Otto Loewi’s Dream    111

 TYPES OF SYNAPSES    111
 Electrical Synapses    111
 Chemical Synapses    113

 CNS Chemical Synapses   115 

  BOX 5.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  For the Love of Dendritic Spines, 

by Kristen M. Harris    118

 The Neuromuscular Junction   119 

 PRINCIPLES OF CHEMICAL SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION    119

 Neurotransmitters    119
 Neurotransmitter Synthesis and Storage    122
 Neurotransmitter Release    122

  BOX 5.3   BRAIN FOOD: How to SNARE a Vesicle    125

 Neurotransmitter Receptors and Effectors    124

 Transmitter-Gated Ion Channels    124

  BOX 5.4   BRAIN FOOD: Reversal Potentials    127

 G-Protein-Coupled Receptors    126
 Autoreceptors    128

 Neurotransmitter Recovery and Degradation    130
 Neuropharmacology    130

  BOX 5.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Bacteria, Spiders, Snakes, and People    131

 PRINCIPLES OF SYNAPTIC INTEGRATION    132

 The Integration of EPSPs    132

 Quantal Analysis of EPSPs    132
 EPSP Summation    133

 The Contribution of Dendritic Properties to Synaptic Integration    133

 Dendritic Cable Properties   133 
 Excitable Dendrites    136

 Inhibition    136

  BOX 5.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Startling Mutations and Poisons    137

 IPSPs and Shunting Inhibition    136
 The Geometry of Excitatory and Inhibitory Synapses    138

 Modulation    138

 CONCLUDING REMARKS   140 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxvii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxvii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxviii

EXPANDED CONTENTS

CHAPTER SIX   Neurotransmitter Systems   143
INTRODUCTION   144
STUDYING NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS   145

Localization of Transmitters and Transmitter-Synthesizing Enzymes   145

Immunocytochemistry   145
In Situ Hybridization   146

Studying Transmitter Release   148
Studying Synaptic Mimicry   148
Studying Receptors   149

Neuropharmacological Analysis   149
Ligand-Binding Methods   151

 BOX 6.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Finding Opiate Receptors, by Solomon H. Snyder   152

Molecular Analysis   152

NEUROTRANSMITTER CHEMISTRY   153

Cholinergic Neurons   154

 BOX 6.2   BRAIN FOOD: Pumping Ions and Transmitters   154

Catecholaminergic Neurons   156
Serotonergic Neurons   158
Amino Acidergic Neurons   159
Other Neurotransmitter Candidates and Intercellular Messengers   160

 BOX 6.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: This Is Your Brain on Endocannabinoids   161

TRANSMITTER-GATED CHANNELS   163

The Basic Structure of Transmitter-Gated Channels   163
Amino Acid-Gated Channels   164
Glutamate-Gated Channels   165

 BOX 6.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Exciting Poisons: Too Much of a Good Thing   167

GABA-Gated and Glycine-Gated Channels   167

G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTORS AND EFFECTORS   169
The Basic Structure of G-Protein-Coupled Receptors   169
The Ubiquitous G-Proteins   170
G-Protein-Coupled Effector Systems   170

The Shortcut Pathway   171
Second Messenger Cascades   172
Phosphorylation and Dephosphorylation   174
The Function of Signal Cascades   174

DIVERGENCE AND CONVERGENCE IN NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS   176
CONCLUDING REMARKS   177
CHAPTER SEVEN   The Structure of the Nervous System    179
INTRODUCTION   180
GROSS ORGANIZATION OF THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM   180

Anatomical References   180
The Central Nervous System   183

The Cerebrum   183
The Cerebellum   183
The Brain Stem   183
The Spinal Cord   183

The Peripheral Nervous System   184

The Somatic PNS   184
The Visceral PNS   185
Afferent and Efferent Axons   185

The Cranial Nerves   185
The Meninges   185
The Ventricular System   186

 BOX 7.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Water on the Brain   187

New Views of the Brain   186

Imaging the Structure of the Living Brain   188

 BOX 7.2   BRAIN FOOD: Magnetic Resonance Imaging   189

Functional Brain Imaging   188

 BOX 7.3   BRAIN FOOD: PET and fMRI   190

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxviii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxviii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxix

UNDERSTANDING CNS STRUCTURE THROUGH DEVELOPMENT   192

Formation of the Neural Tube   193

 BOX 7.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Nutrition and the Neural Tube   194

Three Primary Brain Vesicles   195
Differentiation of the Forebrain   196

Differentiation of the Telencephalon and Diencephalon   196
Forebrain Structure-Function Relationships   198

Differentiation of the Midbrain   199

Midbrain Structure-Function Relationships   200

Differentiation of the Hindbrain   200

Hindbrain Structure-Function Relationships   202

Differentiation of the Spinal Cord   203

Spinal Cord Structure-Function Relationships   203

Putting the Pieces Together   204
Special Features of the Human CNS   205
A GUIDE TO THE CEREBRAL CORTEX   208

Types of Cerebral Cortex   208
Areas of Neocortex   210

Neocortical Evolution and Structure-Function Relationships   211

 BOX 7.5   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Connecting with the Connectome, 

by Sebastian Seung   212

CONCLUDING REMARKS   214
APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY   219

PART TWO   Sensory and Motor Systems   263
CHAPTER EIGHT   The Chemical Senses   265
INTRODUCTION   266
TASTE   266

The Basic Tastes   267
The Organs of Taste   267

 BOX 8.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Strange Tastes: Fat, Starch, Carbonation, 

Calcium, Water?   268

Taste Receptor Cells   269
Mechanisms of Taste Transduction   271

Saltiness   271
Sourness   272
Bitterness   273
Sweetness   273
Umami (Amino Acids)   274
Central Taste Pathways   274

 BOX 8.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Memories of a Very Bad Meal   276

The Neural Coding of Taste   277

SMELL   278

The Organs of Smell   278

 BOX 8.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Human Pheromones?   279

Olfactory Receptor Neurons   280

Olfactory Transduction   280
Olfactory Receptor Proteins   282
cAMP-Gated Channels   283

 BOX 8.4  PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Channels of Vision and Smell, 

by Geoffrey Gold   284

Central Olfactory Pathways   284
Spatial and Temporal Representations of Olfactory Information   287

Olfactory Population Coding   287
Olfactory Maps   288
Temporal Coding in the Olfactory System   290

CONCLUDING REMARKS   291

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxix
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxix

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxx

EXPANDED CONTENTS

CHAPTER NINE   The Eye   293
INTRODUCTION   294
PROPERTIES OF LIGHT   295

Light   295
Optics   295

THE STRUCTURE OF THE EYE   296

Gross Anatomy of the Eye   296
Ophthalmoscopic Appearance of the Eye   297

 BOX 9.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Demonstrating the Blind Regions of Your Eye   298

Cross-Sectional Anatomy of the Eye   298

 BOX 9.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Eye Disorders   300

IMAGE FORMATION BY THE EYE   299

Refraction by the Cornea   299
Accommodation by the Lens   301

 BOX 9.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Vision Correction   302

The Pupillary Light Reﬂ ex   303
The Visual Field   304
Visual Acuity   304

MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY OF THE RETINA   304

The Laminar Organization of the Retina   305
Photoreceptor Structure   306

 BOX 9.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Seeing Through the Photoreceptor Mosaic, 

by David Williams   308

Regional Differences in Retinal Structure and Their Visual Consequences   310

PHOTOTRANSDUCTION   312

Phototransduction in Rods   312
Phototransduction in Cones   315

Color Perception   316

 BOX 9.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Genetics of Color Vision   317

Dark and Light Adaptation   316

Calcium’s Role in Light Adaptation   318
Local Adaptation of Dark, Light, and Color   318

RETINAL PROCESSING AND OUTPUT   319

The Receptive Field   320
Bipolar Cell Receptive Fields   321
Ganglion Cell Receptive Fields   323

Structure-Function Relationships   325
Color-Opponent Ganglion Cells   325

Ganglion Cell Photoreceptors   327
Parallel Processing   328

CONCLUDING REMARKS   328
CHAPTER TEN   The Central Visual System   331
INTRODUCTION   332
THE RETINOFUGAL PROJECTION   333

The Optic Nerve, Optic Chiasm, and Optic Tract   333
Right and Left Visual Hemiﬁ elds   334
Targets of the Optic Tract   335

 BOX 10.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: David and Goliath   337

Nonthalamic Targets of the Optic Tract   337

THE LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS   338

The Segregation of Input by Eye and by Ganglion Cell Type   339
Receptive Fields   340
Nonretinal Inputs to the LGN   341

ANATOMY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX   341

Retinotopy   342
Lamination of the Striate Cortex   343

The Cells of Different Layers   344

Inputs and Outputs of the Striate Cortex   344

Innervation of Other Cortical Layers from Layer IVC   345

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxx
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxx

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

Ocular Dominance Columns   345
Striate Cortex Outputs   347

Cytochrome Oxidase Blobs   347

PHYSIOLOGY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX   347

Receptive Fields   348

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxxi

Binocularity   348
Orientation Selectivity   348

 BOX 10.2   BRAIN FOOD:  Cortical Organization Revealed by Optical 

and Calcium Imaging   350

Direction Selectivity   350
Simple and Complex Receptive Fields   351
Blob Receptive Fields   353

Parallel Pathways and Cortical Modules   354

Parallel Pathways   354
Cortical Modules   355

BEYOND THE STRIATE CORTEX   356

The Dorsal Stream   358

Area MT   358
Dorsal Areas and Motion Processing   358

The Ventral Stream   359

Area V4   359
Area IT   360

 BOX 10.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Finding Faces in the Brain, 
by Nancy Kanwisher   360

FROM SINGLE NEURONS TO PERCEPTION   362

 BOX 10.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Magic of Seeing in 3D   364

Receptive Field Hierarchy and Perception   363
Parallel Processing and Perception   365

CONCLUDING REMARKS   366
CHAPTER ELEVEN   The Auditory and Vestibular Systems   369
INTRODUCTION   370
THE NATURE OF SOUND   370

 BOX 11.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Ultrasound and Infrasound   372

THE STRUCTURE OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM   373
THE MIDDLE EAR   374

Components of the Middle Ear   374
Sound Force Ampliﬁ cation by the Ossicles   374
The Attenuation Reﬂ ex   376

THE INNER EAR   377

Anatomy of the Cochlea   377
Physiology of the Cochlea   378

The Response of the Basilar Membrane to Sound   379
The Organ of Corti and Associated Structures   380

 BOX 11.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Deaf Shall Hear: Cochlear Implants   382

Transduction by Hair Cells   382
Hair Cells and the Axons of the Auditory Nerve   386
Ampliﬁ cation by Outer Hair Cells   386

 BOX 11.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hearing with Noisy Ears   387

CENTRAL AUDITORY PROCESSES   388

The Anatomy of Auditory Pathways   389
Response Properties of Neurons in the Auditory Pathway   389

ENCODING SOUND INTENSITY AND FREQUENCY   391

Stimulus Intensity   391
Stimulus Frequency, Tonotopy, and Phase Locking   391

Tonotopy   391
Phase Locking   392

 BOX 11.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Capturing the Beat, by Donata Oertel   394

MECHANISMS OF SOUND LOCALIZATION   395

Localization of Sound in the Horizontal Plane   395

The Sensitivity of Binaural Neurons to Sound Location   396

Localization of Sound in the Vertical Plane   398

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxxii

EXPANDED CONTENTS

AUDITORY CORTEX   399

Neuronal Response Properties   400

 BOX 11.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  How Does Auditory Cortex Work? 

Ask a Specialist   400
The Effects of Auditory Cortical Lesions and Ablation   402

 BOX 11.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Auditory Disorders and Their Treatments   402

THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM   403
The Vestibular Labyrinth   403
The Otolith Organs   404
The Semicircular Canals   406
Central Vestibular Pathways and Vestibular Reﬂ exes   408

The Vestibulo-Ocular Reﬂ ex (VOR)   409

Vestibular Pathology   410

CONCLUDING REMARKS   411
CHAPTER TWELVE   The Somatic Sensory System   415
INTRODUCTION   416
TOUCH   416

Mechanoreceptors of the Skin   417

Vibration and the Pacinian Corpuscle   419
Mechanosensitive Ion Channels   420
Two-Point Discrimination   420

Primary Afferent Axons   422
The Spinal Cord   423

Segmental Organization of the Spinal Cord   423

 BOX 12.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Herpes, Shingles, and Dermatomes   426

Sensory Organization of the Spinal Cord   426

The Dorsal Column–Medial Lemniscal Pathway   426
The Trigeminal Touch Pathway   428

 BOX 12.2   BRAIN FOOD: Lateral Inhibition   429

Somatosensory Cortex   430
Cortical Somatotopy   431

 BOX 12.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Cortical Barrels, by Thomas Woolsey   434

Cortical Map Plasticity   435
The Posterior Parietal Cortex   436

PAIN   437

 BOX 12.4    OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Misery of Life Without Pain   438

Nociceptors and the Transduction of Painful Stimuli   438

Types of Nociceptors   439
Hyperalgesia and Inﬂ ammation   439

 BOX 12.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hot and Spicy   440

Itch   441
Primary Afferents and Spinal Mechanisms   442
Ascending Pain Pathways   443

The Spinothalamic Pain Pathway   444
The Trigeminal Pain Pathway   445
The Thalamus and Cortex   45

The Regulation of Pain   446

Afferent Regulation   446
Descending Regulation   446
The Endogenous Opioids   448

 BOX 12.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Pain and the Placebo Effect   448

TEMPERATURE   449

Thermoreceptors   449
The Temperature Pathway   451

CONCLUDING REMARKS   451
CHAPTER THIRTEEN   Spinal Control of Movement    453
 INTRODUCTION    454
 THE SOMATIC MOTOR SYSTEM    454
 THE LOWER MOTOR NEURON    456

 The Segmental Organization of Lower Motor Neurons    457

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxxiii

 Alpha Motor Neurons    458

 Graded Control of Muscle Contraction by Alpha Motor Neurons    459
 Inputs to Alpha Motor Neurons    459

 Types of Motor Units    461

 Neuromuscular Matchmaking   461 

  BOX 13.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: ALS: Glutamate, Genes, and Gehrig   463 

 EXCITATION–CONTRACTION COUPLING    464

  BOX 13.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Myasthenia Gravis   464 

 Muscle Fiber Structure    464
 The Molecular Basis of Muscle Contraction   466 

  BOX 13.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy   468 

 SPINAL CONTROL OF MOTOR UNITS    469

 Proprioception from Muscle Spindles    469

 The Stretch Reﬂ ex    470

  BOX 13.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Nerve Regeneration Does Not Ensure Full Recovery, 

by Timothy C. Cope   472 

 Gamma Motor Neurons    472
 Proprioception from Golgi Tendon Organs   475 

 Proprioception from the Joints    476

 Spinal Interneurons    476

 Inhibitory Input    477
 Excitatory Input    477

 The Generation of Spinal Motor Programs for Walking    478

 CONCLUDING REMARKS    481
CHAPTER FOURTEEN   Brain Control of Movement   483
INTRODUCTION   484
DESCENDING SPINAL TRACTS   485

The Lateral Pathways   486

The Effects of Lateral Pathway Lesions   487

 BOX 14.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Paresis, Paralysis, Spasticity, and Babinski   488

The Ventromedial Pathways   488
The Vestibulospinal Tracts   489
The Tectospinal Tract   489
The Pontine and Medullary Reticulospinal Tracts   490

THE PLANNING OF MOVEMENT BY THE CEREBRAL CORTEX   491

Motor Cortex   492
The Contributions of Posterior Parietal and Prefrontal Cortex   493
Neuronal Correlates of Motor Planning   494

 BOX 14.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Behavioral Neurophysiology   495

Mirror Neurons   495

THE BASAL GANGLIA   498

Anatomy of the Basal Ganglia   498
Direct and Indirect Pathways through the Basal Ganglia   498

Basal Ganglia Disorders   501

 BOX 14.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Do Neurons in Diseased Basal Ganglia 

Commit Suicide?   502

 BOX 14.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Destruction and Stimulation: Useful Therapies 

THE INITIATION OF MOVEMENT BY PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX   505

for Brain Disorders   504

The Input–Output Organization of M1   506
The Coding of Movement in M1   507

BOX 14.5   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Distributed Coding in the Superior Colliculus, 

by James T. McIlwain   510

The Malleable Motor Map   509

THE CEREBELLUM   510

 BOX 14.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Involuntary Movements—Normal 

and Abnormal   512

Anatomy of the Cerebellum   513
The Motor Loop through the Lateral Cerebellum   514

Programming the Cerebellum   515

CONCLUDING REMARKS   516

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxiii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxiii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxxiv

EXPANDED CONTENTS

PART THREE   The Brain and Behavior   519
CHAPTER FIFTEEN   Chemical Control of the Brain and Behavior    521
INTRODUCTION   522
THE SECRETORY HYPOTHALAMUS  524
An Overview of the Hypothalamus   524

Homeostasis   524
Structure and Connections of the Hypothalamus   524

Pathways to the Pituitary   525

Hypothalamic Control of the Posterior Pituitary   525
Hypothalamic Control of the Anterior Pituitary   528

 BOX 15.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Stress and the Brain   531

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM   531

ANS Circuits   532

Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Divisions   533
The Enteric Division   535
Central Control of the ANS   537

Neurotransmitters and the Pharmacology of Autonomic Function   537

Preganglionic Neurotransmitters   537
Postganglionic Neurotransmitters   538

THE DIFFUSE MODULATORY SYSTEMS OF THE BRAIN   538

Anatomy and Functions of the Diffuse Modulatory Systems   539
 BOX 15.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: You Eat What You Are   540

The Noradrenergic Locus Coeruleus   539

 BOX 15.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons, 

by Floyd Bloom   542

The Serotonergic Raphe Nuclei   541
The Dopaminergic Substantia Nigra and Ventral Tegmental Area   542
The Cholinergic Basal Forebrain and Brain Stem Complexes   545

Drugs and the Diffuse Modulatory Systems   546

Hallucinogens   546
Stimulants   546

CONCLUDING REMARKS   548
CHAPTER SIXTEEN   Motivation    551
 INTRODUCTION    552
 THE HYPOTHALAMUS, HOMEOSTASIS, AND MOTIVATED BEHAVIOR    552
 THE LONG-TERM REGULATION OF FEEDING BEHAVIOR    553

 Energy Balance    553
 Hormonal and Hypothalamic Regulation of Body Fat and Feeding    554

 Body Fat and Food Consumption    554

  BOX 16.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Starving Brains of the Obese    556

 The Hypothalamus and Feeding    556
 The Effects of Elevated Leptin Levels on the Hypothalamus   557 
 The Effects of Decreased Leptin Levels on the Hypothalamus    558
 The Control of Feeding by Lateral Hypothalamic Peptides    560
 THE SHORT-TERM REGULATION OF FEEDING BEHAVIOR    561

 Appetite, Eating, Digestion, and Satiety    562

  BOX 16.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Marijuana and the Munchies    563

 Ghrelin    564
 Gastric Distension   564 
 Cholecystokinin    564
 Insulin    564

  BOX 16.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Diabetes Mellitus and Insulin Shock    565

 WHY DO WE EAT?    566

 Reinforcement and Reward   566 

  BOX 16.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Self-Stimulation of the Human Brain    567

 The Role of Dopamine in Motivation    568

  BOX 16.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Dopamine and Addiction    569
  BOX 16.6   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Learning to Crave, by Julie Kauer    572

 Serotonin, Food, and Mood    571

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxiv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxiv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxxv

 OTHER MOTIVATED BEHAVIORS    571

 Drinking    572
 Temperature Regulation    575
 CONCLUDING REMARKS    576

  BOX 16.7   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Neuroeconomics    577

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN   Sex and the Brain    579
INTRODUCTION   580
SEX AND GENDER   580

The Genetics of Sex   581

Sex Chromosome Abnormalities   582

Sexual Development and Differentiation   583

THE HORMONAL CONTROL OF SEX   584

The Principal Male and Female Hormones   584
The Control of Sex Hormones by the Pituitary and Hypothalamus   585

THE NEURAL BASIS OF SEXUAL BEHAVIORS   587

Reproductive Organs and Their Control   587
Mammalian Mating Strategies   590
The Neurochemistry of Reproductive Behavior   590

 BOX 17.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Bonding with Voles, by Thomas Insel   592

Love, Bonding, and the Human Brain   594

WHY AND HOW MALE AND FEMALE BRAINS DIFFER   595
Sexual Dimorphisms of the Central Nervous System   596
Sexual Dimorphisms of Cognition   598
Sex Hormones, The Brain, and Behavior   599

Masculinization of the Fetal Brain   599

 BOX 17. 2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Bird Songs and Bird Brains   601

Mismatches between Genetic Sex and Hormone Action   602

Direct Genetic Effects on Behavior and Sexual Differentiation 

of the Brain   603

 BOX 17.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  David Reimer and the Basis of 

Gender Identity   604

The Activational Effects of Sex Hormones   606

Brain Changes Associated with Maternal and Paternal Behavior   606
Estrogen Effects on Neuron Function, Memory, and Disease   608

Sexual Orientation   610

CONCLUDING REMARKS   612
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN   Brain Mechanisms of Emotion    615
INTRODUCTION   616
EARLY THEORIES OF EMOTION   616

The James–Lange Theory   617
The Cannon–Bard Theory   617

 BOX 18.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Butterﬂ ies in the Stomach   620

Implications of Unconscious Emotion   619

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM   621

Broca’s Limbic Lobe   622
The Papez Circuit   622

 BOX 18.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Phineas Gage   624

Difﬁ culties with the Concept of a Single System for Emotions   624

EMOTION THEORIES AND NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS   625

Basic Emotion Theories   626
Dimensional Emotion Theories   627
What is an Emotion?   628

 BOX 18.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Concepts and Names in Everyday Science, 

by Antonio Damasio   629

FEAR AND THE AMYGDALA   630

The Klüver–Bucy Syndrome   630
Anatomy of the Amygdala   631
Effects of Amygdala Stimulation and Lesions   632
A Neural Circuit for Learned Fear   633

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxv
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxv

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxxvi

EXPANDED CONTENTS

ANGER AND AGGRESSION   635

The Amygdala and Aggression   635

Surgery to Reduce Human Aggression   636

 BOX 18.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Frontal Lobotomy   637

Neural Components of Anger and Aggression Beyond the Amygdala   637

Anger, Aggression, and the Hypothalamus   638
The Midbrain and Aggression   639

Serotonergic Regulation of Anger and Aggression   640

CONCLUDING REMARKS   641
CHAPTER NINETEEN   Brain Rhythms and Sleep    645
INTRODUCTION   646
THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM   646

Recording Brain Waves   647

 BOX 19.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  The Puzzle of Brain Rhythms, 

by Stephanie R. Jones   650

EEG Rhythms   650
Mechanisms and Meanings of Brain Rhythms   653

The Generation of Synchronous Rhythms   653
Functions of Brain Rhythms   655

The Seizures of Epilepsy   655

SLEEP   658

The Functional States of the Brain   658
The Sleep Cycle   660

 BOX 19.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Walking, Talking, and Screaming in Your Sleep   661

Why Do We Sleep?   662

 BOX 19.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Longest All-Nighter   664

Functions of Dreaming and REM Sleep   664
Neural Mechanisms of Sleep   666

Wakefulness and the Ascending Reticular Activating System   666

 BOX 19.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Narcolepsy   669

Falling Asleep and the Non-REM State   668
Mechanisms of REM Sleep   670
Sleep-Promoting Factors   671
Gene Expression during Sleeping and Waking   672

CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS   673

Biological Clocks   674
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: A Brain Clock   676

 BOX 19.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Mutant Hamster Clocks   678

SCN Mechanisms   679

CONCLUDING REMARKS   681
CHAPTER TWENTY   Language    685
INTRODUCTION   686
WHAT IS LANGUAGE?   686

Human Sound and Speech Production   686

 BOX 20.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Thinking in Different Languages   688

Language in Animals   688
Language Acquisition   690
Genes Involved in Language   692

FOXP2 and Verbal Dyspraxia   692
Genetic Factors in Speciﬁ c Language Impairment and Dyslexia   693

THE DISCOVERY OF SPECIALIZED LANGUAGE AREAS IN THE BRAIN   694

Broca’s Area and Wernicke’s Area   695

 BOX 20.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Assessing Hemispheric Language 

Dominance   696

LANGUAGE INSIGHTS FROM THE STUDY OF APHASIA   697

 BOX 20.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Uncovering Language Areas of the Brain, 

Broca’s Aphasia   699
Wernicke’s Aphasia   700
The Wernicke–Geschwind Model of Language and Aphasia   701

by Nina Dronkers   698

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxvi
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxvi

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxxvii

Conduction Aphasia   704
Aphasia in Bilinguals and Deaf People   705

ASYMMETRICAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN THE TWO 
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES   706

Language Processing in Split-Brain Humans   707

Left Hemisphere Language Dominance   708
Language Functions of the Right Hemisphere   708

Anatomical Asymmetry and Language   709

LANGUAGE STUDIES USING BRAIN STIMULATION AND HUMAN 
BRAIN IMAGING   711

The Effects of Brain Stimulation on Language   711
Imaging of Language Processing in the Human Brain   713

 BOX 20.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hearing Sight and Seeing Touch   714

CONCLUDING REMARKS   717
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE   The Resting Brain, Attention, and 
Consciousness    719
INTRODUCTION   720
RESTING STATE BRAIN ACTIVITY   720

The Brain’s Default Mode Network   721
Functions of the Default Network   722

ATTENTION   723

 BOX 21.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST:  Attention-Deﬁ cit Hyperactivity 

Disorder   724

Behavioral Consequences of Attention   725

Attention Enhances Visual Sensitivity   725
Attention Speeds Reaction Times   727
Physiological Effects of Attention   728

Functional MRI Imaging of Human Attention to Location   728
PET Imaging of Human Attention to Features   729
Attention Enhances Responses of Neurons in Parietal Cortex   731
Attention Focuses Receptive Fields in Area V4   733

Brain Circuits for the Control of Attention   734

The Pulvinar, a Subcortical Component   734
The Frontal Eye Fields, Eye Movements, and Attention   735
Directing Attention with Salience and Priority Maps   736
A Priority Map in the Parietal Lobe   737

 BOX 21.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hemispatial Neglect Syndrome   738

The Frontoparietal Attention Network   740

CONSCIOUSNESS   742

What Is Consciousness?   742
Neural Correlates of Consciousness   743

 BOX 21.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  Tracking the Neuronal Footprints 

of Consciousness, by Christof Koch   744

Neuronal Correlates of Alternating Perception in Binocular Rivalry   743
Visual Awareness and Human Brain Activity   746
Challenges in the Study of Consciousness   748

CONCLUDING REMARKS   749
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO   Mental Illness    751
INTRODUCTION   752
MENTAL ILLNESS AND THE BRAIN   752

Psychosocial Approaches to Mental Illness   753
Biological Approaches to Mental Illness   753

The Promise and Challenge of Molecular Medicine in Psychiatry   754

ANXIETY DISORDERS   756

A Description of Anxiety Disorders   756

Panic Disorder   757
Agoraphobia   757

 BOX 22.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks   758

Other Disorders Characterized by Increased Anxiety   757

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder   757

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxvii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxvii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xxxviii

EXPANDED CONTENTS

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder   757

Biological Bases of Anxiety Disorders   758

The Stress Response   759
Regulation of the HPA Axis by the Amygdala and Hippocampus   760

Treatments for Anxiety Disorders   761

Psychotherapy   761
Anxiolytic Medications   761

AFFECTIVE DISORDERS   763

A Description of Affective Disorders   763

Major Depression   763
Bipolar Disorder   764

 BOX 22.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: A Magical Orange Grove in a Nightmare   765

Biological Bases of Affective Disorders   764

The Monoamine Hypothesis   764
The Diathesis–Stress Hypothesis   766
Anterior Cingulate Cortex Dysfunction   767

Treatments for Affective Disorders   767

Electroconvulsive Therapy   768
Psychotherapy   768
Antidepressants   768
Lithium   770
Deep Brain Stimulation   771

 BOX 22.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Tuning Depression Circuits, by Helen Mayberg   772

SCHIZOPHRENIA   771

A Description of Schizophrenia   771
Biological Bases of Schizophrenia   774

Genes and the Environment   774
The Dopamine Hypothesis   775
The Glutamate Hypothesis   777

Treatments for Schizophrenia   779

CONCLUDING REMARKS   779

PART FOUR   The Changing Brain   781
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE   Wiring the Brain    783
INTRODUCTION   784
THE GENESIS OF NEURONS   785

Cell Proliferation   785

 BOX 23.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Neurogenesis in Adult Humans   787

Cell Migration   788
Cell Differentiation   789
Differentiation of Cortical Areas   791

 BOX 23.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Making a Map of the Mind, by Pasko Rakic   792

THE GENESIS OF CONNECTIONS   795

The Growing Axon   796
Axon Guidance   797

Guidance Cues   797
Establishing Topographic Maps   799

 BOX 23.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Why Our CNS Axons Don’t Regenerate   800

Synapse Formation   801

THE ELIMINATION OF CELLS AND SYNAPSES   802

 BOX 23.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Mystery of Autism   803

Cell Death   803
Changes in Synaptic Capacity   804

ACTIVITY-DEPENDENT SYNAPTIC REARRANGEMENT   805

Synaptic Segregation   806

Segregation of Retinal Inputs to the LGN   806
Segregation of LGN Inputs in the Striate Cortex   808

 BOX 23.5   BRAIN FOOD:  Three-Eyed Frogs, Ocular Dominance Columns, 

 BOX 23.6   BRAIN FOOD: The Critical Period Concept   810

and Other Oddities   808

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxviii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxviii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

EXPANDED CONTENTS

xxxix

Synaptic Convergence   809
Synaptic Competition   811
Modulatory Inﬂ uences   812

ELEMENTARY MECHANISMS OF CORTICAL SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY   814

Excitatory Synaptic Transmission in the Immature Visual System   815
Long-Term Synaptic Potentiation   815
Long-Term Synaptic Depression   817

WHY CRITICAL PERIODS END   818
CONCLUDING REMARKS   819
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR   Memory Systems    823
INTRODUCTION   824
TYPES OF MEMORY AND AMNESIA   824

Declarative and Nondeclarative Memory   824

 BOX 24.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Extraordinary Memory   826

Types of Procedural Memory   825

Nonassociative Learning   827
Associative Learning   827

Types of Declarative Memory   828
Amnesia   829

WORKING MEMORY   830

The Prefrontal Cortex and Working Memory   831

Imaging Working Memory in the Human Brain   832

Area LIP and Working Memory   833

DECLARATIVE MEMORY   835

The Neocortex and Declarative Memory   935

Hebb and the Cell Assembly   836

Studies Implicating the Medial Temporal Lobes   837

Anatomy of the Medial Temporal Lobe   838
Electrical Stimulation of the Human Temporal Lobes   839
Neural Recordings from the Human Medial Temporal Lobe   840

Temporal Lobe Amnesia   841

The Case of H.M.: Temporal Lobectomy and Amnesia   841
An Animal Model of Human Amnesia   843

 BOX 24.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Korsakoff’s Syndrome 
and the Case of N.A.   845

Memory Functions of the Hippocampal System   846

The Effects of Hippocampal Lesions in Rats   846
Spatial Memory, Place Cells, and Grid Cells   847

 BOX 24.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  How the Brain Makes Maps, by Edvard 

and May-Britt Moser   850

Hippocampal Functions Beyond Spatial Memory   852
Consolidating Memories and Retaining Engrams   853

Standard and Multiple Trace Models of Consolidation   854
Reconsolidation   856

 BOX 24.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Introducing False Memories 
and Erasing Bad Memories   858

PROCEDURAL MEMORY   857

The Striatum and Procedural Memory in Rodents   857
Habit Learning in Humans and Nonhuman Primates   861

CONCLUDING REMARKS   862
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE   Molecular Mechanisms of Learning 

and Memory   865
INTRODUCTION   866
MEMORY ACQUISITION   867

Cellular Reports of Memory Formation   867

Distributed Memory Storage   869

 BOX 25.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY:  What Attracted Me to the Study of Learning and 

Memory in Aplysia? by Eric Kandel   871

Strengthening Synapses   874

Anatomy of the Hippocampus   874

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxix
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xxxix

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xl

EXPANDED CONTENTS

Properties of LTP in CA1   875
Mechanisms of LTP in CA1   877

 BOX 25.2   BRAIN FOOD: Synaptic Plasticity: Timing Is Everything   878

Weakening Synapses   880

 BOX 25.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Memories of Memory, by Leon Cooper   880
 BOX 25.4   BRAIN FOOD: The Wide World of Long-Term Synaptic Depression   883

Mechanisms of LTD in CA1   882
Glutamate Receptor Trafﬁ cking   884

LTP, LTD, and Memory   885

 BOX 25.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Memory Mutants   888

Synaptic Homeostasis   889

Metaplasticity   889
Synaptic Scaling   891

MEMORY CONSOLIDATION   891

Persistently Active Protein Kinases   892

CaMKII   892
Protein Kinase M Zeta   893

Protein Synthesis and Memory Consolidation   893

Synaptic Tagging and Capture   894
CREB and Memory   894
Structural Plasticity and Memory   896

CONCLUDING REMARKS   897

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xl
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xl

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

LIST OF BOXES

BRAIN FOOD
Expressing One’s Mind in the Post-Genomic Era   33
Understanding Neuronal Structure and 

Function with Incredible Cre   50
A Review of Moles and Molarity   65
The Nernst Equation   70
The Goldman Equation   73
Methods of Recording Action Potentials   83
The Patch-Clamp Method   95
How to SNARE a Vesicle   125
Reversal Potentials   127
Pumping Ions and Transmitters   154
Magnetic Resonance Imaging   189
PET and fMRI   190
Cortical Organization Revealed by Optical 

and Calcium Imaging   350

Lateral Inhibition   429
Three-Eyed Frogs, Ocular Dominance Columns, 

and Other Oddities   808

The Critical Period Concept   810
Synaptic Plasticity: Timing Is Everything   878
The Wide World of Long-Term Synaptic 

Depression   883

OF SPECIAL INTEREST
Advances in Microscopy   28
Alzheimer’s Disease and the Neuronal 

Cytoskeleton   40

Hitching a Ride with Retrograde Transport   45
Intellectual Disability and Dendritic Spines   47
Death by Lethal Injection   78
Local Anesthesia   102
Multiple Sclerosis, a Demyelinating Disease   103
The Eclectic Electric Behavior of Neurons   106
Otto Loewi’s Dream   111
Bacteria, Spiders, Snakes, and People   131
Startling Mutations and Poisons   137
This Is Your Brain on Endocannabinoids   161
Exciting Poisons: Too Much of a Good Thing   167
Water on the Brain   187
Nutrition and the Neural Tube   194
Strange Tastes: Fat, Starch, Carbonation, 

Calcium, Water?   268

Memories of a Very Bad Meal   276
Human Pheromones?   279
Demonstrating the Blind Regions of Your Eye   298
Eye Disorders   300
Vision Correction   302
The Genetics of Color Vision   317

David and Goliath   337
The Magic of Seeing in 3D   364
Ultrasound and Infrasound   372
The Deaf Shall Hear: Cochlear Implants   382
Hearing with Noisy Ears   387
How Does Auditory Cortex Work? Ask 

a Specialist   400

Auditory Disorders and Their Treatments   402
Herpes, Shingles, and Dermatomes   426
The Misery of Life without Pain   438
Hot and Spicy   440
Pain and the Placebo Effect   448
ALS: Glutamate, Genes, and Gehrig   463
Myasthenia Gravis   464
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy   468
Paresis, Paralysis, Spasticity, and Babinski   488
Behavioral Neurophysiology   495
Do Neurons in Diseased Basal Ganglia 

Commit Suicide?   502

Destruction and Stimulation: Useful Therapies 

for Brain Disorders   504

Involuntary Movements—Normal and Abnormal   512
Stress and the Brain   531
You Eat What You Are   540
The Starving Brains of the Obese  556
Marijuana and the Munchies   563
Diabetes Mellitus and Insulin Shock   565
Self-Stimulation of the Human Brain   567
Dopamine and Addiction   569
Neuroeconomics   577
Bird Songs and Bird Brains   601
David Reimer and the Basis of Gender Identity   604
Butterﬂ ies in the Stomach   620
Phineas Gage   624
The Frontal Lobotomy   637
Walking, Talking, and Screaming in Your Sleep   661
The Longest All-Nighter   664
Narcolepsy   669
Mutant Hamster Clocks   678
Thinking in Different Languages   688
Assessing Hemispheric Language Dominance   696
Hearing Sight and Seeing Touch   714
Attention-Deﬁ cit Hyperactivity Disorder   724
Hemispatial Neglect Syndrome   738
Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks   758
A Magical Orange Grove in a Nightmare   765
Neurogenesis in Adult Humans   787
Why Our CNS Axons Don’t Regenerate   800
The Mystery of Autism   803

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xli
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xli

xli

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

xlii

LIST OF BOXES

Extraordinary Memory   826
Korsakoff’s Syndrome and the Case of N.A.   845
Introducing False Memories and 

Erasing Bad Memories   858

Memory Mutants   888

PATH OF DISCOVERY
Gene Targeting in Mice, 
by Mario Capecchi   34

Feeling Around Inside Ion Channels in the Dark, 

by Chris Miller   76

The Discovery of the Channelrhodopsins, 

by Georg Nagel   86

For the Love of Dendritic Spines, 

by Kristen M. Harris   118

Finding Opiate Receptors, 

by Solomon H. Snyder   152

Connecting with the Connectome, 

by Sebastian Seung   212

Channels of Vision and Smell, 

by Geoffrey Gold   284

Seeing Through the Photoreceptor Mosaic, 

by David Williams   308

Finding Faces in the Brain, 
by Nancy Kanwisher   360

Capturing the Beat, 

by Donata Oertel   394

Cortical Barrels, 

by Thomas Woolsey   434

by Floyd Bloom   542

Learning to Crave, 

by Julie Kauer   572

Bonding with Voles, 

by Thomas Insel   592

Concepts and Names in Everyday Science, 

by Antonio Damasio   629

The Puzzle of Brain Rhythms, 
by Stephanie R. Jones   650

Uncovering Language Areas of the Brain, 

by Nina Dronkers   698

Tracking the Neuronal Footprints of Consciousness,

Nerve Regeneration Does Not Ensure Full Recovery, 

by Timothy C. Cope   472

Distributed Coding in the Superior Colliculus, 

by James T. McIlwain   510

Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons, 

by Christof Koch   744

Tuning Depression Circuits, 

by Helen Mayberg   772

Making a Map of the Mind, 

by Pasko Rakic   792

How the Brain Makes Maps, 

and Memory in Aplysia? 
by Eric Kandel   871
Memories of Memory, 
by Leon Cooper   880

by Edvard and May-Britt Moser   850

What Attracted Me to the Study of Learning 

000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xlii
000i-0xlii_Bear_FM_revised_final.indd   xlii

12/20/14   7:38 AM
12/20/14   7:38 AM

PART ONE

Foundations

C H A P T E R   1
Neuroscience: Past, Present, and Future      3

C H A P T E R   2
Neurons and Glia      23

C H A P T E R   3
The Neuronal Membrane at Rest      55

C H A P T E R   4
The Action Potential      81

C H A P T E R   5
Synaptic Transmission      109

C H A P T E R   6
Neurotransmitter Systems      143

C H A P T E R   7
The Structure of the Nervous System      179

Appendix: An Illustrated Guide to Human Neuroanatomy      219

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   1
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   1

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   2
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   2

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER ONE

Neuroscience: 
Past, Present, and Future

INTRODUCTION
THE ORIGINS OF NEUROSCIENCE

Views of the Brain in Ancient Greece
Views of the Brain During the Roman Empire
Views of the Brain from the Renaissance to the Nineteenth Century
Nineteenth-Century Views of the Brain

Nerves as Wires
Localization of Speciﬁ c Functions to Different Parts of the Brain
The Evolution of Nervous Systems
The Neuron: The Basic Functional Unit of the Brain

NEUROSCIENCE TODAY

Levels of Analysis

Molecular Neuroscience
Cellular Neuroscience
Systems Neuroscience
Behavioral Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience

Neuroscientists
The Scientiﬁ c Process

Observation
Replication
Interpretation
Veriﬁ cation

The Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research

The Animals
Animal Welfare
Animal Rights

The Cost of Ignorance: Nervous System Disorders

CONCLUDING REMARKS

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   3
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   3

3333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

4

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCCTION

Men ought to know that from nothing else but the brain come joys,  delights, 
laughter and sports, and sorrows, griefs, despondency, and lamentations. 
And by this, in an especial manner, we acquire wisdom and knowledge, 
and see and hear and know what are foul and what are fair, what are 
bad and what are good, what are sweet and what are unsavory. . . . And 
by the same organ we become mad and delirious, and fears and terrors 
assail us. . . . All these things we endure from the brain when it is not 
healthy. . . . In these ways I am of the opinion that the brain exercises the 
greatest power in the man.

—Hippocrates, On the Sacred Disease (Fourth century B.C.E.)

It is human nature to be curious about how we see and hear; why some 
things feel good and others hurt; how we move; how we reason, learn, re-
member, and forget; and the nature of anger and madness. Neuroscience 
research  is  unraveling  these  mysteries,  and  the  conclusions  of  this  re-
search are the subject of this textbook.

The  word  “neuroscience”  is  young.  The  Society  for  Neuroscience,  an 
 association  of  professional  neuroscientists,  was  founded  only  relatively 
recently  in  1970.  The  study  of  the  brain,  however,  is  as  old  as  science 
itself.  Historically,  the  scientists  who  devoted  themselves  to  an  under-
standing of the nervous system came from different scientiﬁ c disciplines: 
medicine,  biology,  psychology,  physics,  chemistry,  mathematics.  The 
 neuroscience revolution occurred when scientists realized that the best 
hope for understanding the workings of the brain would come from an 
interdisciplinary  approach,  a  combination  of  traditional  approaches  to 
yield  a  new  synthesis,  a  new  perspective.  Most  people  involved  in  the 
scientiﬁ c  investigation  of  the  nervous  system  today  regard  themselves 
as neuroscientists. Indeed, while the course you are now taking may be 
sponsored by the psychology or biology department at your university or 
college and may be called biopsychology or neurobiology, you can bet that 
your instructor is a neuroscientist.

The Society for Neuroscience is one of the largest and fastest growing 
associations of professional scientists. Far from being overly specialized, 
the  ﬁ eld  is  as  broad  as  nearly  all  of  natural  science,  with  the  nervous 
 system  serving  as  the  common  point  of  focus.  Understanding  how  the 
brain works requires knowledge about many things, from the structure of 
the water molecule to the electrical and chemical properties of the brain 
to why Pavlov’s dog salivated when a bell rang. This book explores the 
brain with this broad perspective.

We begin the adventure with a brief tour of neuroscience. What have 
scientists thought about the brain over the ages? Who are the neuroscien-
tists of today, and how do they approach studying the brain?

THE ORIGINS OF NEUROSCIENCE
THE OORIGINS OF NEUROSCIEENCE

You probably already know that the nervous system—the brain, spinal 
cord, and nerves of the body—is crucial for life and enables you to sense, 
move, and think. How did this view arise?

Evidence suggests that even our prehistoric ancestors appreciated that 
the brain was vital to life. The archeological record includes many homi-
nid skulls, dating back a million years and more, that bear signs of fatal 
cranial damage likely inﬂ icted by other hominids. As early as 7000 years 
ago,  people  were  boring  holes  in  each  other’s  skulls  (a   process  called 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   4
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   4

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

5

 trepanation), evidently with the aim not to kill but to cure (Figure 1.1). 
These  skulls  show  signs  of  healing  after  the  operation,  indicating  that 
this  procedure  had  been  carried  out  on  live  subjects  rather  than  being 
a  ritual  conducted  after  death.  Some  individuals  apparently  survived 
 multiple skull surgeries. What those early surgeons hoped to accomplish 
is not clear, although it has been speculated that this procedure may have 
been used to treat headaches or mental disorders, perhaps by giving the 
evil spirits an escape route.

Recovered writings from the physicians of ancient Egypt, dating back 
almost  5000  years,  indicate  that  they  were  well  aware  of  many  symp-
toms of brain damage. However, it is also very clear that the heart, not 
the brain, was considered to be the seat of the soul and the repository of 
memories. Indeed, while the rest of the body was carefully preserved for 
the afterlife, the brain of the deceased was simply scooped out through 
the nostrils and discarded! The view that the heart was the seat of con-
sciousness  and  thought  was  not  seriously  challenged  until  the  time  of 
Hippocrates.

Views of the Brain in Ancient Greece
Consider the idea that the different parts of your body look different 
 because they serve different purposes. The structures of the feet and 
hands are very different, for example, because they perform very dif-
ferent  functions:  We  walk  on  our  feet  and  manipulate  objects  with 
our hands. Thus, there appears to be a very clear correlation between 
structure  and  function.  Differences  in  appearance  predict  differences 
in function.

What  can  we  glean  about  function  from  the  structure  of  the  head? 
Quick inspection and a few simple experiments (like closing your eyes) 
reveal that the head is specialized for sensing the environment with the 
eyes  and  ears,  nose,  and  tongue.  Even  crude  dissection  can  trace  the 
nerves from these organs through the skull into the brain. What would 
you conclude about the brain from these observations?

If your answer is that the brain is the organ of sensation, then you 
have  reached  the  same  conclusion  as  several  Greek  scholars  of  the 
fourth  century  B.C.E.  The  most  inﬂ uential  scholar  was  Hippocrates 
 (460–379  B.C.E.),  the  father  of  Western  medicine,  who  believed  that 
the  brain  was  not  only  involved  in  sensation  but  was  also  the  seat  of 
intelligence.

This view was not universally accepted, however. The famous Greek 
philosopher Aristotle (384–322  B.C.E.) clung to the belief that the heart 
was  the  center  of  intellect.  What  function  did  Aristotle  reserve  for  the 
brain? He believed it was a radiator for cooling blood that was overheated 
by  the  seething  heart.  The  rational  temperament  of  humans  was  thus 
explained by the large cooling capacity of our brain.

▲ FIGURE 1.1
Evidence of prehistoric brain surgery.
This skull of a man over 7000 years old 
was surgically opened while he was still 
alive. The arrows indicate two sites of 
trepanation. (Source: Alt et al., 1997, 
Fig. 1a.)

Cerebrum

Cerebellum

1 cm

Side view

Views of the Brain During the Roman Empire
The most important ﬁ gure in Roman medicine was the Greek physician 
and writer Galen (130–200 C.E.), who embraced the Hippocratic view of 
brain function. As physician to the gladiators, he must have witnessed 
the  unfortunate  consequences  of  spine  and  brain  injuries.  However, 
Galen’s opinions about the brain were probably inﬂ uenced more by his 
many careful animal dissections. Figure 1.2 is a drawing of the brain of 
a  sheep,  one  of  Galen’s  favorite  subjects.  Two  major  parts  are  evident: 
the cerebrum in the front and the cerebellum in the back. (The structure 
of the brain is described in Chapter 7.) Just as we can deduce function 

Top view

▲ FIGURE 1.2
The brain of a sheep. Notice the location 
and appearance of the cerebrum and the 
cerebellum.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   5
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   5

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

6

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Ventricles

▲ FIGURE 1.3
A dissected sheep brain showing the 
ventricles.

from  the  structure  of  the  hands  and  feet,  Galen  tried  to  deduce  func-
tion from the structure of the cerebrum and the cerebellum. Poking the 
freshly  dissected brain with a ﬁ nger reveals the cerebellum is rather hard 
and  the  cerebrum  rather  soft.  From  this  observation,  Galen  suggested 
that  the  cerebrum  must  receive  sensations  while  the  cerebellum  must 
command  the  muscles.  Why  such  a  distinction?  He  recognized  that  to 
form  memories,  sensations  must  be  imprinted  in  the  brain.  Naturally, 
this must occur in the doughy cerebrum.

As  improbable  as  his  reasoning  may  seem,  Galen’s  deductions  were 
not that far from the truth. The cerebrum, in fact, is largely concerned 
with sensation and perception, and the cerebellum is primarily a move-
ment control center. Moreover, the cerebrum is a repository of memory. 
We  will  see  that  this  is  not  the  only  example  in  the  history  of  neuro-
science  in  which  the  right  general  conclusions  were  reached  for  the 
wrong reasons.

How does the brain receive sensations and move the limbs? Galen cut 
open the brain and found that it is hollow (Figure 1.3). In these hollow 
spaces, called ventricles (like the similar chambers in the heart), there is 
ﬂ uid. To Galen, this discovery ﬁ t perfectly with the prevailing theory that 
the body functioned according to a balance of four vital ﬂ uids, or  humors. 
Sensations were registered and movements initiated by the movement of 
humors to or from the brain ventricles via the nerves, which were  believed 
to be hollow tubes, like the blood vessels.

Views of the Brain from the Renaissance to the 
Nineteenth Century
Galen’s  view  of  the  brain  prevailed  for  almost  1500  years.  During 
the  Renaissance,  the  great  anatomist  Andreas  Vesalius  (1514–1564) 
added more detail to the structure of the brain (Figure 1.4). However, 
the  ventricular  theory  of  brain  function  remained  essentially  un-
challenged. Indeed, the whole concept was strengthened in the early 
seventeenth century, when French inventors built hydraulically con-
trolled  mechanical  devices.  These  devices  supported  the  notion  that 
the brain could be machinelike in its function: Fluid forced out of the 
ventricles through the nerves might literally “pump you up” and cause 
the  movement  of  the  limbs.  After  all,  don’t  the  muscles  bulge  when 
they contract?

▲ FIGURE 1.4
Human brain ventricles depicted 
 during the Renaissance. This drawing 
is from De humani corporis fabrica by 
Vesalius (1543). The subject was proba-
bly a decapitated criminal. Great care 
was taken to be anatomically correct in 
depicting the ventricles. (Source: Finger, 
1994, Fig. 2.8.)

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   6
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   6

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

7

▲ FIGURE 1.5
The brain according to Descartes. 
This drawing appeared in a 1662 
 publication by Descartes, who thought 
that hollow nerves from the eyes 
 projected to the brain ventricles. The 
mind influenced the motor response by 
controlling the  pineal gland (H), which 
worked like a valve to control the 
movement of animal spirits through the 
nerves that inflated the muscles. 
(Source: Finger, 1994, Fig. 2.16.)

A  chief  advocate  of  this  ﬂ uid–mechanical  theory  of  brain  func-
tion  was  the  French  mathematician  and  philosopher  René  Descartes 
(1596–1650). Although he thought this theory could explain the brain 
and  behavior  of  other  animals,  Descartes  believed  it  could  not  possi-
bly  account  for  the  full  range  of  human  behavior.  He  reasoned  that 
unlike  other  animals,  people  possess  intellect  and  a  God-given  soul. 
Thus, Descartes proposed that brain mechanisms control only human 
behavior that is like that of the beasts. Uniquely human mental capa-
bilities exist outside the brain in the “mind.” Descartes believed that 
the mind is a spiritual entity that receives sensations and commands 
movements by communicating with the machinery of the brain via the 
pineal  gland  (Figure  1.5).  Today,  some  people  still  believe  that  there 
is a “mind–brain problem,” that somehow the human mind is distinct 
from the brain. However, as we shall see in Part III, modern neurosci-
ence research supports a different conclusion: The mind has a physical 
basis, which is the brain.

Fortunately,  other  scientists  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
 centuries  broke  away  from  the  traditional  focus  on  the  ventricles  and 
began examining the brain’s substance more closely. They observed, for 
example, two types of brain tissue: the gray matter and the white matter 
(Figure  1.6).  What  structure–function  relationship  did  they  propose? 
White matter, because it was continuous with the nerves of the body, was 
correctly believed to contain the ﬁ bers that bring information to and from 
the gray matter.

By  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  nervous  system  had  been 
completely dissected and its gross anatomy described in detail. Scientists 
recognized that the nervous system has a central division, consisting of 
the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  and  a  peripheral  division,  consisting  of  the 
network of nerves that course through the body (Figure 1.7). An impor-
tant breakthrough in neuroanatomy came with the observation that the 
same general pattern of bumps (called gyri) and grooves (called sulci and 
ﬁ ssures) can be identiﬁ ed on the surface of the brain in every individual 
(Figure 1.8). This pattern, which enables the parceling of the cerebrum 
into lobes, led to speculation that different functions might be localized 
to the different bumps on the brain. The stage was now set for the era of 
cerebral localization.

Gray matter

White matter

▲ FIGURE 1.6
White matter and gray matter. 
The human brain has been cut open to 
reveal these two types of tissue.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   7
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   7

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

Cerebrum
Cerebellum Brain
Brain stem

Spinal cord

Central
nervous
system

Peripheral
nervous
system

8

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 1.7
The basic anatomical subdivisions of the nervous system. 
The nervous system consists of two divisions, the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS 
consists of the brain and spinal cord. The three major parts of 
the brain are the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the brain stem. 
The PNS consists of the nerves and nerve cells that lie outside 
the brain and spinal cord.

Central
sulcus

Parietal
lobe

Frontal
lobe

Occipital
lobe

Sylvian
fissure

Temporal lobe

Cerebellum

▲ FIGURE 1.8
The lobes of the cerebrum. Notice the 
deep Sylvian fissure, dividing the frontal 
lobe from the temporal lobe, and the 
central sulcus, dividing the frontal lobe 
from the parietal lobe. The occipital lobe 
lies at the back of the brain. These land-
marks can be found on all human brains.

Nineteenth-Century Views of the Brain
Let’s review how the nervous system was understood at the end of the 
eighteenth century:
(cid:129) Injury to the brain can disrupt sensations, movement, and thought and

(cid:129) The brain communicates with the body via the nerves.
(cid:129) The  brain  has  different  identiﬁ able  parts,  which  probably  perform

can cause death.

 different functions.

(cid:129) The brain operates like a machine and follows the laws of nature.

During the next 100 years, more would be learned about the function of
the brain than had been learned in all of previous recorded history. This 
work provided the solid foundation on which modern neuroscience rests. 
Now we’ll look at four key insights gained during the nineteenth century.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   8
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   8

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

9

Nerves  as  Wires.   In  1751,  Benjamin  Franklin  published  a  pamphlet 
 titled Experiments and Observations on Electricity, which heralded a new 
 understanding of electrical phenomena. By the turn of the century, Italian 
scientist Luigi Galvani and German biologist Emil du Bois-Reymond had 
shown that muscles can be caused to twitch when nerves are stimulated 
electrically and that the brain itself can generate electricity. These discov-
eries ﬁ nally displaced the notion that nerves communicate with the brain 
by the movement of ﬂ uid. The new concept was that the nerves are “wires” 
that conduct electrical signals to and from the brain.

Unresolved  was  whether  the  signals  to  the  muscles  causing  move-
ment use the same wires as those that register sensations from the skin. 
Bidirectional  communication  along  the  same  wires  was  suggested  by 
the observation that when a nerve in the body is cut, there is usually a 
loss of both sensation and movement in the affected region. However, it 
was also known that within each nerve of the body there are many thin 
 ﬁ laments, or nerve ﬁ bers, each one of which could serve as an individual 
wire  carrying information in a different direction.

This  question  was  answered  around  1810  by  Scottish  physician 
Charles Bell and French physiologist François Magendie. A curious ana-
tomical fact is that just before the nerves attach to the spinal cord, the 
ﬁ bers  divide into two branches, or roots. The dorsal root enters toward 
the back of the spinal cord, and the ventral root enters toward the front 
(Figure 1.9). Bell tested the possibility that these two spinal roots carry 
information  in  different  directions  by  cutting  each  root  separately  and 
observing the  consequences in experimental animals. He found that cut-
ting only the ventral roots caused muscle paralysis. Later, Magendie was 
able to show that the dorsal roots carry sensory information into the spi-
nal cord. Bell and Magendie concluded that within each nerve is a mix-
ture of many wires, some of which bring information into the brain and 
spinal cord and others that send information out to the muscles. In each 

Ventral roots

Dorsal
roots

Nerve

Muscle Skin

Nerve fibers
(axons)

Spinal 
cord

Vertebra

▲ FIGURE 1.9
Spinal nerves and spinal nerve roots. 
Thirty-one pairs of nerves leave the spinal 
cord to supply the skin and the muscles. 
Cutting a spinal nerve leads to a loss of 
 sensation and a loss of movement in the 
 affected region of the body. Incoming 
 sensory fibers (red ) and outgoing motor 
 fibers (blue) divide into spinal roots where 
the nerves attach to the spinal cord. Bell 
and Magendie found that the ventral roots 
contain only motor fibers and the dorsal 
roots contain only sensory fibers.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   9
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   9

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

10

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

sensory and motor nerve ﬁ ber, transmission is strictly one-way. The two 
kinds of ﬁ bers are bundled together for most of their length, but they are 
 anatomically segregated where they enter or exit the spinal cord.

Localization of Speciﬁ c Functions to Different Parts of the Brain. If dif-
ferent functions are localized in different spinal roots, then perhaps dif-
ferent functions are also localized in different parts of the brain. In 1811, 
Bell proposed that the origin of the motor ﬁ bers is the cerebellum and the 
destination of the sensory ﬁ bers is the cerebrum.

▲ FIGURE 1.10
A phrenological map. According to Gall 
and his followers, different behavioral 
traits could be related to the size of 
 different parts of the skull. (Source: 
Clarke and O’Malley, 1968, Fig. 118.)

▲ FIGURE 1.11
Paul Broca (1824–1880). By carefully 
studying the brain of a man who had 
lost the faculty of speech after a brain 
lesion (see Figure 1.12), Broca became 
convinced that different functions could 
be localized to different parts of the 
 cerebrum. (Source: Clarke and O’Malley, 
1968, Fig. 121.)

How would you test this proposal? One way is to use the same approach 
that Bell and Magendie employed to identify the functions of the spinal 
roots: to destroy these parts of the brain and test for sensory and motor 
deﬁ cits.  This  approach,  in  which  parts  of  the  brain  are  systematically 
destroyed to determine their function, is called the experimental ablation 
method.  In  1823,  the  esteemed  French  physiologist  Marie-Jean-Pierre 
Flourens used this method in a variety of animals (particularly birds) to 
show that the cerebellum does indeed play a role in the coordination of 
movement. He also concluded that the cerebrum is involved in sensation 
and perception, as Bell and Galen before him had suggested. Unlike his 
predecessors, however, Flourens provided solid experimental support for 
his conclusions.

What about all those bumps on the brain’s surface? Do they perform 
different  functions  as  well?  The  idea  that  they  do  was  irresistible  to  a 
young  Austrian  medical  student  named  Franz  Joseph  Gall.  Believing 
that  bumps  on  the  surface  of  the  skull  reﬂ ect  bumps  on  the  surface  of 
the brain, Gall proposed in 1809 that the propensity for certain personal-
ity  traits,  such  as  generosity,  secretiveness,  and  destructiveness,  could 
be  related  to  the  dimensions  of  the  head  (Figure  1.10).  To  support  his 
claim, Gall and his followers collected and carefully measured the skulls 
of   hundreds  of  people  representing  an  extensive  range  of  personality 
types, from the very gifted to the criminally insane. This new “science” 
of correlating the structure of the head with personality traits was called 
phrenology. Although the claims of the phrenologists were never taken 
seriously by the mainstream scientiﬁ c community, they did capture the 
popular imagination of the time. In fact, a textbook on phrenology pub-
lished in 1827 sold over 100,000 copies.

One of the most vociferous critics of phrenology was Flourens, the same 
man who had shown experimentally that the cerebellum and cerebrum 
perform different functions. His grounds for criticism were sound. For one 
thing, the shape of the skull is not correlated with the shape of the brain. 
In  addition,  Flourens  performed  experimental  ablations  showing  that 
particular traits are not isolated to the portions of the cerebrum speciﬁ ed 
by phrenology. Flourens also maintained, however, that all regions of the 
cerebrum participate equally in all cerebral functions, a conclusion later 
shown to be erroneous.

The person usually credited with tilting the scales of scientiﬁ c opinion 
ﬁ rmly toward localization of functions in the cerebrum was French neu-
rologist Paul Broca (Figure 1.11). Broca was presented with a patient who 
could understand language but could not speak. After the man’s death in 
1861, Broca carefully examined his brain and found a lesion in the left 
frontal lobe (Figure 1.12). Based on this case and several others like it, 
Broca concluded that this region of the human cerebrum was speciﬁ cally 
responsible for the production of speech.

Solid experimental support for cerebral localization in animals quickly 
followed. German physiologists Gustav Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig showed 
in 1870 that applying small electrical currents to a circumscribed region 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   10
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   10

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

11

of  the  exposed  surface  of  the  brain  of  a  dog  could  elicit  discrete  move-
ments.  Scottish  neurologist  David  Ferrier  repeated  these  experiments 
with monkeys. In 1881, he showed that removal of this same region of the 
cerebrum causes paralysis of the muscles. Similarly, German physiolo-
gist Hermann Munk using experimental ablation found evidence that the 
occipital lobe of the cerebrum was speciﬁ cally required for vision.

As you will see in Part II of this book, we now know that there is a very 
clear division of labor in the cerebrum, with different parts performing 
very different functions. Today’s maps of the functional divisions of the 
cerebrum rival even the most elaborate of those produced by the phre-
nologists. The big difference is that unlike the phrenologists, scientists 
today  require  solid  experimental  evidence  before  attributing  a  speciﬁ c 
function to a portion of the brain. All the same, Gall seems to have had 
in part the right general idea. It is natural to wonder why Flourens, the 
pioneer of brain localization of function, was misled into believing that 
the cerebrum acted as a whole and could not be subdivided. This gifted 
experimentalist may have missed cerebral localization for many different 
reasons, but it seems clear that one reason was his visceral disdain for 
Gall and phrenology. He could not bring himself to agree even remotely 
with Gall, whom he viewed as a lunatic. This reminds us that science, 
for better or worse, was and still is subject to both the strengths and the 
weaknesses of human nature.

The Evolution of Nervous Systems. In 1859, English biologist Charles 
Darwin (Figure 1.13) published On the Origin of Species. This landmark 
work articulates a theory of evolution: that species of organisms evolved 
from  a  common  ancestor.  According  to  his  theory,  differences  among 
 species  arise  by  a  process  Darwin  called  natural  selection. As  a  result 
of  the  mechanisms  of  reproduction,  the  physical  traits  of  the  offspring 
are sometimes different from those of the parents. If such traits hold an 
 advantage  for  survival,  the  offspring  themselves  will  be  more  likely  to 
survive  to  reproduce,  thus  increasing  the  likelihood  that  the  advanta-
geous traits are passed on to the next generation. Over the course of many 
generations, this process led to the development of traits that distinguish 
species today: ﬂ ippers on harbor seals, paws on dogs, hands on raccoons, 
and so on. This single insight revolutionized biology. Today, scientiﬁ c evi-
dence  in  many  ﬁ elds  ranging  from  anthropology  to  molecular  genetics 
overwhelmingly supports the theory of evolution by natural selection.

Darwin included behavior among the heritable traits that could evolve. 
For example, he observed that many mammalian species show the same 
reaction  when  frightened:  The  pupils  of  the  eyes  get  bigger,  the  heart 
races, hairs stand on end. This is as true for a human as it is for a dog. 
To Darwin, the similarities of this response pattern indicated that these 
different  species  evolved  from  a  common  ancestor  that  possessed  the 
same  behavioral  trait,  which  was  advantageous  presumably  because  it 
facilitated escape from predators. Because behavior reﬂ ects the activity of 
the nervous system, we can infer that the brain mechanisms that under-
lie this fear reaction may be similar, if not identical, across these species.
The  idea  that  the  nervous  systems  of  different  species  evolved  from 
common ancestors and may have common mechanisms is the rationale 
for relating the results of animal experiments to humans. For example, 
many  of  the  details  of  electrical  impulse  conduction  along  nerve  ﬁ bers 
were  discovered  ﬁ rst  in  the  squid  but  are  now  known  to  apply  equally 
well  to  humans.  Most  neuroscientists  today  use  animal  models  to  ex-
amine processes they wish to understand in humans. For example, rats 
show clear signs of addiction if they are repeatedly given the chance to 

Central sulcus

▲ FIGURE 1.12
The brain that convinced Broca of 
 localization of function in the 
 cerebrum. This is the preserved brain of 
a patient who had lost the ability to 
speak before he died in 1861. The lesion 
that produced this deficit is circled. 
(Source: Corsi, 1991, Fig. III, 4.)

▲ FIGURE 1.13
Charles Darwin (1809–1882). Darwin 
proposed his theory of evolution, 
 explaining how species evolve through 
the process of natural selection. 
(Source: The Bettman Archive.)

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   11
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   11

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

12

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

7 cm

(a)  

Monkey brain

3 cm

(b)  

Rat brain

▲ FIGURE 1.14
Different brain specializations in monkeys and rats. (a) The brain of the 
 macaque monkey has a highly evolved sense of sight. The boxed region receives 
information from the eyes. When this region is sliced open and stained to show 
metabolically active tissue, a mosaic of “blobs” appears. The neurons within the 
blobs are specialized to analyze colors in the visual world. (b) The brain of a rat 
has a highly evolved sense of touch to the face. The boxed region receives infor-
mation from the whiskers. When this region is sliced open and stained to show 
the location of the neurons, a mosaic of “barrels” appears. Each barrel is special-
ized to receive input from a single whisker on the rat’s face. (Photomicrographs 
courtesy of Dr. S.H.C. Hendry.)

 self-administer  cocaine.  Consequently,  rats  provide  a  valuable  animal 
model  for  research  focused  on  understanding  how  psychoactive  drugs 
exert their effects on the nervous system.

On the other hand, many behavioral traits are highly specialized for 
the  environment  (or  niche)  a  species  normally  occupies.  For  example, 
monkeys  swinging  from  branch  to  branch  have  a  keen  sense  of  sight, 
while  rats  slinking  through  underground  tunnels  have  poor  vision  but 
a highly evolved sense of touch using their snout whiskers. Adaptations 
are reﬂ ected in the structure and function of the brain of every species. 
By comparing the specializations of the brains of different species, neuro-
scientists have been able to identify which parts of the brain are special-
ized for different behavioral functions. Examples for monkeys and rats 
are shown in Figure 1.14.

The Neuron: The Basic Functional Unit of the Brain. Technical advances 
in microscopy during the early 1800s gave scientists their ﬁ rst opportu-
nity to examine animal tissues at high magniﬁ cations. In 1839, German 
zoologist Theodor Schwann proposed what came to be known as the cell 
theory: All tissues are composed of microscopic units called cells.

Although  cells  in  the  brain  had  been  identiﬁ ed  and  described,  there 
was  still  controversy  at  that  time  about  whether  the  individual  “nerve 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   12
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   12

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

13

cell”  was  actually  the  basic  unit  of  brain  function.  Nerve  cells  usually 
have a number of thin projections, or processes, that extend from a cen-
tral cell body (Figure 1.15). Initially, scientists could not decide whether 
the processes from different cells fuse together as do blood vessels in the 
circulatory system. If this were true, then the “nerve net” of connected 
nerve cells would represent the elementary unit of brain function.

Chapter 2 presents a brief history of how this issue was resolved. Sufﬁ ce 
it to say that by 1900, the individual nerve cell, now called the neuron, 
was recognized to be the basic functional unit of the nervous system.

NEUROSCIENCE TODAY
NEURROSCIIENCE TODAY

The  history  of  modern  neuroscience  is  still  being  written,  and  the 
accomplishments to date form the basis for this textbook. We will discuss 
the most recent developments in the coming chapters. Before we do, let’s 
take  a  look  at  how  brain  research  is  conducted  today  and  why  it  is  so 
 important to society.

Levels of Analysis
History has clearly shown that understanding how the brain works is a 
big challenge. To reduce the complexity of the problem, neuroscientists 
break  it  into  smaller  pieces  for  systematic  experimental  analysis.  This 
is called the reductionist approach. The size of the unit of study deﬁ nes 
what is often called the level of analysis. In ascending order of complexity, 
these levels are molecular, cellular, systems, behavioral, and cognitive.

Molecular  Neuroscience.  The  brain  has  been  called  the  most  complex 
piece of matter in the universe. Brain matter consists of a fantastic  variety 
of molecules, many of which are unique to the nervous system. These differ-
ent molecules play many different roles that are crucial for brain function: 
messengers that allow neurons to communicate with one another, sentries 
that control what materials can enter or leave neurons, conductors that 
orchestrate neuron growth, archivists of past experiences. The study of the 
brain at this most elementary level is called molecular neuroscience.

Cellular Neuroscience. The next level of analysis is cellular neuroscience, 
which focuses on studying how all those molecules work together to give 
neurons their special properties. Among the questions asked at this level 
are:  How  many  different  types  of  neurons  are  there,  and  how  do  they 
 differ in function? How do neurons inﬂ uence other neurons? How do neu-
rons become “wired together” during fetal development? How do neurons 
perform computations?

Systems Neuroscience. Constellations of neurons form complex circuits 
that perform a common function, such as vision or voluntary movement. 
Thus, we can speak of the “visual system” and the “motor system,” each 
of which has its own distinct circuitry within the brain. At this level of 
analysis, called systems neuroscience, neuroscientists study how different 
neural circuits analyze sensory information, form perceptions of the ex-
ternal world, make decisions, and execute movements.

Behavioral Neuroscience. How do neural systems work together to pro-
duce integrated behaviors? For example, are different forms of memory 
accounted for by different systems? Where in the brain do  “mind-altering” 
drugs act, and what is the normal contribution of these systems to the 

▲ FIGURE 1.15
An early depiction of a nerve cell. 
Published in 1865, this drawing by 
 German anatomist Otto Deiters shows 
a nerve cell, or neuron, and its many 
projections, called neurites. For a time 
it was thought that the neurites from 
 different neurons might fuse together 
like the blood vessels of the circulatory 
system. We now know that neurons are 
distinct entities that communicate using 
chemical and electrical signals. (Source: 
Clarke and O’Malley, 1968, Fig. 16.)

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   13
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   13

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

14

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

regulation  of  mood  and  behavior?  What  neural  systems  account  for 
gender-speciﬁ c behaviors? Where are dreams created and what do they 
reveal? These questions are studied in behavioral neuroscience.

Cognitive Neuroscience. Perhaps the greatest challenge of neuroscience 
is understanding the neural mechanisms responsible for the higher levels 
of human mental activity, such as self-awareness, imagination, and lan-
guage. Research at this level, called cognitive neuroscience, studies how 
the activity of the brain creates the mind.

Neuroscientists
“Neuroscientist”  sounds  impressive,  kind  of  like  “rocket  scientist.”  But 
we  were  all  students  once,  just  like  you.  For  whatever  reason—maybe 
we wanted to know why our eyesight was poor, or why a family member 
suffered  a  loss  of  speech  after  a  stroke—we  came  to  share  a  thirst  for 
knowledge of how the brain works. Perhaps you will, too.

Being a neuroscientist is rewarding, but it does not come easily. Many 
years of training are required. One may begin by helping out in a  research 
lab during or after college and then going to graduate school to earn a 
Ph.D. or an M.D. (or both). Several years of post-doctoral training usually 
follow, learning new techniques or ways of thinking under the direction 
of  an  established  neuroscientist.  Finally,  the  “young”  neuroscientist  is 
ready to set up shop at a university, institute, or hospital.

Broadly speaking, neuroscience research (and neuroscientists) may be 
divided into three types: clinical, experimental, and theoretical. Clinical 
research is mainly conducted by physicians (M.D.s). The main medical 
specialties  associated  with  the  human  nervous  system  are  neurology, 
psychiatry,  neurosurgery,  and  neuropathology  (Table  1.1).  Many  who 
conduct clinical research continue in the tradition of Broca, attempting 
to  deduce  from  the  behavioral  effects  of  brain  damage  the  functions  of 
 various parts of the brain. Others conduct studies to assess the beneﬁ ts 
and risks of new types of treatment.

Despite  the  obvious  value  of  clinical  research,  the  foundation  for 
all  medical  treatments  of  the  nervous  system  continues  to  be  laid  by 
 experimental neuroscientists, who may hold either an M.D. or a Ph.D. The 
experimental approaches to studying the brain are so broad that they in-
clude almost every conceivable methodology. Neuroscience is highly inter-
disciplinary; however, expertise in a particular methodology may distin-
guish one neuroscientist from another. Thus, there are neuroanatomists, 
who  use  sophisticated  microscopes  to  trace  connections  in  the  brain; 
neurophysiologists, who use electrodes to measure the brain’s electrical 
activity; neuropharmacologists, who use drugs to study the chemistry of 

TABLE 1.1 

Specialist
SpSpececiaialilistst

Neurologist

 Medical Specialists Associated with the 
Nervous System
Description
DeDescscririptptioionn

An M.D. trained to diagnose and treat diseases of the 

nervous system

Psychiatrist

An M.D. trained to diagnose and treat disorders of mood 

Neurosurgeon

An M.D. trained to perform surgery on the brain and 

and behavior

Neuropathologist

An M.D. or Ph.D. trained to recognize the changes in 

nervous tissue that result from disease

spinal cord

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   14
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   14

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

15

TABLE 1.2  Types of Experimental Neuroscientists
Type

Description

Developmental 
neurobiologist

Analyzes the development and maturation of the 

brain

Molecular neurobiologist

Uses the genetic material of neurons to understand 

Neuroanatomist
Neurochemist
Neuroethologist

the structure and function of brain molecules

Studies the structure of the nervous system
Studies the chemistry of the nervous system
Studies the neural basis of species-speciﬁ c animal 

behaviors in natural settings

Neuropharmacologist

Examines the effects of drugs on the nervous 

system

Neurophysiologist

Measures the electrical activity of the nervous 

Physiological psychologist 
(biological psychologist, 
psychobiologist)

Psychophysicist

system

Studies the biological basis of behavior

Quantitatively measures perceptual abilities

brain function; molecular neurobiologists, who probe the genetic material 
of neurons to ﬁ nd clues about the structure of brain molecules; and so on. 
Table 1.2 lists some of the types of experimental neuroscientists.

Theoretical  neuroscience  is  a  relatively  young  discipline,  in  which 
researchers  use  mathematical  and  computational  tools  to  understand 
the brain at all levels of analysis. In the tradition of physics, theoretical 
 neuroscientists attempt to make sense of the vast amounts of data gen-
erated by experimentalists, with the goals of helping focus experiments 
on questions of greatest importance and establishing the mathematical 
principles of nervous system organization.

The Scientiﬁ c Process
Neuroscientists  of  all  stripes  endeavor  to  establish  truths  about  the 
 nervous  system.  Regardless  of  the  level  of  analysis  they  choose,  they 
work according to a scientiﬁ c process consisting of four essential steps: 
 observation, replication, interpretation, and veriﬁ cation.

Observation.  Observations  are  typically  made  during  experiments  de-
signed  to  test  a  particular  hypothesis.  For  example,  Bell  hypothesized 
that the ventral roots contain the nerve ﬁ bers that control the muscles. 
To test this idea, he performed an experiment in which he cut these ﬁ bers 
and  then  observed  whether  or  not  muscular  paralysis  resulted.  Other 
types of observation derive from carefully watching the world around us, 
or from introspection, or from human clinical cases. For example, Broca’s 
careful observations led him to correlate left frontal lobe damage with the 
loss of the ability to speak.

Replication. Any observation, whether experimental or clinical, must be 
replicated.  Replication  simply  means  repeating  the  experiment  on  dif-
ferent subjects or making similar observations in different patients, as 
many times as necessary to rule out the possibility that the observation 
occurred by chance.

Interpretation. Once the scientist believes the observation is correct, he 
or  she  interprets  it.  Interpretations  depend  on  the  state  of  knowledge 
(or  ignorance)  at  the  time  and  on  the  scientist’s  preconceived  notions 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   15
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   15

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

16

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(or “mind set”). Interpretations therefore do not always withstand the test 
of time. For example, at the time he made his observations, Flourens was 
unaware that the cerebrum of a bird is fundamentally different from that 
of a mammal. Thus, he wrongly concluded from experimental ablations in 
birds that there was no localization of certain functions in the  cerebrum 
of  mammals.  Moreover,  as  mentioned  before,  his  profound  distaste  for 
Gall surely also colored his interpretation. The point is that the correct 
interpretation often is not made until long after the original observations. 
Indeed, major breakthroughs sometimes occur when old observations are 
reinterpreted in a new light.

Veriﬁ cation.  The  ﬁ nal  step  of  the  scientiﬁ c  process  is  veriﬁ cation. This 
step  is  distinct  from  the  replication  the  original  observer  performed. 
Veriﬁ cation  means  that  the  observation  is  sufﬁ ciently  robust  that  any 
competent  scientist  who  precisely  follows  the  protocols  of  the  original 
observer can reproduce it. Successful veriﬁ cation generally means that 
the  observation  is  accepted  as  fact.  However,  not  all  observations  can 
be veriﬁ ed, sometimes because of inaccuracies in the original report or 
 insufﬁ cient replication. But failure to verify usually stems from the fact 
that unrecognized variables, such as temperature or time of day, contrib-
uted to the original result. Thus, the process of veriﬁ cation, if afﬁ rmative, 
establishes  new  scientiﬁ c  fact,  or,  if  negative,  suggests  new  interpreta-
tions for the original observation.

Occasionally,  one  reads  in  the  popular  press  about  a  case  of  scien-
tiﬁ c fraud. Researchers face keen competition for limited research funds 
and feel considerable pressure to “publish or perish.” In the interest of 
 expediency,  a  few  have  actually  published  “observations”  they  in  fact 
never made. Fortunately, such instances of fraud are rare, thanks to the 
scientiﬁ c  process.  Before  long,  other  scientists  ﬁ nd  they  are  unable  to 
verify the fraudulent observations and question how they could have been 
made in the ﬁ rst place. The fact that we can ﬁ ll this book with so much 
knowledge about the nervous system stands as a testament to the value 
of the scientiﬁ c process.

The Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research
Most of what we know about the nervous system has come from experi-
ments on animals. In most cases, the animals are killed so their brains 
can be examined neuroanatomically, neurophysiologically, and/or neuro-
chemically. The fact that animals are sacriﬁ ced for the pursuit of human 
knowledge raises questions about the ethics of animal research.

The Animals. Let’s begin by putting the issue in perspective. Throughout 
history, humans have considered animals and animal products as renew-
able  natural  resources  that  can  be  used  for  food,  clothing,  transporta-
tion, recreation, sport, and companionship. The animals used in research, 
 education, and testing have always been a small fraction of those used 
for other purposes. For example, in the United States, the number of ani-
mals used in all types of biomedical research is very small compared to 
the number killed for food. The number used speciﬁ cally in neuroscience 
research is much smaller still.

Neuroscience  experiments  are  conducted  using  many  different  spe-
cies, ranging from snails to monkeys. The choice of species is generally 
 dictated by the question under investigation, the level of analysis, and 
the extent to which the knowledge gained can be related to humans. As a 
rule, the more basic the process under investigation, the more distant can 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   16
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   16

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

17

be the evolutionary relationship with humans. Thus, experiments aimed 
at  understanding  the  molecular  basis  of  nerve  impulse  conduction  can 
be carried out with a distantly related species, such as the squid. On the 
other hand, understanding the neural basis of movement and perceptual 
disorders in humans has required experiments with more closely related 
species, such as the macaque monkey. Today, more than half of the ani-
mals  used  for  neuroscience  research  are  rodents—mice  and  rats—that 
are bred speciﬁ cally for this purpose.

Animal Welfare. In the developed world today, most educated adults have 
a concern for animal welfare. Neuroscientists share this concern and work 
to ensure that animals are well treated. Society has not always placed 
such value on animal welfare, however, as reﬂ ected in some of the scien-
tiﬁ c practices of the past. For example, in his experiments early in the 
nineteenth century, Magendie used unanesthetized puppies (for which he 
was later criticized by his scientiﬁ c rival Bell). Fortunately, heightened 
awareness of animal welfare has more recently led to signiﬁ cant improve-
ments in how animals are treated in biomedical research.

Today,  neuroscientists  accept  certain  moral  responsibilities  toward 

their animal subjects:
1. Animals  are  used  only  in  worthwhile  experiments  that  promise  to 

 advance our knowledge of the nervous system.

2. All necessary steps are taken to minimize pain and distress experienced 

by the experimental animals (use of anesthetics, analgesics, etc.).

3. All possible alternatives to the use of animals are considered.

Adherence to this ethical code is monitored in a number of ways. First, 
research proposals must pass a review by the Institutional Animal Care 
and Use Committee (IACUC), as mandated by U.S. federal law. Members 
of this committee include a veterinarian, scientists in other disciplines, 
and  nonscientist  community  representatives.  After  passing  the  IACUC 
review, proposals are evaluated for scientiﬁ c merit by a panel of expert 
neuroscientists. This step ensures that only the most worthwhile projects 
are carried out. Then, when neuroscientists submit their observations for 
publication in the professional journals, the papers are carefully reviewed 
by other neuroscientists for both scientiﬁ c merit and animal welfare con-
cerns. Reservations about either issue can lead to rejection of the paper, 
which in turn can lead to a loss of funding for the research. In addition 
to these monitoring procedures, federal law sets strict standards for the 
housing and care of laboratory animals.

Animal Rights. Most people accept the necessity for animal experimenta-
tion to advance knowledge, as long as it is performed humanely and with 
the proper respect for animals’ welfare. However, a vocal and increasingly 
violent minority seeks the total abolition of animal use for human pur-
poses, including experimentation. These people subscribe to a philosophi-
cal position often called animal rights. According to this way of thinking, 
animals have the same legal and moral rights as humans.

If you are an animal lover, you may be sympathetic to this position. 
But consider the following questions. Are you willing to deprive yourself 
and  your  family  of  medical  procedures  that  were  developed  using  ani-
mals? Is the death of a mouse equivalent to the death of a human being? 
Is keeping a pet the moral equivalent of slavery? Is eating meat the moral 
equivalent of murder? Is it unethical to take the life of a pig to save the 
life of a child? Is controlling the rodent population in the sewers or the 
roach  population  in  your  home  morally  equivalent  to  the  Holocaust? 

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   17
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   17

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

18

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

If your answer is no to any of these questions, then you do not subscribe 
to  the  philosophy  of  animal  rights.  Animal  welfare—a  concern  that  all 
responsible people share—must not be confused with animal rights.

Animal  rights  activists  have  vigorously  pursued  their  agenda  against 
 animal research, sometimes with alarming success. They have manipulated 
public opinion with repeated allegations of cruelty in animal experiments 
that are grossly distorted or blatantly false. They have vandalized laborato-
ries, destroying years of hard-won scientiﬁ c data and hundreds of thousands 
of dollars of equipment (that you, the taxpayer, had paid for). With threats 
of violence they have driven some researchers out of science altogether.

Fortunately, the tide is turning. Thanks to the efforts of a number of 
people, scientists and nonscientists alike, the false claims of the extrem-
ists have been exposed, and the beneﬁ ts to humankind of animal research 
have been extolled (Figure 1.16). Considering the staggering toll in terms 
of  human  suffering  that  results  from  disorders  of  the  nervous  system, 
neuroscientists  take  the  position  that  it  is  our  responsibility  to  wisely 
use all the resources nature has provided, including animals, to gain an 
understanding of how the brain functions in health and in disease.

Recently, a surgical technique perfected on animals was used to remove 
a malignant tumor from a little girl's brain.  We lost some lab animals. 

But look what we saved. 

▲ FIGURE 1.16
Our debt to animal research. This poster counters the claims of animal rights 
activists by raising public awareness of the benefits of animal research. 
(Source: Foundation for Biomedical Research.)

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   18
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   18

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

19

TABLE 1.3  Some Major Disorders of the Nervous System
Disorder

Description

Alzheimer’s disease

A progressive degenerative disease of the brain, 

Autism

Cerebral palsy

 characterized by dementia and always fatal

A disorder emerging in early childhood characterized by 
impairments in communication and social interactions, 
and restricted and repetitive behaviors

A motor disorder caused by damage to the cerebrum 

before, during, or soon after birth

Depression

A serious disorder of mood, characterized by insomnia, 

Epilepsy

loss of appetite, and feelings of dejection

A condition characterized by periodic disturbances of 

brain electrical activity that can lead to seizures, loss 
of consciousness, and sensory disturbances

Multiple sclerosis

A progressive disease that affects nerve conduction, 

characterized by episodes of weakness, lack of 
 coordination, and speech disturbance

Parkinson’s disease

A progressive disease of the brain that leads to difﬁ culty 

in initiating voluntary movement

Schizophrenia

A severe psychotic illness characterized by delusions, 

Spinal paralysis

A loss of feeling and movement caused by traumatic 

 hallucinations, and bizarre behavior

Stroke

damage to the spinal cord

A loss of brain function caused by disruption of the 

blood supply, usually leading to permanent sensory, 
motor, or cognitive deﬁ cit

The Cost of Ignorance: Nervous System Disorders
Modern  neuroscience  research  is  expensive,  but  the  cost  of  ignorance 
about the brain is far greater. Table 1.3 lists some of the disorders that 
affect the nervous system. It is likely that your family has felt the impact 
of one or more of these. Let’s look at a few brain disorders and examine 
their effects on society.

Alzheimer’s  disease  and  Parkinson’s  disease  are  both  characterized 
by progressive degeneration of speciﬁ c neurons in the brain. Parkinson’s 
disease,  which  results  in  a  crippling  impairment  of  voluntary  move-
ment,  currently  affects  over  500,000  Americans.1  Alzheimer’s  disease 
leads to dementia, a state of confusion characterized by the loss of ability 
to  learn  new  information  and  to  recall  previously  acquired  knowledge. 
Dementia affects an estimated 18% of people over age 85.2 The number 
of Americans with dementia totals well over 4 million. Indeed, demen-
tia is now  recognized as not an inevitable outcome of aging, as was once 
believed, but as a sign of brain disease. Alzheimer’s disease progresses 
mercilessly, robbing its victims ﬁ rst of their mind, then of control over 
basic bodily functions, and ﬁ nally of their life; the disease is always fatal. 
In the United States, the annual cost of care for people with dementia is 
greater than $100 billion and rising at an alarming rate.

Depression  and  schizophrenia  are  disorders  of  mood  and  thought. 
Depression  is  characterized  by  overwhelming  feelings  of  dejection, 

1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Parkinson Disease Backgrounder.” 
October 18, 2004.
2U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and 
Quality.  “Approximately  5  Percent  of  Seniors  Report  One  or  More  Cognitive  Disorders.” 
March 2011.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   19
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   19

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

20

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

worthlessness,  and  guilt.  Over  30  million  Americans  will  experience  a 
major  depressive  illness  at  some  time  in  their  lives.  Depression  is  the 
leading cause of suicide, which claims more than 30,000 lives each year 
in the United States.3

Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder characterized by delu-
sions, hallucinations, and bizarre behavior. This disease often strikes at 
the  prime  of  life—adolescence  or  early  adulthood—and  can  persist  for 
life. Over 2 million Americans suffer from schizophrenia. The National 
Institute  of  Mental  Health  (NIMH)  estimates  that  mental  disorders, 
such as depression and schizophrenia, cost the United States in excess of 
$150 billion annually.

Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death in the United States. Stroke 
victims who do not die, over half a million every year, are likely to be per-
manently disabled. The annual cost of stroke nationwide is $54 billion.4

Alcohol or drug addiction affects virtually every family in the United 
States. The cost in terms of treatment, lost wages, and other consequences 
exceeds $600 billion per year.5

These  few  examples  only  scratch  the  surface.  More  Americans  are 
hospitalized with neurological and mental disorders than with any other 
major disease group, including heart disease and cancer.

The economic costs of brain dysfunction are enormous, but they pale 
in  comparison  with  the  staggering  emotional  toll  on  victims  and  their 
families.  The  prevention  and  treatment  of  brain  disorders  require  an 
 understanding of normal brain function, and this basic understanding is 
the goal of neuroscience. Neuroscience research has already contributed 
to the development of increasingly effective treatments for Parkinson’s 
 disease, depression, and schizophrenia. New strategies are being tested 
to rescue dying neurons in people with Alzheimer’s disease and those who 
have had a stroke. Major progress has been made in our understanding 
of how drugs and alcohol affect the brain and how they lead to addictive 
behavior.  The  material  in  this  book  demonstrates  that  a  lot  is  known 
about the function of the brain. But what we know is insigniﬁ cant com-
pared with what is still left to be learned.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

The historical foundations of neuroscience were established by many peo-
ple over many generations. Men and women today are working at all levels 
of analysis, using all types of technology, to shed more light on the func-
tions of the brain. The fruits of this labor form the basis for this textbook.
The goal of neuroscience is to understand how nervous systems func-
tion. Many important insights can be gained from a vantage point out-
side the head. Because the brain’s activity is reﬂ ected in behavior, careful 
behavioral  measurements  inform  us  of  the  capabilities  and  limitations 
of  brain  function.  Computer  models  that  reproduce  the  brain’s  compu-
tational properties can help us understand how these properties might 
arise. From the scalp, we can measure brain waves, which tell us some-
thing about the electrical activity of different parts of the brain during 

3National  Institute  of  Mental  Health.  “Suicide  in  the  U.S.:  Statistics  and  Prevention.” 
September 27, 2010.
4American  Heart  Association /American  Stroke  Association.  “Impact  of  Stroke  (Stroke 
Statistics).” May 1, 2012.
5National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Drug Abuse. “DrugFacts: Understanding 
Drug Abuse and Addiction.” March 2011.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   20
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   20

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER 1    NEUROSCIENCE: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

21

various  behavioral  states.  New  computer-assisted  imaging  techniques 
enable researchers to examine the structure of the living brain as it sits 
in the head. And using even more sophisticated imaging methods, we are 
beginning to see which different parts of the human brain become active 
under different conditions. But none of these noninvasive methods, old 
or new, can fully substitute for experimentation with living brain tissue. 
We cannot make sense of remotely detected signals without being able to 
see how they are generated and what their signiﬁ cance is. To understand 
how the brain works, we must open the head and examine what’s inside—
neuroanatomically, neurophysiologically, and neurochemically.

The pace of neuroscience research today is truly breathtaking, raising 
hopes that soon we will have new treatments for the wide range of ner-
vous system disorders that debilitate and cripple millions of people annu-
ally. However, despite the progress in recent decades and the centuries 
preceding them, we still have a long way to go before we fully understand 
how  the  brain  performs  all  of  its  amazing  feats.  But  this  is  the  fun  of 
being a neuroscientist: Because our ignorance of brain function is so vast, 
a startling new discovery lurks around virtually every corner.

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What are brain ventricles, and what functions have been ascribed to them over the ages?
2.  What  experiment  did  Bell  perform  to  show  that  the  nerves  of  the  body  contain  a  mixture  of 

 sensory and motor ﬁ bers?

3.  What did Flourens’ experiments suggest were the functions of the cerebrum and the cerebellum?
4.  What is the meaning of the term animal model?
5.  A  region  of  the  cerebrum  is  now  called  Broca’s  area.  What  function  do  you  think  this  region 

 performs, and why?

6.  What are the different levels of analysis in neuroscience research? What questions do research-

ers ask at each level?

7.  What are the steps in the scientiﬁ c process? Describe each one.

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Allman JM. 1999. Evolving Brains. New York: 

Scientiﬁ c American Library.

Clarke E, O’Malley C. 1968. The Human Brain 

and Spinal Cord, 2nd ed. Los Angeles: 
University of California Press.

Corsi P, ed. 1991. The Enchanted Loom. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

Crick F. 1994. The Astonishing Hypothesis: 

The Scientiﬁ c Search for the Soul. New York: 
Macmillan.

Finger S. 1994. Origins of Neuroscience. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

Glickstein M. 2014. Neuroscience: A Historical 

Introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   21
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   21

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   22
001-022_Bear_01_revised_final.indd   22

12/20/14   2:38 AM
12/20/14   2:38 AM

CHAPTER TWO

Neurons and Glia

INTRODUCTION
THE NEURON DOCTRINE

The Golgi Stain
Cajal’s Contribution

 BOX 2.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Advances in Microscopy

THE PROTOTYPICAL NEURON

The Soma

The Nucleus
Neuronal Genes, Genetic Variation, and Genetic Engineering
 BOX 2.2   BRAIN FOOD: Expressing One’s Mind in the Post-Genomic Era
 BOX 2.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Gene Targeting in Mice, by Mario Capecchi
Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum
Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum and the Golgi Apparatus
The Mitochondrion

The Neuronal Membrane
The Cytoskeleton

Microtubules
 BOX 2.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Alzheimer’s Disease and the Neuronal 
Cytoskeleton
Microﬁ laments
Neuroﬁ laments

The Axon

The Axon Terminal
The Synapse
Axoplasmic Transport
 BOX 2.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hitching a Ride with Retrograde Transport

Dendrites

 BOX 2.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Intellectual Disability and Dendritic Spines

CLASSIFYING NEURONS

Classiﬁ cation Based on Neuronal Structure

Number of Neurites
Dendrites
Connections
Axon Length

Classiﬁ cation Based on Gene Expression

 BOX 2.7   BRAIN FOOD: Understanding Neuronal Structure and Function with 
Incredible Cre

GLIA

Astrocytes
Myelinating Glia
Other Non-Neuronal Cells

CONCLUDING REMARKS

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   23
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   23

23

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

24

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 All tissues and organs in the body consist of cells. The specialized func-
tions  of  cells  and  how  they  interact  determine  the  functions  of  organs. 
The brain is an organ—to be sure, the most sophisticated and complex 
organ that nature has devised. But the basic strategy for unraveling its 
functions is no different from that used to investigate the pancreas or the 
lung. We must begin by learning how brain cells work individually and 
then see how they are assembled to work together. In neuroscience, there 
is  no  need  to  separate   mind   from   brain ;  once  we  fully  understand  the 
individual and concerted actions of brain cells, we will understand our 
mental abilities. The organization of this book reﬂ ects this “neurophiloso-
phy.” We start with the cells of the nervous system—their structure, func-
tion, and means of communication. In later chapters, we will explore how 
these cells are assembled into circuits that mediate sensation, perception, 
movement, speech, and emotion. 

 This chapter focuses on the structure of the different types of cells in 
the nervous system:  neurons  and  glia . These are broad categories, within 
which  are  many  types  of  cells  that  differ  in  structure,  chemistry,  and 
function. Nonetheless, the distinction between neurons and glia is impor-
tant. Although there are approximately equal numbers of neurons and 
glia in the adult human brain (roughly 85 billion of each type), neurons 
are  responsible  for  most  of  the  unique  functions  of  the  brain.  It  is  the 
 neurons   that  sense  changes  in  the  environment,  communicate  these 
changes  to  other  neurons,  and  command  the  body’s  responses  to  these 
sensations.  Glia , or  glial cells , contribute to brain function mainly by 
insulating, supporting, and nourishing neighboring neurons. If the brain 
were a chocolate chip cookie and the neurons were chocolate chips, the 
glia would be the cookie dough that ﬁ lls all the other space and suspends 
the chips in their appropriate locations. Indeed, the term  glia  is derived 
from  the  Greek  word  for  “glue,”  giving  the  impression  that  the  main 
function of these cells is to keep the brain from running out of our ears! 
Although this simple view belies the importance of glial function, as we 
shall  see  later  in  this  chapter,  we  are  conﬁ dent  that  neurons  perform 
most information processing in the brain, so neurons receive most of our 
attention. 

 Neuroscience, like other ﬁ elds, has a language all its own. To use this 
language, you must learn the vocabulary. After you have read this chap-
ter, take a few minutes to review the key terms list and make sure you 
understand the meaning of each term. Your neuroscience vocabulary will 
grow as you work your way through the book. 

 THE NEURON DOCTRINE 
THE NNEUROON DOCTRINE 

 To  study  the  structure  of  brain  cells,  scientists  have  had  to  overcome 
several  obstacles.  The  ﬁ rst  was  the  small  size.  Most  cells  are  in  the 
range of 0.01–0.05 mm in diameter. The tip of an unsharpened pencil 
lead  is  about  2  mm  across;  neurons  are  40–200  times  smaller.  (For  a 
review of the metric system, see Table 2.1.) Because neurons cannot be 
seen by the naked eye, cellular neuroscience could not progress before 
the  development  of  the  compound  microscope  in  the  late  seventeenth 
century. Even then, obstacles remained. To observe brain tissue using a 
microscope, it was necessary to make very thin slices, ideally not much 
thicker than the diameter of the cells. However, brain tissue has a con-
sistency like a bowl of Jell-O: not ﬁ rm enough to make thin slices. Thus, 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   24
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   24

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

25

TABLE 2.1  Units of Size in the Metric System
Unit
UnUnitit

Abbreviation Meter Equivalent Real-World Equivalent
AbAbbrbreveviaiatitionon MeMeteterr EqEquiuivavalelentnt ReRealal W-Wororldld E Eququivivalalenentt

km
Kilometer
m
Meter
cm
Centimeter
Millimeter
mm
Micrometer ␮m

Nanometer

nm

103 m
1 m
10⫺2 m
10⫺3 m
10⫺6 m

10⫺9 m

About two-thirds of a mile
About 3 feet
Thickness of your little ﬁ nger
Thickness of your toenail
Near the limit of resolution for 

the light microscope

Near the limit of resolution for 

the electron  microscope

the anatomical study of brain cells had to await a method to harden the 
tissue  without  disturbing  its  structure  and  an  instrument  that  could 
produce very thin slices. Early in the nineteenth century, scientists dis-
covered how to harden, or “ﬁ x,” tissues by immersing them in formalde-
hyde, and they developed a special device called a microtome to make 
very thin slices. 

 These technical advances spawned the ﬁ eld of  histology , the micro-
scopic  study  of  the  structure  of  tissues.  But  scientists  studying  brain 
structure faced yet another obstacle. Freshly prepared brain tissue has 
a  uniform,  cream-colored  appearance  under  the  microscope,  with  no 
differences in pigmentation to enable histologists to resolve individual 
cells. The ﬁ nal breakthrough in neurohistology was the introduction of 
stains that selectively color some, but not all, parts of the cells in brain 
tissue. 

 One stain still used today was introduced by the German neurologist 
Franz Nissl in the late nineteenth century. Nissl showed that a class of 
basic dyes would stain the nuclei of all cells as well as clumps of material 
surrounding the nuclei of neurons (Figure 2.1). These clumps are called 
 Nissl bodies , and the stain is known as the  Nissl stain . The Nissl stain is 
extremely useful for two reasons: It distinguishes between neurons and 
glia, and it enables histologists to study the arrangement, or  cytoarchi-
tecture ,  of  neurons  in  different  parts  of  the  brain.  (The  preﬁ x   cyto-   is 
from the Greek word for “cell.”) The study of cytoarchitecture led to the 
realization that the brain consists of many specialized regions. We now 
know that each region performs a different function. 

 The Golgi Stain 
 The Nissl stain, however, could not tell the whole story. A Nissl-stained 
neuron  looks  like  little  more  than  a  lump  of  protoplasm  containing  a 

 ▲ FIGURE 2.1
 Nissl-stained neurons.   A thin slice of brain 
tissue has been stained with cresyl violet, a 
Nissl stain. The clumps of deeply stained ma-
terial around the cell nuclei are Nissl bodies. 
(Source: Hammersen, 1980, Fig. 493.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   25
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   25

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

26

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 2.2
 Camillo Golgi (1843–1926).  
(Source: Finger, 1994, Fig. 3.22.)

nucleus.  Neurons  are  much  more  than  that,  but  how  much  more  was 
not  recognized  before  Italian  histologist  Camillo  Golgi  devised  a  new 
method  (Figure  2.2).  In  1873,  Golgi  discovered  that  soaking  brain  tis-
sue  in  a  silver  chromate  solution,  now  called  the   Golgi  stain ,  makes 
a  small  percentage  of  neurons  become  darkly  colored  in  their  entirety 
(Figure 2.3). This revealed that the neuronal cell body, the region of the 
neuron around the nucleus that is shown with the Nissl stain, is actu-
ally only a small fraction of the total structure of the neuron. Notice in 
Figures 2.1 and 2.3 how different histological stains can provide strik-
ingly different views of the same tissue. Today, neurohistology remains 
an active ﬁ eld in neuroscience, along with its credo: “The gain in brain is 
mainly in the stain.” 

 The Golgi stain shows that neurons have at least two distinguishable 
parts: a central region that contains the cell nucleus and numerous thin 
tubes that radiate away from the central region. The swollen region con-
taining the cell nucleus has several names that are used interchangeably: 
 cell body ,  soma  (plural: somata), and  perikaryon  (plural: perikarya). 
The thin tubes that radiate from the soma are called  neurites  and are of 
two types:  axons  and  dendrites  (Figure 2.4). 

 The cell body usually gives rise to a single axon. The axon is of uni-
form diameter throughout its length, and any branches from it generally 
extend  at  right  angles.  Because  axons  can  extend  over  great  distances 
in the body (a meter or more), histologists of the day immediately recog-
nized that axons must act like “wires” that carry the output of the neu-
rons. Dendrites, on the other hand, are rarely longer than 2 mm. Many 
 dendrites extend from the cell body and generally taper to a ﬁ ne point. 

Soma

Dendrites
Axon

Neurites

 ▲ FIGURE 2.4
 The basic parts of a neuron.  

 ▲ FIGURE 2.3
 Golgi-stained neurons.  (Source: Hubel, 1988, p. 126.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   26
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   26

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

27

Early histologists recognized that because dendrites come in contact with 
many axons, they must act as the antennae of the neuron to receive in-
coming signals, or input. 

 Cajal’s Contribution 
 Golgi invented the stain, but a Spanish contemporary used it to great-
est effect. Santiago Ramón y Cajal was a skilled histologist and artist 
who learned about Golgi’s method in 1888 (Figure 2.5). In a remark-
able series of publications over the next 25 years, Cajal used the Golgi 
stain to work out the circuitry of many regions of the brain (Figure 2.6). 
Curiously, Golgi and Cajal drew completely opposite conclusions about 
neurons. Golgi championed the view that the neurites of different cells 
are fused together to form a continuous reticulum, or network, similar 
to the arteries and veins of the circulatory system. According to this 
reticular  theory,  the  brain  is  an  exception  to  the  cell  theory,  which 
states  that  the  individual  cell  is  the  elementary  functional  unit  of 
all  animal  tissues.  Cajal,  on  the  other  hand,  argued  forcefully  that 
the neurites of different neurons are not continuous with each other 
and  communicate by contact, not continuity . This idea that cell theory 
also  applies  to  neurons  came  to  be  known  as  the   neuron  doctrine . 
Although  Golgi  and  Cajal  shared  the  Nobel  Prize  in  1906,  they  re-
mained rivals to the end. 

 The scientiﬁ c evidence over the next 50 years strongly supported the 
neuron doctrine, but ﬁ nal proof had to wait for the electron microscope 
in the 1950s (Box 2.1). With the increased resolving power of the electron 
microscope, it was ﬁ nally possible to show that the neurites of different 
neurons are not continuous with one another (Figure 2.7). Thus, our start-
ing point in the exploration of the brain must be the individual neuron. 

 ▲ FIGURE 2.5
 Santiago Ramón y Cajal (1852–1934). 
 (Source: Finger, 1994, Fig. 3.26.) 

 ▲ FIGURE 2.6 
One of Cajal’s many drawings of brain 
 circuitry.   The letters label the different ele-
ments Cajal identified in an area of the human 
cerebral cortex that controls voluntary move-
ment. We will learn more about this part of the 
brain in Chapter 14. (Source: DeFelipe and 
Jones, 1998, Fig. 90.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   27
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   27

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

28

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 2.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Advances in Microscopy 

 The  human  eye  can  distinguish  two  points  only  if  they 

are separated by more than about one-tenth of a millimeter 
(100   ␮ m).  Thus,  we  can  say  that  100   ␮ m  is  near  the  limit 
of resolution for the unaided eye. Neurons have a diameter 
of  about  20   ␮ m,  and  neurites  can  be  as  small  as  a  frac-
tion of a micrometer. The light microscope, therefore, was a 
necessary development before neuronal structure could be 
studied.  But  this  type  of  microscopy  has  a  theoretical  limit 
imposed by the properties of microscope lenses and visible 
light. With the standard light microscope, the limit of resolu-
tion is about 0.1  ␮ m. Because the space between neurons 
is only 0.02  ␮ m (20 nm), it’s no wonder that two esteemed 
scientists, Golgi and Cajal, disagreed about whether neurites 
were  continuous  from  one  cell  to  the  next.  This  question 
could  not  be  answered  until  about  70  years  ago  when  the 
electron microscope was developed and applied to biological 
specimens. 

 The electron microscope uses an electron beam instead 
of light to form images, dramatically increasing the resolving 
power. The limit of resolution for an electron microscope is 
about 0.1 nm—a million times better than the unaided eye 
and  a  thousand  times  better  than  a  light  microscope.  Our 
insights into the ﬁ ne structure of the inside of neurons—the 
ultrastructure—have all come from electron microscopic ex-
amination of the brain. 

 Today,  microscopes  on  the  leading  edge  of  technology 
use laser beams to illuminate tissue and computers to cre-
ate  digital  images  (Figure  A).  Neuroscientists  now  routinely 
introduce  into  neurons  molecules  that  ﬂ uoresce  when  il-
luminated  by  laser  light.  The  ﬂ uorescence  is  recorded  by 

 sensitive  detectors, and the computer takes these data and 
 reconstructs the image of the neuron. Unlike the traditional 
methods of light and electron microscopy, which require tis-
sue  ﬁ xation,  these  new  techniques  give  neuroscientists  the 
ability to peer into brain tissue that is still alive. Furthermore, 
they  have  allowed  “super-resolution”  imaging,  breaking  the 
limits imposed by traditional light microscopy to reveal struc-
tures as small as 20 nm across. 

 Figure A
 A laser microscope and computer display of a ﬂ uorescent neuron 
and dendrites. (Source: Dr. Miquel Bosch, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology.) 

▲ FIGURE 2.7
 Neurites in contact, not continuity.  
These neurites were reconstructed from a 
series of images made using an electron 
microscope. The axon ( colored yellow ) is 
in contact with a dendrite ( colored blue ). 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Sebastian 
Seung, Princeton University, and Kris 
Krug, Pop Tech.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   28
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   28

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

29

THE PROTOTYPICAL NEURON 
THE PPROTOOTYPICAL NEURONN 

 As we have seen, the neuron (also called a  nerve cell ) consists of several 
parts: the soma, the dendrites, and the axon. The inside of the neuron is 
separated from the outside by the  neuronal membrane , which lies like a 
circus tent on an intricate internal scaffolding, giving each part of the cell 
its special three-dimensional appearance. Let’s explore the inside of the 
neuron and learn about the functions of the different parts (Figure 2.8). 

 The Soma 
 We begin our tour at the soma, the roughly spherical central part of the 
neuron. The cell body of the typical neuron is about 20  ␮ m in diameter. 
The watery ﬂ uid inside the cell, called the  cytosol , is a salty, potassium-
rich  solution  that  is  separated  from  the  outside  by  the  neuronal  mem-
brane. Within the soma are a number of membrane-enclosed structures 
called  organelles . 

 The cell body of the neuron contains the same organelles found in all 
animal cells. The most important ones are the nucleus, the rough endo-
plasmic reticulum, the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi appara-
tus, and the mitochondria. Everything contained within the conﬁ nes of 
the cell membrane, including the organelles but excluding the nucleus, is 
referred to collectively as the  cytoplasm . 

 The Nucleus.  Its name derived from the Latin word for “nut,” the  nucleus  
of  the  cell  is  spherical,  centrally  located,  and  about  5–10   ␮ m  across.  It 
is contained within a double membrane called the  nuclear envelope . The 
nuclear envelope is perforated by pores about 0.1  ␮ m across. 

 Within the nucleus are  chromosomes  which contain the genetic ma-
terial  DNA  ( deoxyribonucleic acid ). Your DNA was passed on to you 
from your parents and it contains the blueprint for your entire body. The 
DNA in each of your neurons is the same, and it is the same as the DNA 
in the cells of your liver and kidney and other organs. What distinguishes 
a neuron from a liver cell are the speciﬁ c parts of the DNA that are used 
to assemble the cell. These segments of DNA are called  genes . 

 Each  chromosome  contains  an  uninterrupted  double-strand  braid  of 
DNA, 2 nm wide. If the DNA from the 46 human chromosomes were laid 
out straight, end to end, it would measure more than 2 m in length. If we 
were to compare this total length of DNA to the total string of letters that 
make up this book, the genes would be analogous to the individual words. 
Genes are from 0.1 to several micrometers in length. 

 The  “reading”  of  the  DNA  is  known  as   gene  expression .  The  ﬁ nal 
product of gene expression is the synthesis of molecules called  proteins , 
which exist in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, perform many different 
functions, and bestow upon neurons virtually all of their unique charac-
teristics.  Protein synthesis , the assembly of protein molecules, occurs 
in the cytoplasm. Because the DNA never leaves the nucleus, an interme-
diary must carry the genetic message to the sites of protein synthesis in 
the cytoplasm. This function is performed by another long molecule called 
 messenger ribonucleic acid , or  mRNA . mRNA consists of four differ-
ent nucleic acids strung together in various sequences to form a chain. 
The  detailed  sequence  of  the  nucleic  acids  in  the  chain  represents  the 
information in the gene, just as the sequence of letters gives meaning to 
a written word. 

 The process of assembling a piece of mRNA that contains the informa-
tion of a gene is called  transcription , and the resulting mRNA is called 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   29
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   29

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

30

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Neuronal
membrane

Mitochondrion

Nucleus

Rough ER

Ribosomes

Polyribosomes

Golgi apparatus

Smooth ER

Microtubules

Axon
hillock

Axon

▲ FIGURE 2.8
The internal structure of a typical neuron.

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   30
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   30

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

31

Gene

Terminator

Promoter

DNA

Exon 1

Exon 2

Exon 3

Intron 1

Intron 2

Transcription

Splicing

Gene

1

Transcription

DNA

DNA

RNA

RNA polymerase

RNA

2

RNA processing

mRNA
transcript

3

Export from nucleus

(b)  

mRNA

Cytoplasm

(a)  

 ▲ FIGURE 2.9
 Gene transcription.   (a)  RNA molecules are synthesized by RNA polymerase and then 
processed into mRNA to carry the genetic instructions for protein assembly from the 
nucleus to the cytoplasm.  (b)  Transcription is initiated at the promoter region of the 
gene and stopped at the terminator region. The initial RNA must be spliced to remove 
the introns that do not code for protein. 

the  transcript  (Figure 2.9a). Interspersed between protein-coding genes 
are  long  stretches  of  DNA  whose  functions  remain  poorly  understood. 
Some of these regions, however, are known to be important for regulat-
ing  transcription.  At  one  end  of  the  gene  is  the   promoter ,  the  region 
where the RNA-synthesizing enzyme,  RNA polymerase , binds to initiate 
transcription. The binding of the polymerase to the promoter is tightly 
regulated by other proteins called  transcription factors . At the other 
end is a sequence of DNA called the  terminator,  or  stop sequence,  that the 
RNA polymerase recognizes as the end point for transcription. 

 In  addition  to  the  non-coding  regions  of  DNA  that  ﬂ ank  the  genes, 
there  are  often  additional  stretches  of  DNA  within  the  gene  itself  that 
cannot be used to code for protein. These interspersed regions are called 
 introns , and the coding sequences are called  exons . Initial transcripts con-
tain both introns and exons, but then, by a process called  RNA  splicing , 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   31
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   31

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

32

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

the   introns  are  removed  and  the  remaining  exons  are  fused  together 
(Figure  2.9b).  In  some  cases,  speciﬁ c  exons  are  also  removed  with  the 
introns, leaving an “alternatively spliced” mRNA that actually encodes a 
different protein. Thus, transcription of a single gene can ultimately give 
rise to several different mRNAs and protein products. 

 mRNA transcripts emerge from the nucleus via pores in the nuclear 
envelope and travel to the sites of protein synthesis elsewhere in the neu-
ron. At these sites, a protein molecule is assembled much as the mRNA 
molecule was: by linking together many small molecules into a chain. In 
the case of protein, the building blocks are  amino acids , of which there 
are  20  different  kinds.  This  assembling  of  proteins  from  amino  acids 
under the direction of the mRNA is called  translation . 

 The scientiﬁ c study of this process, which begins with the DNA of the 
nucleus and ends with the synthesis of protein molecules in the cell, is 
known as  molecular biology . The “central dogma” of molecular biology is 
summarized as follows: 
 

 Transcription 

Translation 

 DNA 

 mRNA 

 Protein 

 Neuronal Genes, Genetic Variation, and Genetic Engineering.  Neurons 
differ from other cells in the body because of the speciﬁ c genes they express 
as proteins. A new understanding of these genes is now possible because 
the human  genome —the entire length of DNA that comprises the genetic 
information in our chromosomes—has been sequenced. We now know the 
25,000 “words” that comprise our genome, and we know where these genes 
can be found on each chromosome. Furthermore, we are learning which 
genes are expressed uniquely in neurons (Box 2.2). This knowledge has 
paved the way to understanding the genetic basis of many diseases of the 
nervous system. In some diseases, long stretches of DNA that contain sev-
eral genes are missing; in others, genes are duplicated, leading to overex-
pression of speciﬁ c proteins. These sorts of mishaps, called  gene   copy num-
ber variations , often occur at the moment of conception when paternal and 
maternal DNA mix to create the genome of the offspring. Some instances 
of serious psychiatric disorders, including autism and schizophrenia, were 
recently  shown  to  be  caused  by  gene  copy  number  variations  in  the  af-
fected children. (Psychiatric disorders are discussed in Chapter 22.) 

 Other nervous system disorders are caused by  mutations —“typographical 
errors”—in a gene or in the ﬂ anking regions of DNA that regulate the gene’s 
expression.  In  some  cases,  a  single  protein  may  be  grossly  abnormal  or 
missing entirely, disrupting neuronal function. An example is fragile X syn-
drome, a disorder that manifests as intellectual disability and autism and 
is caused by disruption of a single gene (discussed further in Chapter 23). 
Many of our genes carry small mutations, called  single nucleotide polymor-
phisms , which are analogous to a minor misspelling caused by a change in 
a single letter. These are usually benign, like the difference between “color” 
and “colour”—different spelling, same meaning. However, sometimes the 
mutations  can  affect  protein  function  (consider  the  difference  between 
“bear” and “bare”—same letters, different meaning). Such single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, alone or together with others, can affect neuronal function. 
 Genes make the brain, and understanding how they contribute to neu-
ronal function in both healthy and diseased organisms is a major goal of 
neuroscience.  An  important  breakthrough  was  the  development  of  tools 
for   genetic  engineering —ways  to  change  organisms  by  design  with 
gene mutations or insertions. This technology has been used most in mice 
because  they  are  rapidly  reproducing  mammals  with  a  central  nervous 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   32
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   32

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

33

BOX 2.2

B R A I N   F O O D

 Expressing One’s Mind in the Post-Genomic Era 

 Sequencing  the  human  genome  was  a  truly  monumen-

tal  achievement,  completed  in  2003.  The  Human  Genome 
Project  identiﬁ ed  all  of  the  approximately  25,000  genes  in 
human DNA. We now live in what has been called the “post-
genomic  era,”  in  which  information  about  the  genes  ex-
pressed  in  our  tissues  can  be  used  to  diagnose  and  treat 
diseases. Neuroscientists are using this information to tackle 
long-standing questions about the biological basis of neuro-
logical and psychiatric disorders as well as to probe deeper 
into the origins of individuality. The logic goes as follows. The 
brain is a product of the genes expressed in it. Differences 
in gene expression between a normal brain and a diseased 
brain, or a brain of unusual ability, can be used to identify the 
molecular basis of the observed symptoms or traits. 

 The  level  of  gene  expression  is  usually  deﬁ ned  as  the 
number  of  mRNA  transcripts  synthesized  by  different  cells 
and tissues to direct the synthesis of speciﬁ c proteins. Thus, 
the analysis of gene expression requires comparing the rela-
tive abundance of various mRNAs in the brains of two groups 
of humans or animals. One way to perform such a compari-
son is to use DNA  microarrays , which are created by robotic 
machines that arrange thousands of small spots of synthetic 
DNA  on  a  microscope  slide.  Each  spot  contains  a  unique 
DNA sequence that will recognize and stick to a different spe-
ciﬁ c  mRNA  sequence.  To  compare  the  gene  expression  in 
two brains, one begins by collecting a sample of mRNAs from 
each brain. The mRNA of one brain is labeled with a chemical 
tag that ﬂ uoresces green, and the mRNA of the other brain 
is labeled with a tag that ﬂ uoresces red. These samples are 
then applied to the microarray. Highly expressed genes will 
produce brightly ﬂ uorescent spots, and differences in the rel-
ative gene expression between the brains will be revealed by 
differences in the color of the ﬂ uorescence (Figure A). 

Brainn 1
Brain 1

Brain 2
Brain 2

Vial of mRNA
Vial of mRNA
from brain 2,
from brain 2,
labeled green
labeled green

Spot of synthetic
Spot of synthetic
DNA with gene-
DNA with gene-
specific sequence
specific sequence

Microscopic
Microscopic
slide
slide

Vial of mRNA
Vial of mRNA
from brain 1,
from brain 1,
labeled red
labeled red

ix applie
Mix applied
ededied
ix applie
MixMMiMiMix applied
to DNA microarray
roar
rocrocr
A micr
A micr
A m
to DDDNNAAA m crocr
rray

Gene with
Gene with
reduced
reduced
expression
expression
in brain 2
in brain 2

Genne with
Gene with
equivalent
equivalent
expression
expression
in both
in both
brains
brains

Gene wwith
Gene with
reducedd
reduced
expresssion
expression
in brain  1
in brain 1

 Figure A
 Figure A
 Proﬁ ling differences in gene expression. 
Proﬁ ling differences in gene expression. 

 system similar to our own. Today, it is common in neuroscience to hear 
about  knockout mice , in which one gene has been deleted (or “knocked 
out”). Such mice can be used to study the progression of a disease, like frag-
ile X, with the goal of correcting it. Another approach has been to generate 
transgenic mice , in which genes have been introduced and overexpressed; 
these new genes are called  transgenes .  Knock-in mice  have also been cre-
ated in which the native gene is replaced with a modiﬁ ed transgene. 

 We will see many examples in this book of how genetically engineered 
animals  have  been  used  in  neuroscience.  The  discoveries  that  allowed 
genetic modiﬁ cation of mice have revolutionized biology. The researchers 
who did this work were recognized with the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology 
or Medicine: Martin Evans of Cardiff University, Oliver Smithies of the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Mario Capecchi of the 
University of Utah (Box 2.3). 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   33
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   33

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

34

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 2.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

 Gene Targeting in Mice 
 by Mario Capecchi 

 How  did  I  ﬁ rst  get  the  idea  to  pursue  gene  targeting  in 

mice? From a simple observation. Mike Wigler, now at Cold 
Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  and  Richard  Axel,  at  Columbia 
University, had published a paper in 1979 showing that ex-
posing  mammalian  cells  to  a  mixture  of  DNA  and  calcium 
phosphate  would  cause  some  cells  to  take  up  the  DNA  in 
functional  form  and  express  the  encoded  genes.  This  was 
exciting because they had clearly demonstrated that exog-
enous, functional DNA could be introduced into mammalian 
cells. But I wondered why their efﬁ ciency was so low. Was it 
a problem of delivery, insertion of exogenous DNA into the 
chromosome, or expression of the genes once inserted into 
the host chromosome? What would happen if puriﬁ ed DNA 
was directly injected into the nucleus of mammalian cells in 
culture? 

 To ﬁ nd out, I converted a colleague’s electrophysiology 
station into a miniature hypodermic needle to directly inject 
DNA into the nucleus of a living cell using mechanical micro-
manipulators and light microscopy (Figure A). The procedure 
worked with amazing efﬁ ciency (Capecchi, 1980). With this 
method,  the  frequency  of  successful  integration  was  now 
one  in  three  cells  rather  than  one  in  a  million  cells  as  for-
merly.  This  high  efﬁ ciency  directly  led  to  the   development 

of  transgenic  mice  through  the  injection  and  random  inte-
gration  of  exogenous  DNA  into  chromosomes  of  fertilized 
mouse  eggs,  or  zygotes.  To  achieve  the  high  efﬁ ciency  of 
expression of the exogenous DNA in the recipient cell, I had 
to attach small fragments of viral DNA, which we now un-
derstand to contain enhancers that are critical in eukaryotic 
gene expression. 

 But  what  fascinated  me  most  was  our  observation  that 
when many copies of a gene were injected into a cell nucleus, 
all  of  these  molecules  ended  up  in  an  ordered  head-to-tail 
arrangement, called a  concatemer (Figure B). This was as-
tonishing and could not have occurred as a random event. 
We went on to unequivocally prove that homologous recom-
bination, the process by which chromosomes share genetic 
information  during  cell  division,  was  responsible  for  the  in-
corporation  of  the  foreign  DNA  (Folger  et  al.,  1982).  These 
experiments demonstrated that all mammalian somatic cells 
contain a very efﬁ cient machinery for swapping segments of 
DNA that have similar sequences of nucleotides. Injection of 
a thousand copies of a gene sequence into the nucleus of a 
cell resulted in chromosomal insertion of a concatemer con-
taining  a  thousand  copies  of  that  sequence,  all  oriented  in 
the same direction. This simple observation directly led me to 

Holding 
pipette

Fertilized
mouse

egg

Figure A
 Fertilized mouse egg receiving an injection of foreign DNA. (Image 
courtesy of Dr. Peimin Qi, Division of Comparative Medicine, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

Micropipette

with DNA
solution

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   34
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   34

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

35

(EC). Then I heard a rumor that Martin 
Evans  in  Cambridge,  England  was 
isolating  more  promising  cells,  which 
he  called  EK  cells,  that  resembled 
EC cells but were derived from a nor-
mal  mouse  embryo  rather  than  from 
tumors. I called him and asked if the 
rumor was correct, and he said it was. 
My next question was whether I could 
come  to  his  laboratory  to  learn  how 
to work with those cells, and his an-
swer again was yes. Christmas time, 
1985, was beautiful in Cambridge. My 
wife, who worked with me, and I had 
a wonderful couple of weeks learning 
how to maintain these marvelous cells 
and use them to generate mice capa-
ble of germ line transmission. 

Figure B

envision mutating any chosen gene, in any chosen manner, 
in living mice by gene targeting. 

 Excited by this possibility, in 1980, I submitted a grant 
to the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) proposing to 
directly alter gene DNA sequences in mammalian cultured 
cells by homologous recombination. They rejected the pro-
posal,  and  their  arguments  were  not  unreasonable.  They 
argued that the probability of the exogenously added DNA 
sequence  ever  ﬁ nding  the  DNA  sequence  similar  enough 
to  enable  homologous  recombination  in  living  mammalian 
cells (containing 3  ⫻  10 9  nucleotide base pairs) was van-
ishingly small. Fortunately, my grant application contained 
two other proposals that the NIH reviewers liked, and they 
funded  those  projects.  I  used  those  funds  to  support  the 
gene targeting project. Four years later, we had  results sup-
porting  our  ability  to  do  gene  targeting  in  cultured  mam-
malian cells. I then resubmitted a new NIH grant application 
to the same review panel, now proposing to extend gene 
targeting to generating mutant mice. Their evaluation sheet 
in response began this way: “We are glad you didn’t follow 
our advice.” 

 It took 10 years to develop gene targeting in mice (Thomas 
& Capecchi, 1987). Prior to this success, we had to under-
stand  the  homologous  recombination  machinery  in  eukary-
otic cells. Also, because the frequency of gene targeting was 
low, if we were to be successful in transferring our technology 
to mice, we needed mouse embryonic stem cells capable of 
contributing to the formation of the germ line—the sperm and 
eggs—in  mature animals. I was getting depressed from our 
lack of success using cells derived from embryonal carcinoma 

 Investigators  often  have  a  pre-
conceived  idea  about  the  particular 
role of their gene of interest in mouse biology, and they are 
usually very surprised by results when the gene is knocked 
out.  Gene  targeting  has  taken  us  in  many  new  directions, 
including most recently pursuing the role of microglia, cells 
that migrate into the brain after being generated in the bone 
marrow along with immune and blood cells. Mutating these 
cells in mice results in a pathology remarkably  similar to the 
human condition called trichotillomania, a type of obsessive-
compulsive  disorder  characterized  by  strong  urges  to  pull 
out one’s hair. Amazingly, transplanting normal bone mar-
row into mutant mice permanently cures them of this path-
ological  behavior  (Chen  et  al.,  2010).  Now,  we  are  deeply 
immersed  in  trying  to  understand  the  mechanism  of  how 
microglia  control  neural  circuit  output  and,  more  impor-
tantly,  exploring  the   intimate  relationship  between  the  im-
mune   system  (in  this  case  microglia)  and  neuropsychiatric 
disorders  such  as  depression,  autism,  schizophrenia,  and 
Alzheimer’s disease. 

 References 
 Capecchi MR. 1980. High efﬁ ciency transformation by direct micro-
injection of DNA into cultured mammalian cells.  Cell  22:479–488. 
 Chen SC, Tvrdik P, Peden E, Cho S, Wu S, Spangrude G, Capecchi 
MR.  2010.  Hematopoietic  origin  of  pathological  grooming  in 
Hoxb8 mutant mice.  Cell  141(5):775–785. 

 Folger KR, Wong EA, Wahl G, Capecchi MR. 1982. Patterns of in-
tegration  of  DNA  microinjected  into  cultured  mammalian  cells: 
evidence for homologous recombination between injected plasmid 
DNA molecules.  Molecular and Cellular Biology  2:1372–1387. 

 Thomas  KR,  Capecchi  MR.  1987.  Site-directed  mutagenesis  by 
gene  targeting  in  mouse  embryo-derived  stem  cells.   Cell   51:
503–512. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   35
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   35

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

 Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum. Neurons make use of the information in 
genes by synthesizing proteins. Protein synthesis occurs at dense globular 
structures in the cytoplasm called  ribosomes . mRNA transcripts bind to 
the ribosomes, and the ribosomes translate the  instructions contained in 
the mRNA to assemble a protein molecule. In other words, ribosomes use 
the blueprint provided by the mRNA to manufacture proteins from raw 
material in the form of amino acids. 

 In neurons, many ribosomes are attached to stacks of membrane called 
 rough endoplasmic reticulum , or  rough ER  (Figure 2.10). Rough ER 
abounds  in  neurons,  far  more  than  in  glia  or  most  other  non-neuronal 
cells. In fact, we have already been introduced to rough ER by another 
name: Nissl bodies. This is the organelle stained with the dyes that Nissl 
introduced over 100 years ago. 

 Rough ER is a major site of protein synthesis in neurons, but not all 
ribosomes  are  attached  to  rough  ER.  Many  are  freely  ﬂ oating  and  are 
called  free ribosomes . Several free ribosomes may appear to be attached 
by  a  thread;  these  are  called   polyribosomes .  The  thread  is  a  single 
strand of mRNA, and the associated ribosomes are working on it to make 
multiple copies of the same protein. 

36

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Nucleus

Nuclear
envelope
Nuclear
pore

Rough ER

Ribosomes

 ▲ FIGURE 2.10
 Rough endoplasmic reticulum, or 
rough ER.  

 What is the difference between proteins synthesized on the rough ER 
and those synthesized on the free ribosomes? The answer appears to de-
pend on the intended fate of the protein molecule. If it is destined to re-
side within the cytosol of the neuron, then the protein’s mRNA transcript 
shuns the ribosomes of the rough ER and gravitates toward the free ri-
bosomes (Figure 2.11a). However, if the protein is destined to be inserted 
into the membrane of the cell or an organelle, then it is synthesized on 
the  rough  ER.  As  the  protein  is  being  assembled,  it  is  threaded  back 
and forth through the membrane of the rough ER, where it is trapped 
(Figure 2.11b). It is not surprising that neurons have so much rough ER 
because, as we shall see in later chapters, special membrane proteins are 
what give these cells their remarkable information-processing abilities. 

 Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum and the Golgi Apparatus. The remain-
der of the cytosol of the soma is crowded with stacks of membranous or-
ganelles that look a lot like rough ER without the ribosomes, so much so 
that one type is called  smooth endoplasmic reticulum , or  smooth ER . 
Smooth ER is heterogeneous and performs different functions in different 
locations. Some smooth ER is continuous with rough ER and is believed 
to be a site where the proteins that jut out from the membrane are care-
fully folded, giving them their three-dimensional structure. Other types 
of smooth ER play no direct role in the processing of protein molecules 
but  instead  regulate  the  internal  concentrations  of  substances  such  as 
calcium. (This organelle is particularly prominent in muscle cells, where 
it is called sarcoplasmic reticulum, as we will see in Chapter 13.) 

 The stack of membrane-enclosed disks in the soma that lies farthest from 
the nucleus is the  Golgi apparatus , ﬁ rst described in 1898 by Camillo 
Golgi (Figure 2.12). This is a site of extensive “post-translational” chemical 
processing of proteins. One important function of the Golgi apparatus is 
believed to be the sorting of certain proteins that are destined for delivery 
to different parts of the neuron, such as the axon and the dendrites. 

 The  Mitochondrion.  Another  very  abundant  organelle  in  the  soma  is 
the  mitochondrion  (plural: mitochondria). In neurons, these sausage-
shaped structures are about 1  ␮ m long. Within the enclosure of their outer 
membrane are multiple folds of inner membrane called  cristae  (singular: 
crista). Between the cristae is an inner space called  matrix  (Figure 2.13a). 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   36
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   36

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

37

mRNA

mRNA

mRNA

Free
ribosome

mRNA being
translated

Rough ER

mRNA being
translated

Newly created
protein

(a)   Protein synthesis on a free

ribosome

(b)  

Protein synthesis on rough ER

Newly synthesized
membrane-associated
protein

Rough ER

Newly synthesized
protein

Golgi
apparatus

▲  FIGURE 2.11
 Protein synthesis on a free ribosome 
and on rough ER.  mRNA binds to a ri-
bosome, initiating protein synthesis.  (a)  
Proteins synthesized on free ribosomes 
are destined for the cytosol.  (b)  Proteins 
synthesized on the rough ER are des-
tined to be enclosed by or inserted into 
the membrane. Membrane-associated 
proteins are inserted into the membrane 
as they are assembled. 

 ▲ FIGURE 2.12
 The Golgi apparatus.  This complex organ-
elle sorts newly synthesized proteins for 
delivery to appropriate locations in the 
 neuron. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   37
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   37

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

38

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Outer
membrane

Inner
membrane

Cristae

Matrix

(a)

Pyruvic    
acid

+

O2

+

CO2

Protein

Sugar

Fat

Dietary and stored
energy sources

(b)

 ▲ FIGURE 2.13
 The role of mitochondria.   (a)  Compo-
nents of a mitochondrion.  (b)  Cellular res-
piration. ATP is the energy currency that 
fuels biochemical reactions in  neurons. 

 Mitochondria are the site of  cellular respiration  (Figure 2.13b). When a 
mitochondrion “inhales,” it pulls inside pyruvic acid (derived from sugars 
and digested proteins and fats) and oxygen, both of which are ﬂ oating in 
the cytosol. Within the inner compartment of the mitochondrion, pyruvic 
acid enters into a complex series of biochemical reactions called the  Krebs 
cycle ,  named  after  the  German-British  scientist  Hans  Krebs,  who  ﬁ rst 
proposed it in 1937. The biochemical products of the Krebs cycle provide 
energy that, in another series of reactions within the cristae (called the 
electron-transport chain), results in the addition of phosphate to adenos-
ine  diphosphate  (ADP),  yielding   adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) ,  the 
cell’s energy source. When the mitochondrion “exhales,” 17 ATP molecules 
are released for every molecule of pyruvic acid that had been taken in. 

  ATP is the energy currency of the cell . The chemical energy stored in 
ATP fuels most of the biochemical reactions of the neuron. For example, 
as we shall see in Chapter 3, special proteins in the neuronal membrane 
use the energy released by the breakdown of ATP into ADP to pump cer-
tain substances across the membrane to establish concentration differ-
ences between the inside and the outside of the neuron. 

 The Neuronal Membrane 
 The  neuronal membrane  serves as a barrier to enclose the cytoplasm 
inside the neuron and to exclude certain substances that ﬂ oat in the ﬂ uid 
that bathes the neuron. The membrane is about 5 nm thick and is studded 
with  proteins.  As  mentioned  earlier,  some  of  the  membrane- associated 
proteins  pump  substances  from  the  inside  to  the  outside.  Others  form 
pores that regulate which substances can gain access to the inside of the 
neuron. An important characteristic of neurons is that the protein com-
position of the membrane varies depending on whether it is in the soma, 
the dendrites, or the axon. 

  The function of neurons cannot be understood without understanding 
the structure and function of the membrane and its associated proteins . 
In fact, this topic is so important that we’ll spend much of the next four 
chapters looking at how the membrane endows neurons with the remark-
able ability to transfer electrical signals throughout the brain and body. 

 The Cytoskeleton 
 Earlier,  we  compared  the  neuronal  membrane  to  a  circus  tent  draped 
over an internal scaffolding. This scaffolding is called the  cytoskeleton , 
and it gives the neuron its characteristic shape. The “bones” of the cy-
toskeleton  are  the  microtubules,  microﬁ laments,  and  neuroﬁ laments 
(Figure  2.14).  Unlike  the  tent  scaffolding,  however,  the  cytoskeleton  is 
not static. Elements of the cytoskeleton are dynamically regulated and 
are in continual motion. Your neurons are probably squirming around in 
your head even as you read this sentence. 

 Microtubules.  Measuring  20  nm  in  diameter,   microtubules   are  rela-
tively large and run longitudinally down neurites. A microtubule appears 
as a straight, thick-walled hollow pipe. The wall of the pipe is composed of 
smaller strands that are braided like rope around the hollow core. Each of 
the smaller strands consists of the protein  tubulin . A single tubulin mol-
ecule is small and globular; the strand consists of tubulins stuck together 
like pearls on a string. The process of joining small proteins to form a long 
strand is called  polymerization ; the resulting strand is called a  polymer . 
Polymerization and depolymerization of microtubules and, therefore, of 
neuronal shape can be regulated by various signals within the neuron. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   38
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   38

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

39

 One class of proteins that participate in the regulation of microtubule 
assembly  and  function  are   microtubule-associated  proteins ,  or   MAPs . 
Among other functions (many of which are unknown), MAPs anchor the 
microtubules to one another and to other parts of the neuron. Pathological 
changes in an axonal MAP, called tau, have been implicated in the de-
mentia that accompanies Alzheimer’s disease (Box 2.4). 

 Microﬁ laments. Measuring only 5 nm in diameter,  microﬁ laments  are 
about the same thickness as the cell membrane. Found throughout the 
neuron, they are particularly numerous in the neurites. Microﬁ laments 
are  braids  of  two  thin  strands  that  are  polymers  of  the  protein   actin . 
Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in cells of all types, including 
neurons, and is believed to play a role in changing cell shape. Indeed, as 
we shall see in Chapter 13, actin ﬁ laments are critically involved in the 
mechanism of muscle contraction. 

 Like  microtubules,  actin  microﬁ laments  are  constantly  undergoing  as-
sembly and disassembly, and this process is regulated by signals in the neu-
ron. In addition to running longitudinally down the core of the neurites like 
microtubules, microﬁ laments are also closely associated with the membrane. 
They are anchored to the membrane by attachments with a meshwork of ﬁ -
brous proteins that line the inside of the membrane like a spider web. 

 Neuroﬁ laments. With a diameter of 10 nm,  neuroﬁ laments  are inter-
mediate in size between microtubules and microﬁ laments. They exist in 
all cells of the body as  intermediate ﬁ laments ; only in neurons are they 
called neuroﬁ laments. The difference in name reﬂ ects differences in struc-
ture among different tissues. For example, a different intermediate ﬁ la-
ment, keratin, composes hair when bundled together. 

 Of the types of ﬁ brous structure we have discussed, neuroﬁ laments most 
closely resemble the bones and ligaments of the skeleton. A neuroﬁ lament 
consists  of  multiple  subunits  (building  blocks)  that  are  wound  together 
into a ropelike structure. Each strand of the rope consists of individual 
long protein molecules, making neuroﬁ laments mechanically very strong. 

 The Axon 
 So far, we’ve explored the soma, organelles, membrane, and cytoskeleton. 
These structures are not unique to neurons but are found in all the cells 
in our body. Now we’ll look at the axon, a structure found only in neurons 
and highly specialized for the transfer of information over distances in 
the nervous system. 

 The  axon  begins  with  a  region  called  the   axon  hillock ,  which  ta-
pers away from the soma to form the initial segment of the axon proper 
(Figure 2.15). Two noteworthy features distinguish the axon from the soma: 
 1. No rough ER extends into the axon, and there are few, if any, free ribo-

somes in mature axons.

 2. The protein composition of the axon membrane is fundamentally dif-

ferent from that of the soma membrane.
 These  structural  differences  translate  into  functional  distinctions.
Because there are no ribosomes, there is no protein synthesis in the axon. 
This means that all proteins in the axon must originate in the soma. And 
the different proteins in the axonal membrane enable it to serve as a wire 
that sends information over great distances. 

 Axons may extend from less than a millimeter to over a meter long. 
Axons  often  branch,  and  these  branches,  called   axon  collaterals ,  can 

Tubulin
molecule

20 nm

Microtubule

Actin
molecule

10 nm
Neurofilament

5 nm

Microfilament

▲ FIGURE 2.14
 Components of the cytoskeleton.  The 
arrangement of microtubules, neurofila-
ments, and microfilaments gives the 
neuron its characteristic shape.

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   39
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   39

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

40

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 2.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Alzheimer’s Disease and the Neuronal Cytoskeleton 

 Neurites  are  the  most  remarkable  structural  feature  of  a 

neuron.  Their  elaborate  branching  patterns,  critical  for  infor-
mation  processing,  reﬂ ect  the  organization  of  the  underlying 
cytoskeleton. It is therefore no surprise that a devastating loss 
of brain function can result when the cytoskeleton of neurons is 
disrupted. An example is  Alzheimer’s disease,  which is charac-
terized by the disruption of the cytoskeleton of neurons in the 
cerebral cortex, a region of the brain crucial for cognitive func-
tion. This disorder and its underlying brain pathology were ﬁ rst 
described in 1907 by the German physician A. Alzheimer in a 
paper titled “A Characteristic Disease of the Cerebral Cortex.” 
Below are excerpts from the English translation. 

 One  of  the  ﬁ rst  disease  symptoms  of  a  51-year-old 
woman was a strong feeling of jealousy toward her hus-
band. Very soon she showed rapidly increasing memory 
impairments; she could not ﬁ nd her way about her home, 
she dragged objects to and fro, hid herself, or sometimes 
thought that people were out to kill her, then she would 
start to scream loudly. 

 During institutionalization her gestures showed a com-
plete  helplessness.  She  was  disoriented  as  to  time  and 
place. From time to time she would state that she did not 
understand  anything,  that  she  felt  confused  and  totally 
lost. Sometimes she considered the coming of the doctor 
as an ofﬁ cial visit and apologized for not having ﬁ nished her 
work, but other times she would start to yell in the fear that 
the doctor wanted to operate on her; or there were times 
that  she  would  send  him  away  in  complete  indignation, 
uttering  phrases  that  indicated  her  fear  that  the   doctor 
wanted to damage her woman’s honor. From time to time 
she was completely delirious, dragging her blankets and 
sheets to and fro, calling for her husband and daughter, 
and  seeming  to  have  auditory  hallucinations.  Often  she 
would scream for hours and hours in a horrible voice. 

 Mental  regression  advanced  quite  steadily.  After  four 
and a half years of illness the patient died. She was com-
pletely apathetic in the end, and was conﬁ ned to bed in a 
fetal position. (Bick et al., 1987, pp. 1–2.) 

 Following  her  death,  Alzheimer  examined  the  woman’s 
brain  under  the  microscope.  He  made  particular  note  of 

changes  in  the  “neuroﬁ brils,”  elements  of  the  cytoskeleton 
that can be stained by a silver solution. 

 The Bielschowsky silver preparation showed very char-
acteristic changes in the neuroﬁ brils. However, inside an 
apparently normal-looking cell, one or more single ﬁ bers 
could be observed that became prominent through their 
striking  thickness  and  speciﬁ c  impregnability.  At  a  more 
advanced  stage,  many  ﬁ brils  arranged  parallel  showed 
the same changes. Then they accumulated forming dense 
bundles and gradually advanced to the surface of the cell. 
Eventually, the nucleus and cytoplasm disappeared, and 
only  a  tangled  bundle  of  ﬁ brils  indicated  the  site  where 
once the neuron had been  located. 

 As these ﬁ brils can be stained with dyes different from 
the normal neuroﬁ brils, a chemical transformation of the 
ﬁ bril  substance  must  have  taken  place.  This  might  be 
the reason why the ﬁ brils survived the destruction of the 
cell. It seems that the transformation of the ﬁ brils goes 
hand in hand with the storage of an as yet not closely 
examined pathological product of the metabolism in the 
neuron.  About  one-quarter  to  one-third  of  all  the  neu-
rons  of  the  cerebral  cortex  showed  such  alterations. 
Numerous  neurons,  especially  in  the  upper  cell  layers, 
had totally disappeared. (Bick et al., 1987, pp. 2–3.) 

 The severity of the dementia in Alzheimer’s disease is well 
correlated with the number and distribution of what are now 
commonly known as  neuroﬁ brillary tangles , the “tombstones” 
of dead and dying neurons (Figure A). Indeed, as Alzheimer 
speculated, tangle formation in the cerebral cortex very likely 
causes  the  symptoms  of  the  disease.  Electron  microscopy 
reveals that the major components of the tangles are  paired 
helical  ﬁ laments ,  long  ﬁ brous  proteins  braided  together  like 
strands of a rope (Figure B). It is now understood that these 
ﬁ laments consist of the microtubule-associated protein  tau . 
 Tau normally functions as a bridge between the microtu-
bules in axons, ensuring that they run straight and parallel to 
one another. In Alzheimer’s disease, the tau detaches from 
the microtubules and accumulates in the soma. This disrup-
tion of the cytoskeleton causes the axons to wither, thus im-
peding the normal ﬂ ow of information in the affected neurons. 

travel long distances to communicate with different parts of the nervous 
system. Occasionally, an axon collateral returns to communicate with the 
same cell that gave rise to the axon or with the dendrites of neighboring 
cells. These axon branches are called  recurrent collaterals . 

 The diameter of an axon is variable, ranging from less than 1  ␮ m to 
about 25  ␮ m in humans and to as large as 1 mm in squid. This variation 
in axon size is important. As will be explained in Chapter 4, the speed 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   40
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   40

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

41

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure A 
 Neurons in a human brain with Alzheimer’s disease. Normal neurons contain neuroﬁ laments but no neuroﬁ brillary tangles. (a) Brain tissue 
stained by a method that makes neuronal neuroﬁ laments ﬂ uoresce green, showing viable neurons. (b) The same region of the brain stained 
to show the presence of tau within neuroﬁ brillary tangles, revealed by red ﬂ uorescence. (c) Superimposition of images in parts a and b. The 
neuron indicated by the arrowhead contains neuroﬁ laments but no tangles and therefore is healthy. The neuron indicated by the large arrow 
has neuroﬁ laments but also has started to show accumulation of tau and therefore is diseased. The neuron indicated by the small arrow in 
parts b and c is dead because it contains no neuroﬁ laments. The remaining tangle is the tombstone of a neuron killed by Alzheimer’s disease. 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. John Morrison and modiﬁ ed from Vickers et al., 1994.)

 What causes such changes in tau? Attention has focused 
on another protein that accumulates in the brain of Alzheimer’s 
patients, called  amyloid . Alzheimer’s disease research is mov-
ing very fast, but the consensus today is that the abnormal 
secretion of amyloid by neurons is the ﬁ rst step in a process 

that  leads  to  neuroﬁ brillary  tangle  formation  and  dementia. 
Currently, hope for therapeutic intervention focuses on strate-
gies  to  reduce  the  depositions  of  amyloid  in  the  brain.  The 
need for effective therapy is urgent: In the United States alone, 
more than 5 million people are afﬂ icted with this tragic disease. 

100 nm

 Figure B
 Paired helical ﬁ laments of a tangle. 
(Source: Goedert, 1996, Fig. 2b.) 

of the electrical signal that sweeps down the axon—the  nerve impulse — 
depends on the axonal diameter. The thicker the axon, the faster the im-
pulse travels. 

 The Axon Terminal. All axons have a beginning (the axon hillock), a mid-
dle (the axon proper), and an end. The end is called the  axon terminal  or 
 terminal bouton  (French for “button”), reﬂ ecting the fact that it  usually 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   41
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   41

12/20/14   2:58 AM
12/20/14   2:58 AM

appears as a swollen disk (Figure 2.16). The terminal is a site where the 
axon comes in contact with other neurons (or other cells) and passes in-
formation on to them. This point of contact is called the  synapse , a word 
derived from the Greek, meaning “to fasten together.” Sometimes axons 
have many short branches at their ends, and each branch forms a syn-
apse on dendrites or cell bodies in the same region. These branches are 
collectively called the  terminal arbor . Sometimes axons form synapses 
at swollen regions along their length and then continue on to terminate 
elsewhere  (Figure  2.17).  Such  swellings  are  called   boutons  en  passant  
(“buttons  in  passing”).  In  either  case,  when  a  neuron  makes  synaptic 
contact with another cell, it is said to innervate that cell, or to provide 
  innervation . 

 The  cytoplasm  of  the  axon  terminal  differs  from  that  of  the  axon  in 

several ways: 
 1. Microtubules do not extend into the terminal. 
 2. The  terminal  contains  numerous  small  bubbles  of  membrane,  called 

 synaptic vesicles , that measure about 50 nm in diameter. 

 3. The inside surface of the membrane that faces the synapse has a par-

ticularly dense covering of proteins. 

 4. The axon terminal cytoplasm has numerous mitochondria, indicating a 

high energy demand. 

42

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Axon hillock

Axon
collaterals

 ▲ FIGURE 2.15
 The axon and axon collaterals.  The 
axon functions like a telegraph wire to 
send electrical impulses to distant sites 
in the nervous system. The arrows indi-
cate the direction of information flow. 

Presynaptic
axon terminal

Synapse

Mitochondria

Synaptic
vesicles

Synaptic
cleft

 Postsynaptic dend r i t e  

Receptors

 ▲ FIGURE 2.16
 The axon terminal and the synapse.  Axon terminals form synapses with the 
dendrites or somata of other neurons. When a nerve impulse arrives in the pre-
synaptic axon terminal, neurotransmitter molecules are released from synaptic 
vesicles into the synaptic cleft. Neurotransmitter then binds to specific receptor 
proteins, causing the generation of electrical or chemical signals in the postsyn-
aptic cell. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   42
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   42

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

43

 The Synapse. Although Chapters 5 and 6 are devoted entirely to how in-
formation is transferred from one neuron to another at the synapse, we’ll 
preview  the  process  here.  The  synapse  has  two  sides:   presynaptic   and 
 postsynaptic  (see Figure 2.16). These names indicate the usual direction 
of information ﬂ ow from “pre” to “post.” The presynaptic side generally 
consists of an axon terminal, whereas the postsynaptic side may be a den-
drite or the soma of another neuron. The space between the presynaptic 
and postsynaptic membranes is called the  synaptic cleft . The transfer of 
information at the synapse from one neuron to another is called  synaptic 
transmission . 

 At most synapses, information in the form of electrical impulses travel-
ing down the axon is converted in the terminal into a chemical signal that 
crosses  the  synaptic  cleft.  On  the  postsynaptic  membrane,  this  chemi-
cal signal is converted again into an electrical one. The chemical signal, 
called a  neurotransmitter , is stored in and released from the synaptic 
vesicles within the terminal. As we will see, different neurotransmitters 
are used by different types of neurons. 

 This electrical-to-chemical-to-electrical transformation of information 
makes possible many of the brain’s computational abilities. Modiﬁ cation 
of this process is involved in memory and learning, and synaptic trans-
mission dysfunction accounts for certain mental disorders. The synapse 
is also the site of action for many toxins and for most psychoactive drugs. 

Axon

Synapse

Dendrite

▲ FIGURE 2.17
 A bouton en passant.  An axon ( colored 
yellow ) makes a synapse on a dendrite 
( colored blue ) as they cross. This synapse 
was reconstructed from a series of im-
ages made using an electron microscope. 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Sebastian 
Seung, Princeton University, and Kris 
Krug, Pop Tech.)

 Axoplasmic  Transport.  As  mentioned,  one  feature  of  the  cytoplasm  of 
axons, including the terminal, is the absence of ribosomes. Because ribo-
somes are the protein factories of the cell, their absence means that the 
proteins of the axon must be synthesized in the soma and then shipped 
down the axon. Indeed, in the mid-nineteenth century, English physiolo-
gist Augustus Waller showed that axons cannot be sustained when sepa-
rated from their parent cell body. The degeneration of axons that occurs 
when they are cut is now called  Wallerian degeneration.  Because it can 
be detected with certain staining methods, Wallerian degeneration is one 
way to trace axonal connections in the brain. 

 Wallerian  degeneration  occurs  because  the  normal  ﬂ ow  of  materials 
from  the  soma  to  the  axon  terminal  is  interrupted.  This  movement  of 
material down the axon is called  axoplasmic transport . This was ﬁ rst 
demonstrated  directly  by  the  experiments  of  American  neurobiologist 
Paul Weiss and his colleagues in the 1940s. They found that if they tied 
a thread around an axon, material accumulated on the side of the knot 
closest to the soma. When the knot was untied, the accumulated material 
continued down the axon at a rate of 1–10 mm per day. 

 This was a remarkable discovery, but it is not the whole story. If all 
material  moved  down  the  axon  by  this  transport  mechanism  alone,  it 
would not reach the ends of the longest axons for at least half a year—too 
long a wait to feed hungry synapses. In the late 1960s, methods were de-
veloped to track the movements of protein molecules down the axon into 
the  terminal.  These  methods  entailed  injecting  the  somata  of  neurons 
with  radioactive  amino  acids.  Recall  that  amino  acids  are  the  building 
blocks of proteins. The “hot” amino acids were assembled into proteins, 
and the arrival of radioactive proteins in the axon terminal was timed to 
calculate the rate of transport. This  fast axoplasmic transport  (so named 
to distinguish it from  slow axoplasmic transport  described by Weiss) oc-
curred at a rate as high as 1,000 mm per day. 

 Much  is  now  known  about  how  fast  axoplasmic  transport  works. 
Material is enclosed within vesicles, which then “walk down” the microtu-
bules of the axon. The “legs” are provided by a protein called  kinesin , and 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   43
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   43

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

44

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Axon

Direction of
anterograde
transport

Vesicle

Kinesin

Microtubules

 ▲ FIGURE 2.18
 A mechanism for the movement of material on the microtubules of the axon.  
 Trapped in membrane-enclosed vesicles, material is transported from the soma to 
the axon terminal by the action of the protein kinesin, which “walks” along micro-
tubules at the expense of ATP. 

the process is fueled by ATP (Figure 2.18). Kinesin moves material only 
from the soma to the terminal. All movement of material in this direction 
is called  anterograde transport . 

 In  addition  to  anterograde  transport,  there  is  a  mechanism  for  the 
movement of material up the axon from the terminal to the soma. This 
process is believed to provide signals to the soma about changes in the 
metabolic needs of the axon terminal. Movement in this direction, from 
terminal to soma, is called  retrograde transport . The molecular mech-
anism is similar to anterograde transport, except the “legs” for retrograde 
transport are provided by a different protein,  dynein . Both anterograde 
and retrograde transport mechanisms have been exploited by neuroscien-
tists to trace connections in the brain (Box 2.5). 

 Dendrites 
 The term  dendrite  is derived from the Greek for “tree,” reﬂ ecting the fact that 
these neurites resemble the branches of a tree as they extend from the soma. 
The dendrites of a single neuron are collectively called a  dendritic tree ; each 
branch of the tree is called a  dendritic branch . The wide variety of shapes and 
sizes of dendritic trees are used to classify different groups of neurons. 

 Because dendrites function as the antennae of the neuron, they are cov-
ered with thousands of synapses (Figure 2.19). The dendritic  membrane 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   44
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   44

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

45

BOX 2.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Hitching a Ride with Retrograde Transport

 Fast  anterograde  transport  of  proteins  in  axons  was

shown by injecting the soma with radioactive amino acids. 
The success of this method immediately suggested a way 
to  trace  connections  in  the  brain.  For  example,  to  deter-
mine where neurons in the eye send their axons elsewhere 
in the brain, the eye was injected with radioactive proline, 
an amino acid. The proline was incorporated into proteins 
in the somata that were then transported to the axon ter-
minals. By use of a technique called autoradiography, the 
location  of  radioactive  axon  terminals  could  be  detected, 
thereby revealing the extent of the connection between the 
eye and the brain. 

 Researchers  subsequently  discovered  that  retrograde 
transport  could  also  be  exploited  to  work  out  connections 
in the brain. Strangely enough, the enzyme horseradish per-
oxidase (HRP) is selectively taken up by axon terminals and 
then transported retrogradely to the soma. A chemical reac-
tion can then be initiated to visualize the location of the HRP 
in slices of brain tissue after the experimental animal is eutha-
nized. This method is commonly used to trace connections 
in the brain (Figure A). 

 Some  viruses  also  exploit  retrograde  transport  to  infect 
neurons.  For  example,  the  oral  type  of  herpesvirus  enters 
axon terminals in the lips and mouth and is then transported 
back to the parent cell bodies. Here the virus usually remains 
dormant  until  physical  or  emotional  stress  occurs  (as  on  a 
ﬁ rst date), at which time it replicates and returns to the nerve 
ending, causing a painful cold sore. Similarly, the rabies virus 
enters the nervous system by retrograde transport through 

axons in the skin. However, once inside the soma, the virus 
wastes no time in replicating madly, killing its neuronal host. 
The virus is then taken up by other neurons within the ner-
vous system, and the process repeats itself again and again, 
usually until the victim dies. 

Inject HRP:

Two days later,
after retrograde
transport:

HRP
deposit
in brain

 Figure A 

HRP-labeled
neurons

 ▲ FIGURE 2.19
 Dendrites receiving synaptic inputs from 
axon terminals.  Neurons have been made to 
fluoresce green using a method that reveals 
the distribution of a microtubule-associated 
protein. Axon terminals have been made to flu-
oresce orange-red using a method to reveal 
the distribution of synaptic vesicles. The nuclei 
are stained to fluoresce blue. (Source: Dr. Asha 
Bhakar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   45
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   45

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

46

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 2.20
 Dendritic spines.  This is a computer re-
construction of a segment of dendrite, 
showing the variable shapes and sizes of 
spines. Each spine is postsynaptic to one 
or two axon terminals. (Source: Harris & 
Stevens, 1989, cover image.) 

▲ FIGURE 2.21
 Postsynaptic polyribosomes.  This elec-
tron micrograph shows a dendrite (den) 
with a cluster of polyribosomes ( arrow ) at 
the base of a dendritic spine (s) receiving 
a synapse from an axon terminal (t). 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Oswald 
 Steward, University of California, Irvine.) 

under  the  synapse  (the   postsynaptic   membrane)  has  many  specialized 
protein molecules called  receptors  that detect the neurotransmitters in 
the synaptic cleft. 

 The dendrites of some neurons are covered with specialized structures 
called  dendritic spines  that receive some types of synaptic input. Spines 
look like little punching bags that hang off the dendrite (Figure 2.20). The 
unusual morphology of spines has fascinated neuroscientists ever since 
their  discovery  by  Cajal.  They  are  believed  to  isolate  various  chemical 
reactions that are triggered by some types of synaptic activation. Spine 
structure is sensitive to the type and amount of synaptic activity. Unusual 
changes in spines have been shown to occur in the brains of individuals 
with cognitive impairments (Box 2.6). 

 For the most part, the cytoplasm of dendrites resembles that of axons. 
It is ﬁ lled with cytoskeletal elements and mitochondria. One interesting 
difference is that polyribosomes can be observed in dendrites, often right 
under  spines  (Figure  2.21).  Research  has  shown  that  synaptic  trans-
mission can actually direct local protein synthesis in some neurons. In 
Chapter 25, we will see that synaptic regulation of protein synthesis is 
crucial for information storage by the brain. 

 CLASSIFYING NEURONS 
CLASSSIFYING NEURONS 

 It  is  likely  that  we  will  never  understand  how  each  of  the  85  billion 
neurons  in  the  nervous  system  uniquely  contributes  to  the  function  of 
the brain. But what if we could show that all the neurons in the brain 
can  be  categorized  and  that  within  each  category  all  neurons  function 
identically? The complexity of the problem might then be reduced to un-
derstanding the unique contribution of each category rather than each 
cell. With this hope, neuroscientists have devised schemes for classifying 
 neurons. 

 Classiﬁ cation Based on Neuronal Structure 
 Efforts to classify neurons began in earnest with the development of the 
Golgi  stain.  These  classiﬁ cation  schemes,  based  on  the  morphology  of 
dendrites, axons, and the structures they innervate, are still in wide use. 

 Number  of  Neurites.  Neurons  can  be  classiﬁ ed  according  to  the  total 
number  of  neurites  (axons  and  dendrites)  that  extend  from  the  soma 
(Figure 2.22). A neuron with a single neurite is said to be  unipolar . If 
there are two neurites, the cell is  bipolar , and if there are three or more, 
the cell is multipolar. Most neurons in the brain are  multipolar . 

 Dendrites. Dendritic trees can vary widely from one type of neuron to an-
other. Some have inspired names with ﬂ ourish, like “double bouquet cells” 
or “chandelier cells.” Others have more utilitarian names, such as “alpha 
cells.” Classiﬁ cation is often unique to a particular part of the brain. For 
example,  in  the  cerebral  cortex  (the  structure  that  lies  just  under  the 
surface of the cerebrum), there are two broad classes:  stellate cells  (star 
shaped) and  pyramidal cells  (pyramid shaped) (Figure 2.23). 

 Neurons  can  also  be  classiﬁ ed  according  to  whether  their  dendrites 
have spines. Those that do are called  spiny,  and those that do not are 
called  aspinous . These dendritic classiﬁ cation schemes can overlap. For 
example,  in  the  cerebral  cortex,  all  pyramidal  cells  are  spiny.  Stellate 
cells, on the other hand, can be either spiny or aspinous. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   46
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   46

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

47

BOX 2.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Intellectual Disability and Dendritic Spines 

 The elaborate architecture of a neuron’s dendritic tree re-

ﬂ ects  the  complexity  of  its  synaptic  connections  with  other 
neurons.  Brain  function  depends  on  these  highly  precise 
synaptic  connections,  which  are  formed  during  the  fetal 
period  and  are  reﬁ ned  during  infancy  and  early  childhood. 
Not surprisingly, this very complex developmental process is 
vulnerable to disruption. Intellectual disability is said to have 
occurred if a disruption of brain development results in sub-
average cognitive functioning that impairs adaptive behavior. 
 According to standardized tests, intelligence in the gen-
eral population is distributed along a bell-shaped (Gaussian) 
curve. By convention, the mean intelligence quotient (IQ) is 
set at 100. About two-thirds of the total population falls within 
15 points (one standard deviation) of the mean, and 95% of 
the population falls within 30 points (two standard deviations). 
People with intelligence scores below 70 are considered to 
be intellectually disabled if their cognitive impairment affects 
their ability to adapt their behavior to the setting in which they 
live. Some 2–3% of humans ﬁ t this description. 

 Intellectual disability has many causes. The most severe 
forms are associated with genetic disorders, such as a con-
dition  called   phenylketonuria   ( PKU ).  The  basic  abnormality 
is  a  deﬁ cit  in  the  liver  enzyme  that  metabolizes  the  dietary 
amino acid phenylalanine. Infants born with PKU have an ab-
normally high level of the amino acid in the blood and brain. 
If the condition goes untreated, brain growth is stunted and 
severe intellectual disability results. Another example is  Down 
syndrome , which occurs when the fetus has an extra copy 
of chromosome 21, thus disrupting normal gene expression 
during brain development. 

 Another cause of intellectual disability is problems during 
pregnancy that can include a maternal infection, for example 
with German measles (rubella), and malnutrition. Children born 
to alcoholic mothers frequently have  fetal alcohol  syndrome  
comprising  a  constellation  of  developmental  abnormalities 
that include intellectual disability. Other causes of intellectual 
disability are asphyxia of the infant during childbirth and en-
vironmental impoverishment—the lack of good nutrition, so-
cialization, and sensory stimulation—during infancy. 

 Although  some  forms  of  intellectual  disability  have  very 
clear physical correlates (e.g., stunted growth; abnormalities 
in the structure of the head, hands, and body), most cases 
have only behavioral manifestations. The brains of these indi-
viduals appear grossly normal. How, then, do we account for 
the profound cognitive impairment? An important clue came 
in the 1970s from the research of Miguel Marin-Padilla, work-
ing  at  Dartmouth  College,  and  Dominick  Purpura,  working 

at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City. 
Using  the  Golgi  stain,  they  studied  the  brains  of  intellectu-
ally disabled children and discovered remarkable changes in 
dendritic structure. The dendrites of low-functioning children 
had  many  fewer  dendritic  spines,  and  the  spines  that  they 
did have were unusually long and thin (Figure A). The extent 
of the spine changes was well correlated with the degree of 
intellectual disability. 

 Dendritic spines are an important target of synaptic input. 
Purpura pointed out that the dendritic spines of intellectually 
disabled children resemble those of the normal human fetus. 
He  suggested  that  intellectual  disability  reﬂ ects  the  failure 
of normal circuits to form in the brain. In the three decades 
since  this  seminal  work  was  published,  it  was  established 
that  normal  synaptic  development,  including  maturation  of 
the  dendritic  spines,  depends  critically  on  the  environment 
during infancy and early childhood. An impoverished environ-
ment during an early critical period of development can lead 
to  profound  changes  in  the  circuits  of  the  brain.  However, 
there is some good news. Many of the deprivation-induced 
changes in the brain can be reversed if intervention occurs 
early enough. In Chapter 23, we will take a closer look at the 
role of experience in brain development. 

Dendrite from a 
normal infant

Dendrite from an
intellectually
disabled infant

10 µm

   Figure A
 Normal and abnormal dendrites. (Source: Purpura, 1974, Fig. 2A.) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   47
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   47

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

48

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Soma

Unipolar

Multipolar

Bipolar
 ▲ FIGURE 2.22
 Classification of neurons based on the number of neurites.  

 Connections. Information is delivered to the nervous system by neurons 
that have neurites in the sensory surfaces of the body, such as the skin 
and the retina of the eye. Cells with these connections are called  primary 
sensory neurons . Other neurons have axons that form synapses with the 
muscles and command movements; these are called  motor neurons . But 
most neurons in the nervous system form connections only with other neu-
rons. In this classiﬁ cation scheme, these cells are called   interneurons . 

 Axon Length. Some neurons have long axons that extend from one part of 
the brain to the other; these are called  Golgi type I neurons , or  projection 
neurons . Other neurons have short axons that do not extend beyond the 
vicinity of the cell body; these are called  Golgi type II neurons , or  local cir-
cuit neurons . In the cerebral cortex, for example, pyramidal cells usually 
have long axons that extend to other parts of the brain and are therefore 
Golgi type I neurons. In contrast, stellate cells have axons that never ex-
tend beyond the cerebral cortex and are therefore Golgi type II neurons. 

 Classiﬁ cation Based on Gene Expression 
 We  now  understand  that  most  differences  between  neurons  ultimately 
can  be  explained  at  the  genetic  level.  For  example,  differences  in  gene 
expression  cause  pyramidal  cells  and  stellate  cells  to  develop  different 
shapes. Once a genetic difference is known, that information can be used 
to create transgenic mice that allow detailed investigation of neurons in 
this class. For example, a foreign gene encoding a ﬂ uorescent protein can 
be  introduced  and  placed  under  the  control  of  a  cell  type–speciﬁ c  gene 
promoter.   Green  ﬂ uorescent  protein   (usually  simply  abbreviated  as 
 GFP ), encoded by a gene discovered in jellyﬁ sh, is used commonly in neu-
roscience research. When illuminated with the appropriate wavelength 
of  light,  the  GFP  ﬂ uoresces  bright  green,  allowing  visualization  of  the 
neuron in which it is expressed. Genetic engineering methods are now 
commonly used for measuring and manipulating the functions of neurons 
in different categories (Box 2.7). 

 We have known for some time that one important way neurons differ 
is the neurotransmitter they use. Neurotransmitter differences arise be-
cause of differences in the expression of proteins involved in transmitter 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   48
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   48

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

49

synthesis, storage, and use. Understanding these genetic differences en-
ables a classiﬁ cation of neurons based on their neurotransmitters. For ex-
ample, the motor neurons that command voluntary movements all release 
the  neurotransmitter   acetylcholine   at  their  synapses;  these  motor  cells 
are therefore also classiﬁ ed as  cholinergic , meaning that they express the 
genes that enable use of this particular neurotransmitter. Collections of 
cells that use the same neurotransmitter make up the brain’s neurotrans-
mitter systems (see Chapters 6 and 15). 

GLIA 
GLIA 

 Although most of this chapter is about neurons, as justiﬁ ed by the cur-
rent state of knowledge, some neuroscientists consider glia the “sleeping 
giants” of neuroscience. Indeed, we continue to learn that glia contribute 
much more importantly to information processing in the brain than has 
been  historically  appreciated.  Nevertheless,  the  data  continue  to  indi-
cate that glia contribute to brain function mainly by supporting neuronal 
functions. Although their role may be subordinate, without glia, the brain 
could not function properly. 

 Astrocytes 
The most numerous glia in the brain are called astrocytes (Figure 2.24). 
These  cells  ﬁ ll  most  of  the  spaces  between  neurons.  The  space  that  re-
mains between neurons and astrocytes in the brain is only about 20 nm 
wide. Consequently, astrocytes probably inﬂ uence whether a neurite can 
grow or retract. 

 An essential role of astrocytes is regulating the chemical content of this 
 extracellular  space .  For  example,  astrocytes  envelop  synaptic  junctions 
in the brain (Figure 2.25), thereby restricting the spread of neurotrans-
mitter  molecules  that  have  been  released.  Astrocytes  also  have  special 
proteins in their membranes that actively remove many neurotransmit-
ters from the synaptic cleft. A recent and unexpected discovery is that 
astrocytic membranes also possess neurotransmitter receptors that, like 
the receptors on neurons, can trigger electrical and biochemical events in-
side the glial cell. Besides regulating neurotransmitters, astrocytes also 
tightly control the extracellular concentration of several substances that 
could  interfere  with  proper  neuronal  function.  For  example,  astrocytes 
regulate the concentration of potassium ions in the extracellular ﬂ uid. 

 Myelinating Glia 
 Unlike  astrocytes,  the  primary  function  of   oligodendroglial   and 
Schwann  cells   is  clear.  These  glia  provide  layers  of  membrane  that 
insulate  axons.  Boston  University  anatomist  Alan  Peters,  a  pioneer  in 
the electron microscopic study of the nervous system, showed that this 
wrapping, called  myelin , spirals around axons in the brain (Figure 2.26). 
Because the axon ﬁ ts inside the spiral wrapping like a sword in its scab-
bard, the name  myelin sheath  describes the entire covering. The sheath 
is interrupted periodically, leaving a short length where the axonal mem-
brane is exposed. This region is called a  node of Ranvier  (Figure 2.27). 
 We will see in Chapter 4 that myelin serves to speed the propagation of 
nerve impulses down the axon. Oligodendroglia and Schwann cells differ 
in their location and some other characteristics. For example, oligoden-
droglia are found only in the central nervous system (brain and spinal 
cord), whereas Schwann cells are found only in the peripheral nervous 

Stellate cell

Pyramidal cell

▲ FIGURE 2.23
 Classification of neurons based on den-
dritic tree structure.  Stellate cells and py-
ramidal cells, distinguished by the arrange-
ment of their dendrites, are two types of 
neurons found in the cerebral cortex. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   49
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   49

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

50

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 2.7

B R A I N   F O O D

 Understanding Neuronal Structure and 
Function with Incredible Cre 

 One type of cell in the body can be distinguished from 

another by the unique pattern of genes it expresses as pro-
teins. Similarly, different classes of neurons in the brain can 
be  identiﬁ ed  based  on  which  genes  are  expressed.  With 
modern  methods  of  genetic  engineering,  knowledge  that 
a  gene  is  uniquely  expressed  in  one  type  of  neuron  can 
help  determine  the  contributions  of  this  cell  type  to  brain 
function. 

 Let’s consider as an example the neurons that uniquely 
express  the  gene  encoding  the  protein  choline  acetyltrans-
ferase  (ChAT).  ChAT  is  an  enzyme  that  synthesizes  the 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. It is only expressed in “cho-
linergic neurons” that use acetylcholine because only these 
neurons have the transcription factors that act on this gene’s 

promoter.  If  we  insert  into  a  mouse’s  genome  a  transgene 
 engineered  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  same  promoter, 
this foreign transgene will also be expressed only in cholin-
ergic  neurons.  If  the  transgene  expresses  the  enzyme  Cre 
recombinase, derived from a bacterial virus, we can compel 
these cholinergic neurons to give up their secrets in myriad 
ways. Let’s examine how. 

Cre  recombinase  recognizes  short  DNA  sequences 
called loxP sites that can be inserted on either side of an-
other gene. The DNA between the loxP sites is said to be 
ﬂ oxed.  The  Cre  recombinase  functions  to  cut  out,  or  ex-
cise, the gene between the loxP sites. By breeding the “Cre 
mouse” with the “ﬂ oxed mouse,” one can generate mice in 
which a gene is deleted only in one particular type of neuron.

LoxP

Gene X

LoxP

ChAT promoter

Cre recombinase expressed
only in cholinergic neuron 

DNA

Parents

DNA

Gene encoding
Cre-recombinase

X

Floxed mouse

ChAT Cre mouse

Gene X

deleted only in
Cre-expressing cells

LoxP

LoxP

DNA

Offspring

Cholinergic-specific

gene X knockout mouse

   Figure A  
Creating a mouse with a gene knockout only in cholinergic neurons is accomplished by crossing a ﬂ oxed mouse with the 
gene of interest (gene X) ﬂ anked by loxP sites with another mouse in which Cre recombinase is under the control of the ChAT 
promoter. In the offspring, gene X is cut out only in the cells expressing Cre, namely, the cholinergic neurons. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   50
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   50

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

51

 In a simple example, we can ask how cholinergic neurons 
react to the deletion of another gene they normally express; 
let’s call this gene X. To answer this question, we cross mice 
that have had gene X ﬂ oxed (the “ﬂ oxed mice”) with our mice 
that  express  Cre  under  the  control  of  the  ChAT  promoter 
(the  “ChAT-Cre  mice”).  In  the  offspring,  the  ﬂ oxed  gene  is 
removed only in those neurons that express Cre; that is, only 
in the cholinergic neurons (Figure A). 

 We can also use Cre to cause expression of novel trans-
genes  in  cholinergic  neurons.  Normally,  expression  of  a 
transgene  requires  that  we  include  a  promoter  sequence 
upstream of the protein-coding region. Transcription of the 
transgene  fails  to  occur  if  a  stop  sequence  is  inserted  be-
tween this promoter and the protein-coding sequence. Now 
consider what happens if we generate a transgenic mouse 
with this stop sequence ﬂ anked by loxP sites. Crossing this 

mouse  with  our  ChAT-Cre  mouse  generates  offspring  in 
which the transgene is expressed  only  in cholinergic neurons 
because the stop sequence has been removed only in these 
neurons (Figure B). 

 If we design this transgene to encode a ﬂ uorescent pro-
tein, we can use ﬂ uorescence to examine the structure and 
connections of these cholinergic neurons. If we design this 
transgene  to  express  a  protein  that  ﬂ uoresces  only  when 
impulses are generated by the neurons, we can monitor the 
activity of the cholinergic neurons by measuring light ﬂ ashes. 
If  we  design  this  transgene  to  express  a  protein  that  kills 
or  silences  the  neuron,  we  can  see  how  brain  function  is 
altered in the absence of cholinergic neurons. The possible 
manipulations of cholinergic neurons through this feat of ge-
netic engineering are limited only by the imagination of the 
scientist. 

LoxP

Stop

LoxP

ChAT promoter

Cre recombinase expressed
only in cholinergic neuron 

Ubiquitous promoter

Transgene X

DNA

Gene encoding
Cre-recombinase

Parents

X

ChAT Cre mouse

Stop sequence

deleted only in
Cre-expressing cells

Transgene X expressed
only in Cre-expressing cells

Lox-Stop-Lox

transgenic mouse

DNA

Offspring

Cholinergic neuron-specific

transgenic mouse

  Figure B
A transgene of interest (transgene X) can also be expressed exclusively in cholinergic neurons. First, a mouse is created in which ex-
pression of the transgene is prevented by insertion of a ﬂ oxed stop sequence between a strong, ubiquitous promoter and the coding 
region of the gene. Crossing this mouse with the ChAT-Cre mouse results in offspring in which the stop sequence has been deleted 
only in cholinergic neurons, allowing expression of the transgene only in these neurons.

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   51
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   51

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

system  (parts  outside  the  skull  and  vertebral  column).  Another  differ-
ence is that one oligodendroglial cell contributes myelin to several axons, 
whereas each Schwann cell myelinates only a single axon. 

 Other Non-Neuronal Cells 
 Even if we eliminated every neuron, every astrocyte, and every oligoden-
droglial cell, other cells would still remain in the brain. First, special cells 
called  ependymal cells  line ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled ventricles within the brain and 
play a role in directing cell migration during brain development. Second, 
a class of cells called  microglia  function as phagocytes to remove debris 
left by dead or degenerating neurons and glia. Microglia have attracted 
much interest recently, as they appear to be involved in remodeling syn-
aptic connections by gobbling them up. As we saw in Box 2.3, microglia 
can migrate into the brain from the blood, and disruption of this microg-
lial invasion can interfere with brain functions and behavior. Finally, in 
addition to glial and ependymal cells, the brain also has vasculature: ar-
teries, veins, and capillaries that deliver via the blood essential nutrients 
and oxygen to neurons. 

52

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 ▲ FIGURE 2.24
 An astrocyte.  Astrocytes fill most of the 
space in the brain that is not occupied 
by neurons and blood vessels. 

Postynaptic

dendritic spine

Astrocyte 
process

Presynaptic
axon terminal

Synapse

0.5 µm
0.5 µm
0.5 µm

 ▲ FIGURE 2.25
 Astrocytes envelop synapses.  An elec-
tron micrograph of a thin slice through a 
synapse showing the presynaptic axon ter-
minal and the postsynaptic dendritic spine 
( colored green ) and an astrocyte process 
( colored blue ) that wraps around them and 
restricts the extracellular space. (Source: 
Courtesy of Drs. Cagla Eroglu and Chris 
Risher, Duke University.) 

Oligodendroglial
cells      

Axon

Myelin
sheath 

▲  FIGURE 2.26
 Myelinated optic nerve fibers cut in 
cross section.  (Source: Courtesy of 
Dr. Alan Peters.) 

 ▲ FIGURE 2.27
 An oligodendroglial cell.  Like the Schwann cells found in the nerves of the body, 
oligodendroglia provide myelin sheaths around axons in the brain and spinal cord. 
The myelin sheath of an axon is interrupted periodically at the nodes of Ranvier. 

Cytoplasm of
oligodendroglial cell

Node of
Ranvier

Mitochondrion

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   52
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   52

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER 2    NEURONS AND GLIA

53

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Learning  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  neuron  provides  insight 
into how neurons and their different parts work because structure cor-
relates with function. For example, the absence of ribosomes in the axon 
correctly predicts that proteins in the axon terminal are provided from 
the soma via axoplasmic transport. A large number of mitochondria in 
the axon terminal correctly predicts a high energy demand. The elabo-
rate structure of the dendritic tree appears ideally suited for receiving 
incoming information, and indeed, this is where most of the synapses are 
formed with the axons of other neurons. 

 From the time of Nissl, the rough ER has been recognized as an impor-
tant feature of neurons. What does this tell us about neurons? Recall that 
rough ER is a site of the synthesis of proteins destined to be inserted into 
the membrane. We will next see how the various proteins in the neuronal 
membrane  give  rise  to  the  unique  capabilities  of  neurons  to  transmit, 
receive, and store information. 

K E Y   T E R M S

 Introduction 
 neuron (p. 24) 
 glial cell (p. 24) 

 The Neuron Doctrine 
 histology (p. 25) 
 Nissl stain (p. 25) 
 cytoarchitecture (p. 25) 
 Golgi stain (p. 26) 
 cell body (p. 26) 
 soma (p. 26) 
 perikaryon (p. 26) 
 neurite (p. 26) 
 axon (p. 26) 
 dendrite (p. 26) 
 neuron doctrine (p. 27) 

 The Prototypical Neuron 
 cytosol (p. 29) 
 organelle (p. 29) 
 cytoplasm (p. 29) 
 nucleus (p. 29) 
 chromosome (p. 29) 
 DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 

(p. 29) 

 gene (p. 29) 
 gene expression (p. 29) 
 protein (p. 29) 
 protein synthesis (p. 29) 
 mRNA (messenger 

ribonucleic acid) (p. 29) 

 transcription (p. 29) 
 promoter (p. 31) 

 transcription factor (p. 31) 
 RNA splicing (p. 31) 
 amino acid (p. 32) 
 translation (p. 32) 
 genome (p. 32) 
 genetic engineering (p. 32) 
 knockout mice (p. 33) 
 transgenic mice (p. 33) 
 knock-in mice (p. 33) 
 ribosome (p. 36) 
 rough endoplasmic reticulum 

(rough ER) (p. 36) 
 polyribosome (p. 36) 
 smooth endoplasmic reticulum 

(smooth ER) (p. 36) 
 Golgi apparatus (p. 36) 
 mitochondrion (p. 36) 
 ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 

(p. 38) 

 neuronal membrane (p. 38) 
 cytoskeleton (p. 38) 
 microtubule (p. 38) 
 microﬁ lament (p. 39) 
 neuroﬁ lament (p. 39) 
 axon hillock (p. 39) 
 axon collateral (p. 39) 
 axon terminal (p. 41) 
 terminal bouton (p. 41) 
 synapse (p. 42) 
 terminal arbor (p. 42) 
 innervation (p. 42) 
 synaptic vesicle (p. 42) 

 synaptic cleft (p. 43) 
 synaptic transmission (p. 43) 
 neurotransmitter (p. 43) 
 axoplasmic transport (p. 43) 
 anterograde transport (p. 44) 
 retrograde transport (p. 44) 
 dendritic tree (p. 44) 
 receptor (p. 46) 
 dendritic spine (p. 46) 

 Classifying Neurons 
 unipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 bipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 multipolar neuron (p. 46) 
 stellate cell (p. 46) 
 pyramidal cell (p. 46) 
 spiny neuron (p. 46) 
 aspinous neuron (p. 46) 
 primary sensory neuron (p. 48) 
 motor neuron (p. 48) 
 interneuron (p. 48) 
 green ﬂ uorescent protein (GFP) 

(p. 48) 

 Glia 
 astrocyte (p. 49) 
 oligodendroglial cell (p. 49) 
 Schwann cell (p. 49) 
 myelin (p. 49) 
 node of Ranvier (p. 49) 
 ependymal cell (p. 52) 
 microglial cell (p. 52) 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   53
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   53

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

54

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

   1.  State the neuron doctrine in a single sentence. To whom is this insight credited? 
 2.  Which parts of a neuron are shown by a Golgi stain that are not shown by a Nissl stain? 
 3.  What are three physical characteristics that distinguish axons from dendrites? 
 4.  Of the following structures, state which ones are unique to neurons and which are not: nucleus, 

mitochondria, rough ER, synaptic vesicle, Golgi apparatus. 

 5.  What are the steps by which the information in the DNA of the nucleus directs the synthesis of 

a membrane-associated protein molecule? 

 6.  Colchicine is a drug that causes microtubules to break apart (depolymerize). What effect would 

this drug have on anterograde transport? What would happen in the axon terminal? 

 7.  Classify the cortical pyramidal cell based on (1) the number of neurites, (2) the presence or ab-

sence of dendritic spines, (3) connections, and (4) axon length. 

 8.  Knowledge of genes uniquely expressed in a particular category of neurons can be used to under-
stand how those neurons function. Give one example of how you could use genetic information to 
study a category of neuron. 

 9.  What is myelin? What does it do? Which cells provide it in the central nervous system? 

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

 De Vos KJ, Grierson AJ, Ackerley S, Miller CCJ. 

2008. Role of axoplasmic transport in neu-
rodegenerative diseases.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  31:151–173. 

 Eroglu C, Barres BA. 2010. Regulation of synap-
tic connectivity by glia.  Nature  468:223–231. 

 Jones EG. 1999. Golgi, Cajal and the Neuron Doctrine. 
Journal of the History of Neuroscience  8:170–178. 
 Lent R, Azevedo FAC, Andrade-Moraes CH, 

Pinto AVO. 2012. How many neurons do you 
have? Some dogmas of quantitative neurosci-
ence under revision.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  35:1–9. 

 Nelson  SB,  Hempel  C,  Sugino  K.  2006.  Probing 
the transcriptome of neuronal cell types.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  16:571–576. 

 Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H deF. 1991.  The 

Fine Structure of the Nervous System , 3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

 Sadava D, Hills DM, Heller HC, Berenbaum 

MR. 2011.  Life: The Science of Biology , 9th ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Shepherd GM, Erulkar SD. 1997. Centenary of 
the synapse: from Sherrington to the molecu-
lar biology of the synapse and beyond.  Trends 
in Neurosciences  20:385–392. 

 Wilt BA, Burns LD, Ho ETW, Ghosh KK, 

Mukamel EA, Schnitzer MJ. 2009. Advances 
in light microscopy for neuroscience.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  32:435–506. 

023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   54
023–054_Bear_02_revised_final.indd   54

12/20/14   2:59 AM
12/20/14   2:59 AM

CHAPTER THREE
CHAPTER THREE

The Neuronal 
Membrane at Rest

INTRODUCTION
THE CAST OF CHEMICALS
Cytosol and Extracellular Fluid

Water
Ions

The Phospholipid Membrane
Protein

Protein Structure
Channel Proteins
Ion Pumps

THE MOVEMENT OF IONS

Diffusion

 BOX 3.1   BRAIN FOOD: A Review of Moles and Molarity

Electricity

THE IONIC BASIS OF THE RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL

Equilibrium Potentials

 BOX 3.2   BRAIN FOOD: The Nernst Equation

The Distribution of Ions Across the Membrane
Relative Ion Permeabilities of the Membrane at Rest

 BOX 3.3   BRAIN FOOD: The Goldman Equation
The Wide World of Potassium Channels
 BOX 3.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Feeling Around Inside Ion Channels in the Dark, 
by Chris Miller
The Importance of Regulating the External Potassium Concentration
 BOX 3.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Death by Lethal Injection

CONCLUDING REMARKS

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   55
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   55

5555
5555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555
55

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

56

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Consider the problem your nervous system confronts when you step on 
a thumbtack. Your reactions are automatic: You shriek with pain as you 
jerk up your foot. For this simple response to occur, breaking of the skin 
by the tack must be translated into neural signals that travel rapidly and 
reliably up the long sensory nerves of your leg. In the spinal cord, these 
signals are transferred to interneurons. Some of these neurons connect 
with the parts of your brain that interpret the signals as being painful. 
Others  connect  to  the  motor  neurons  that  control  the  leg  muscles  that 
withdraw your foot. Thus, even this simple reﬂ ex, depicted in Figure 3.1, 
requires the nervous system to  collect ,  distribute , and  integrate  informa-
tion.  A  goal  of  cellular  neurophysiology  is  to  understand  the  biological 
mechanisms that underlie these functions. 

 The neuron solves the problem of conducting information over a dis-
tance by using electrical signals that sweep along the axon. In this sense, 
axons act like telephone wires. The analogy stops there, however, because 
the type of signal used by the neuron is constrained by the special en-
vironment of the nervous system. In a copper telephone wire, informa-
tion can be transferred over long distances at a high rate (about half the 
speed of light) because telephone wire is a superb conductor of electrons, 
is well insulated, and is suspended in air (air being a poor conductor of 

Spinal
cord

1

To brain

3

2

Motor neuron
cell body

Sensory neuron
cell body

4

Sensory
neuron axon

Motor
neuron axon

▲ FIGURE 3.1
A simple reflex. ➀ A person steps on a thumbtack. ➁ The breaking of the skin is 
translated into signals that travel up sensory nerve fibers (the direction of informa-
tion flow, indicated by the arrows). ➂ In the spinal cord, the information is distrib-
uted to interneurons. Some of these neurons send axons to the brain where the 
painful sensation is registered. Others synapse on motor neurons, which send 
descending signals to the muscles. ➃ The motor commands lead to muscle con-
traction and withdrawal of the foot.

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   56
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   56

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

57

 electricity).  Electrons  will,  therefore,  move  within  the  wire  instead  of 
radiating away. In contrast, electrical charge in the cytosol of the axon is 
carried by electrically charged atoms (ions) instead of free electrons. This 
makes cytosol far less conductive than copper wire. Also, the axon is not 
especially well insulated and is bathed in salty extracellular ﬂ uid, which 
conducts electricity. Thus, like water ﬂ owing down a leaky garden hose, 
electrical current ﬂ owing down the axon would not go very far before it 
would leak out. 

 Fortunately, the axonal membrane has properties that enable it to con-
duct a special type of signal—the nerve impulse, or  action potential —
that overcomes these biological constraints. As we will see in a moment, 
the term “potential” refers to the separation of electrical charge across the 
membrane. In contrast to passively conducted electrical signals, action 
potentials do not diminish over distance; they are signals of ﬁ xed size and 
duration. Information is encoded in the frequency of action potentials of 
individual neurons as well as in the distribution and number of neurons 
ﬁ ring action potentials in a given nerve. This type of code is somewhat 
like Morse code sent down an old fashioned telegraph wire; information is 
encoded in the pattern of electrical impulses. Cells capable of generating 
and conducting action potentials, which include both nerve and muscle 
cells, are said to have  excitable membrane . The “action” in action po-
tentials occurs at the cell membrane. 

 When  a  cell  with  excitable  membrane  is  not  generating  impulses,  it 
is said to be at rest. In the resting neuron, the cytosol along the inside 
surface of the membrane has a negative electrical charge compared to the 
outside. This difference in electrical charge across the membrane is called 
the  resting membrane potential  (or resting potential). The action po-
tential is simply a brief reversal of this condition, and for an instant—
about  a  thousandth  of  a  second—the  inside  of  the  membrane  becomes 
positively charged relative to the outside. Therefore, to understand how 
neurons signal one another, we must learn how the neuronal membrane 
at rest separates electrical charge, how electrical charge can be rapidly 
redistributed across the membrane during the action potential, and how 
the impulse can propagate reliably along the axon. 

 In this chapter, we begin our exploration of neuronal signaling by tack-
ling the ﬁ rst question: How does the resting membrane potential arise? 
Understanding the resting potential is very important because it forms 
the  foundation  for  understanding  the  rest  of  neuronal  physiology.  And 
knowledge of neuronal physiology is central to understanding the capa-
bilities and limitations of brain function. 

THE CAST OF CHEMICALS 
THE CCAST OF CHEMICALS

 We begin our discussion of the resting membrane potential by introduc-
ing the three main players: the salty ﬂ uids on either side of the mem-
brane, the membrane itself, and the proteins that span the membrane. 
Each of these has certain properties that contribute to establishing the 
resting potential. 

 Cytosol and Extracellular Fluid 
 Water is the main ingredient of both the ﬂ uid inside the neuron, the in-
tracellular ﬂ uid or cytosol, and the outside ﬂ uid that bathes the neuron, 
the  extracellular  ﬂ uid.  Electrically  charged  atoms—ions—that  are  dis-
solved in this water are responsible for the resting and action potentials. 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   57
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   57

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

58

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(a)

H2O  =           =  

O

–

++

H

H

–

+

+

+

+

–

–

+

+

–
+

+

–
+

–

+

+

–
+

+
+–

–

+

+–

Na+
+ +– +

–

+

+–
+

–

+

+

+

–

+

+

–

+

+

+–

Cl–
+

+

–

+

+–
+

+

–

+

+–
+

+

–

+

+–
+

+

–
+

+

–

+

+

–

+

Cl–

Na+

–

++

–+
Na+
–

–
+

+ +

+

+

–

+

+

+–

+

Cl–

+
–

+

+

–
+

+

+– +

+

–

–

+

+

–

+

+
–

Na+ and Cl– 
dissolved in water

Na+

–

+

+

+

–

Crystal of NaCl

(b)

▲ FIGURE 3.2
Water is a polar solvent. (a) Different representations of the atomic structure of 
the water molecule. The oxygen atom has a net negative electrical charge and 
the hydrogen atoms have a net positive electrical charge, making water a polar 
molecule. (b) A crystal of sodium chloride (NaCl) dissolves in water because the 
polar water molecules have a stronger attraction for the electrically charged so-
dium and chloride ions than the ions do for one another.

 Water.  For our purpose here, the most important property of the water 
molecule (H 2 O) is its uneven distribution of electrical charge (Figure 3.2a). 
The two hydrogen atoms and the oxygen atom are bonded together cova-
lently, which means they share electrons. The oxygen atom, however, has 
a greater afﬁ nity for electrons than does the hydrogen atom. As a result, 
the shared electrons spend more time associated with the oxygen atom 
than with the two hydrogen atoms. Therefore, the oxygen atom acquires 
a  net  negative  charge  (because  it  has  extra  electrons),  and  the  hydro-
gen atoms acquire a net positive charge. Thus, H 2 O is said to be a polar 
molecule, held together by  polar covalent bonds . This electrical polarity 
makes water an effective solvent of other charged or polar molecules; that 
is, other polar molecules tend to dissolve in water. 

 Ions.  Atoms or molecules that have a net electrical charge are known as 
 ions . Table salt is a crystal of sodium (Na ⫹ ) and chloride (Cl ⫺ ) ions held 
together by the electrical attraction of oppositely charged atoms. This at-
traction is called an  ionic bond . Salt dissolves readily in water because 
the  charged  portions  of  the  water  molecule  have  a  stronger  attraction 
for the ions than the ions have for each other (Figure 3.2b). As each ion 
breaks away from the crystal, it is surrounded by a sphere of water mol-
ecules. Each positively charged ion (Na ⫹ , in this case) is covered by water 
molecules oriented so that the oxygen atoms (the negative pole) are fac-
ing the ion. Likewise, each negatively charged ion (Cl ⫺ ) is surrounded by 
water molecules with the hydrogen atoms (with their net positive charge) 
facing the chloride ion. These clouds of water that surround each ion are 
called  spheres  of  hydration,  and  they  effectively  insulate  the  ions  from 
one another. 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   58
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   58

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

59

 The  electrical  charge  of  an  atom  depends  on  the  difference  between 
its numbers of protons and electrons. When this difference is 1, the ion 
is  said  to  be   monovalent ;  when  the  difference  is  2,  the  ion  is   divalent ; 
and so on. Ions with a net positive charge are called  cations ; ions with 
a negative charge are called  anions . Remember that ions are the major 
charge  carriers  in  the  conduction  of  electricity  in  biological  systems, 
including the neuron. The ions of particular importance for cellular neu-
rophysiology  are  the  monovalent  cations  Na ⫹   (sodium)  and  K ⫹   (potas-
sium), the divalent cation Ca 2  ⫹  (calcium), and the monovalent anion Cl ⫺  
(chloride). 

 The Phospholipid Membrane 
 As we have seen, substances with a net or uneven electrical charge will 
dissolve in water because of the polarity of the water molecule. These sub-
stances, including ions and polar molecules, are said to be “water-loving,” 
or  hydrophilic . However, compounds whose atoms are bonded by  nonpo-
lar covalent bonds  have no basis for chemical interactions with water. A 
nonpolar covalent bond occurs when the shared electrons are distributed 
evenly in the molecule so that no portion acquires a net electrical charge. 
Such  compounds  will  not  dissolve  in  water  and  are  said  to  be  “water-
fearing,” or  hydrophobic . A familiar example of a hydrophobic substance 
is olive oil, and, as you know, oil and water don’t mix. Another example 
is  lipid , a class of water-insoluble biological molecules important to the 
structure of cell membranes. The lipids of the neuronal membrane con-
tribute to the resting and action potentials by forming a barrier to water-
soluble ions and, indeed, to water itself. 

 The main chemical building blocks of cell membranes are  phospho-
lipid s. Like other lipids, phospholipids contain long nonpolar chains of 
carbon atoms bonded to hydrogen atoms. In addition, however, a phos-
pholipid  has  a  polar  phosphate  group  (a  phosphorus  atom  bonded  to 
three oxygen atoms) attached to one end of the molecule. Thus, phos-
pholipids  are  said  to  have  a  polar  “head”  (containing  phosphate)  that 
is  hydrophilic,  and  a  nonpolar  “tail”  (containing  hydrocarbon)  that  is 
hydrophobic. 

 The neuronal membrane consists of a sheet of phospholipids, two mol-
ecules thick. A cross section through the membrane, shown in Figure 3.3, 
reveals that the hydrophilic heads face the outer and inner watery envi-
ronments and the hydrophobic tails face each other. This stable arrange-
ment  is  called  a   phospholipid  bilayer ,  and  it  effectively  isolates  the 
cytosol of the neuron from the extracellular ﬂ uid. 

 Protein 
 The type and distribution of protein molecules distinguish neurons from 
other types of cells. The  enzymes  that catalyze chemical reactions in the 
neuron, the  cytoskeleton  that gives a neuron its special shape, and the 
 receptors  that are sensitive to neurotransmitters are all made up of pro-
tein molecules. The resting potential and action potential depend on spe-
cial proteins that span the phospholipid bilayer. These proteins provide 
routes for ions to cross the neuronal membrane. 

 Protein Structure.  In order to perform their many functions in the neu-
ron, different proteins have widely different shapes, sizes, and chemical 
characteristics. To understand this diversity, let’s brieﬂ y review protein 
structure. 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   59
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   59

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

60

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Polar “head” containing
phosphate

Nonpolar “tail” containing
hydrocarbon

Outside cell

Inside cell

Phospholipid
bilayer

▲ FIGURE 3.3
The phospholipid bilayer. The phospholipid bilayer is the core of the neuronal 
membrane and forms a barrier to water-soluble ions.

 As mentioned in Chapter 2, proteins are molecules assembled from 
various  combinations  of  20  different  amino  acids.  The  basic  structure 
of an amino acid is shown in Figure 3.4a. All amino acids have a cen-
tral carbon atom (the alpha carbon), which is covalently bonded to four 
molecular groups: a hydrogen atom, an amino group (NH 3  ⫹ ), a carboxyl 
group (COO ⫺ ), and a variable group called the  R group  (R for residue). 
The differences among amino acids result from differences in the size 
and  nature  of  these  R  groups  (Figure  3.4b).  The  properties  of  the  R 
group determine the chemical relationships in which each amino acid 
can participate. 

 Proteins are synthesized by the ribosomes of the neuronal cell body. 
In this process, amino acids assemble into a chain connected by  peptide 
bonds ,  which  join  the  amino  group  of  one  amino  acid  to  the  carboxyl 
group of the next (Figure 3.5a). Proteins made of a single chain of amino 
acids are also called  polypeptides  (Figure 3.5b). 

 The  four  levels  of  protein  structure  are  shown  in  Figure  3.6.  The 
 primary  structure   is  like  a  chain  in  which  the  amino  acids  are  linked 
together  by  peptide  bonds.  As  a  protein  molecule  is  being  synthesized, 
however,  the  polypeptide  chain  can  coil  into  a  spiral-like  conﬁ guration 
called  an   alpha  helix .  The  alpha  helix  is  an  example  of  what  is  called 
the  secondary structure  of a protein molecule. Interactions among the R 
groups  can  cause  the  molecule  to  change  its  three-dimensional  confor-

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   60
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   60

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

61

H
C COO–
R

+H3N

(a)

Amino acids with strongly hydrophobic R groups:

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH

H3C

CH3

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
CH

+H3N
H

H3C

CH3

H
C COO–
C CH3
CH2
CH3

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
CH2
S
CH3

Valine
(Val or V)

Leucine
(Leu or L)

Isoleucine
(Ile or I)

Phenylalanine
(Phe or F)

Methionine
(Met or M)

Amino acids with strongly hydrophilic R groups:

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
COO–

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
CH2
COO–

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
C

H2N

O

+H3N

+H3N

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
CH2
C

H2N

O

H
C COO–
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
+
NH3

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
C NH+

CH

C
N
H H

H
C COO–
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH

+

NH3

C
NH2

Aspartic acid
(Asp or D)

Glutamic acid
(Glu or E)

Asparagine
(Asn or N)

Glutamine
(Gln or Q)

Lysine
(Lys or K)

Arginine
(Arg or R)

Histidine
(His or H)

Other amino acids:

+H3N

H
C COO–
H

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH3

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2
SH

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH

OH

+H3N
H

H
C COO–
C OH

CH3

+H3N

H
C COO–
CH2

H

COO–

C
CH2

+H3N

+H2N
H2C

CH2

H
C COO–
CH2
C CH

NH

OH

Glycine
(Gly or G)

Alanine
(Ala or A)

Cysteine
(Cys or C)

Serine
(Ser or S)

Threonine
(Thr or T)

Tyrosine
(Tyr or Y)

Proline
(Pro or P)

Tryptophan
(Trp or W)

(b)
▲ FIGURE 3.4
Amino acids, the building blocks of protein. (a) Every amino acid has in com-
mon a central alpha carbon, an amino group (NH3
(COOⴚ). Amino  acids differ from one another based on a variable R group. (b) The 
20 different amino acids that are used by neurons to make proteins. Noted in pa-
rentheses are the common abbreviations used for the various amino acids.

ⴙ), and a carboxyl group 

mation even further. In this way, proteins can bend, fold, and assume a 
complex three- dimensional shape. This shape is called  tertiary structure . 
Finally, different polypeptide chains can bond together to form a larger 
molecule; such a protein is said to have  quaternary structure . Each of the 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   61
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   61

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

62

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 3.5
The peptide bond and a polypeptide. (a) Peptide bonds attach amino acids to-
gether. The bond forms between the carboxyl group of one amino acid and the 
amino group of another. (b) A polypeptide is a single chain of amino acids.

different  polypeptides  contributing  to  a  protein  with  quaternary  struc-
ture is called a  subunit . 

 Channel  Proteins.   The  exposed  surface  of  a  protein  may  be  chemi-
cally heterogeneous. Regions where nonpolar R groups are exposed are 
 hydrophobic and tend to associate readily with lipid. Regions with exposed 
polar  R  groups  are  hydrophilic  and  tend  to  avoid  a  lipid   environment. 
Therefore, it is not difﬁ cult to imagine classes of rod-shaped proteins with 
polar  groups  exposed  at  either  end  but  with  only  hydrophobic  groups 
showing on their middle surfaces. This type of protein can be suspended 
in a phospholipid bilayer, with its hydrophobic portion inside the mem-
brane and its hydrophilic ends exposed to the watery environments on 
either side. 

Serine

Serine

Leucine

(a)  

Amino acids 

(c)  

Alpha helix

(b)  

Subunits

(d)  

▲ FIGURE 3.6
Protein structure. (a) Primary structure: the sequence of amino acids in the poly-
peptide. (b) Secondary structure: coiling of a polypeptide into an alpha helix. 
(c) Tertiary structure: three-dimensional folding of a polypeptide. (d) Quaternary 
structure: different polypeptides bonded together to form a larger protein.

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   62
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   62

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

63

Extracellular fluid

Polypeptide
subunit

Cytosol

Phospholipid
bilayer

▲ FIGURE 3.7
A membrane ion channel. Ion channels consist of membrane-spanning proteins 
that assemble to form a pore. In this example, the channel protein has five poly-
peptide subunits. Each subunit has a hydrophobic surface region (shaded) that 
readily associates with the phospholipid bilayer.

  Ion channels  are made from just these sorts of membrane-spanning 
protein molecules. Typically, a functional channel across the membrane 
requires that four to six similar protein molecules assemble to form a 
pore  between  them  (Figure  3.7).  The  subunit  composition  varies  from 
one type of channel to the next, and this is what determines their differ-
ent properties. One important property of most ion channels,  speciﬁ ed 
by the diameter of the pore and the nature of the R groups lining it, is 
 ion  selectivity .  Potassium  channels  are  selectively  permeable  to  K ⫹ . 
Likewise,  sodium  channels  are  permeable  almost  exclusively  to  Na ⫹ , 
calcium  channels  to  Ca 2  ⫹ ,  and  so  on.  Another  important  property  of 
many channels is  gating . Channels with this property can be opened 
and  closed—gated—by  changes  in  the  local  microenvironment  of  the 
membrane. 

 You will learn much more about channels as you work your way through 
this book.  Understanding ion channels in the neuronal membrane is key 
to understanding cellular neurophysiology.  

 Ion Pumps.  In addition to those that form channels, other membrane- 
spanning  proteins  come  together  to  form   ion  pumps .  Recall  from 
Chapter 2 that adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is the energy currency 
of cells. Ion pumps are enzymes that use the energy released by the 
breakdown of ATP to transport certain ions across the membrane. We 
will  see  that  these  pumps  play  a  critical  role  in  neuronal  signaling 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   63
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   63

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

64

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(a)  

NaNa+Na+

CCll––Cl–

NaNa+Na+

CCll––Cl–

(b)  

NaNa+Na+

ClCl––Cl–

NaNa+Na+

ClCl––Cl–

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 3.8
Diffusion. (a) NaCl has been dissolved 
on the left side of an impermeable mem-
brane. The sizes of the letters Naⴙ and 
Clⴚ indicate the relative concentrations 
of these ions. (b) Channels are inserted 
in the membrane that allow the passage 
of Naⴙ and Clⴚ. Because there is a large 
concentration gradient across the mem-
brane, there will be a net movement of 
Naⴙ and Clⴚ from the region of high 
concentration to the region of low con-
centration, from left to right. (c) In the 
absence of any other factors, the net 
movement of Naⴙ and Clⴚ across the 
membrane ceases when they are equally 
distributed on both sides of the perme-
able membrane.

by  transporting  Na ⫹   and  Ca 2  ⫹   from  the  inside  of  the  neuron  to  the 
outside. 

 THE MOVEMENT OF IONS 
THE MMOVEEMENT OF IONS 

 A channel across a membrane is like a bridge across a river (or, in the 
case of a gated channel, like a drawbridge): It provides a path to cross 
from one side to the other. The existence of a bridge does not necessarily 
compel us to cross it, however. The bridge we cross during our weekday 
commute may not be used on the weekend. The same can be said of mem-
brane ion channels. The existence of an open channel in the membrane 
does not necessarily mean that there is a net movement of ions across the 
membrane. Such movement also requires that external forces be applied 
to drive them across. Because the functioning nervous system requires 
the movement of ions across the neuronal membrane, it is important that 
we understand these forces. Ionic movements through channels are inﬂ u-
enced by two factors: diffusion and electricity. 

 Diffusion 
 Ions  and  molecules  dissolved  in  water  are  in  constant  motion.  This 
temperature-dependent,  random  movement  tends  to  distribute  the 
ions  evenly  throughout  the  solution.  Therefore,  there  is  a  net  move-
ment of ions from regions of high concentration to regions of low con-
centration;  this  movement  is  called   diffusion .  For  example,  when  a 
teaspoon of milk is added to a cup of hot tea, the milk tends to spread 
evenly through the tea solution. If the thermal energy of the solution 
is reduced, as with iced tea, the diffusion of milk molecules will take 
noticeably longer. 

 Although  ions  typically  do  not  pass  through  a  phospholipid  bilayer 
directly,  diffusion  causes  ions  to  be  pushed  through  channels  in  the 
membrane. For example, if NaCl is dissolved in the ﬂ uid on one side of 
a permeable membrane (i.e., with channels that allow Na ⫹  and Cl ⫺  pas-
sage), some Na ⫹  and Cl ⫺  ions will cross until all are evenly distributed in 
the solutions on both sides (Figure 3.8). Like the milk molecules diffus-
ing in the tea, the net movement is from the region of high concentration 
to the region of low concentration. (For a review of how concentrations 
are expressed, see Box 3.1.) Such a difference in concentration is called 
a   concentration  gradient .  Thus,  we  say  that  ions  will  ﬂ ow  down  a 
concentration gradient. The movement of ions across the membrane by 
diffusion, therefore, happens when (1) the membrane has channels per-
meable to the ions and (2) there is a concentration gradient across the 
membrane. 

 Electricity 
 In addition to diffusion down a concentration gradient, another way to 
induce a net movement of ions in a solution is to use an electrical ﬁ eld 
because ions are electrically charged particles. Consider the situation in 
Figure 3.9, where wires from the two terminals of a battery are placed 
in a solution containing dissolved NaCl. Remember,  opposite charges at-
tract and like charges repel . Consequently, there will be a net movement 
of  Na ⫹   toward  the  negative  terminal  (the  cathode)  and  of  Cl ⫺   toward 
the positive terminal (the anode). The movement of electrical charge is 
called  electrical current , represented by the symbol I and measured 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   64
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   64

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

65

BOX 3.1

B R A I N   F O O D

A Review of Moles and Molarity
Concentrations of substances are expressed as the num-

ber  of  molecules  per  liter  of  solution.  The  number  of  mol-
ecules is usually expressed in moles. One mole is 6.02 ⫻ 1023 
molecules.  A  solution  is  said  to  be  1  Molar  (M)  if  it  has  a 

concentration of 1 mole per liter. A 1 millimolar (mM) solution 
has 0.001 moles per liter. The abbreviation for concentration 
is a pair of brackets. Thus, we read [NaCl] ⫽ 1 mM as: “The 
concentration of the sodium chloride solution is 1 millimolar.”

Battery

+

–

NaNa+Na+
(Cation)

+

Cathode

–

Anode

CCll––Cl–
(Anion)

▲ FIGURE 3.9
The movement of ions influenced by 
an electrical field.

in units called amperes (amps). According to the convention established 
by Benjamin Franklin, current is deﬁ ned as being positive in the direc-
tion  of  positive-charge  movement.  In  this  example,  therefore,  positive 
current ﬂ ows in the direction of Na ⫹  movement, from the anode to the 
cathode. 

 Two important factors determine how much current will ﬂ ow: electrical 
potential  and  electrical  conductance.   Electrical  potential ,  also  called 
voltage , is the force exerted on a charged particle; it reﬂ ects the differ-
ence  in  charge  between  the  anode  and  the  cathode.  More  current  will 
ﬂ ow as this difference is increased. Voltage is represented by the symbol 
V and is measured in units called volts. As an example, the difference in 
electrical potential between the terminals of a car battery is 12 volts; that 
is, the electrical potential at one terminal is 12 volts more positive than 
that at the other. 

Electrical conductance  is the relative ability of an electrical charge 
to migrate from one point to another. It is represented by the symbol g and 
measured in units called siemens (S). Conductance depends on the num-
ber of ions or electrons available to carry electrical charge, and the ease 
with which these charged particles can travel through space. A term that 
expresses the same property in a different way is  electrical resistance , 
the relative inability of an electrical charge to migrate. It is represented 
by  the  symbol  R  and  measured  in  units  called  ohms  ( ⍀ ).  Resistance  is 
simply the inverse of conductance (i.e., R  ⫽  1/g). 

 There is a simple relationship between potential (V), conductance (g), 
and the amount of current (I) that will ﬂ ow. This relationship, known as 
 Ohm’s law , may be written I  ⫽  gV: Current is the product of the con-
ductance and the potential difference. Notice that if the conductance is 
zero, no current will ﬂ ow even when the potential difference is very large. 
Likewise, when the potential difference is zero, no current will ﬂ ow even 
when the conductance is very large. 

 Consider  the  situation  illustrated  in  Figure  3.10a,  in  which  NaCl 
has been dissolved in equal concentrations on either side of a phospho-
lipid bilayer. If we drop wires from the two terminals of a battery into 
the solution on either side, they generate a large potential difference 
across  this  membrane.  No  current  will  ﬂ ow,  however,  because  there 
are  no  channels  to  allow  migration  of  Na ⫹   and  Cl ⫺   across  the  mem-
brane; the conductance of the membrane is zero. Driving an ion across 
the membrane electrically, therefore, requires that (1) the membrane 
possesses  channels  permeable  to  that  ion  (to  provide  conductance) 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   65
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   65

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

66

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

+

–

NaNa+
Na+

NaNa+
Na+

ClCl––
Cl–

ClCl––
Cl–

No current

+

–

NaNa+
NaNa+
Na+

ClCl––
ClCl––
Cl–

–

–

(a)

+

+

(b) 

Electrical current

▲ FIGURE 3.10
Electrical current flow across a mem-
brane. (a) A voltage applied across a 
phospholipid bilayer causes no electrical 
current because there are no channels to 
allow the passage of electrically charged 
ions from one side to the other; the con-
ductance of the membrane is zero. 
(b) Inserting channels in the membrane 
allows ions to cross. Electrical current 
flows in the direction of cation movement 
(from left to right, in this example).

and (2) there is an electrical potential difference across the membrane 
(Figure 3.10b). 

 The stage is now set. We have electrically charged ions in solution on 
both sides of the neuronal membrane. Ions can cross the membrane only 
by way of protein channels. The protein channels can be highly selective 
for speciﬁ c ions. The movement of any ion through its channel depends 
on  the  concentration  gradient  and  the  difference  in  electrical  potential 
across the membrane. Now let’s use this knowledge to explore the resting 
membrane potential. 

THE IONIC BASIS OF THE RESTING 
THE IIONIC BASIS OF THE RESSTING 
MEMMBRANNE POTENTIAL 
MEMBRANE POTENTIAL 

 The   membrane  potential   is  the  voltage  across  the  neuronal  mem-
brane at any moment, represented by the symbol V m . Sometimes V m  is 
“at rest”; at other times it is not (such as during an action potential). V m
can be measured by inserting a microelectrode into the cytosol. A typical 
microelectrode  is a thin glass tube with an extremely ﬁ ne tip (diam-
eter  0.5   ␮ m)  that  can  penetrate  the  membrane  of  a  neuron  with  mini-
mal damage. It is ﬁ lled with an electrically conductive salt solution and 
is connected to a device called a voltmeter. The voltmeter measures the 
electrical potential difference between the tip of this microelectrode and 
a  wire  placed  outside  the  cell  (Figure  3.11).  This  method  reveals  that 
electrical charge is unevenly distributed across the neuronal membrane. 
The inside of the neuronal membrane is electrically negative relative to 

Voltmeter

Ground

Microelectrode

–
–
–
–
–

+
+
+
+
+

▲ FIGURE 3.11
Measuring the resting membrane potential. A voltmeter measures the differ-
ence in electrical potential between the tip of a microelectrode inside the cell and 
a wire placed in the extracellular fluid, conventionally called “ground” because it 
is electrically continuous with the earth. Typically, the inside of the neuron is 
about ⫺65 mV with respect to the outside. This potential is caused by the uneven 
distribution of electrical charge across the membrane (enlargement).

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   66
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   66

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

67

the outside. This steady difference, the resting potential, is maintained 
whenever a neuron is not generating impulses. 

 The  resting  potential  of  a  typical  neuron  is  about   ⫺ 65  millivolts 
(1  mV   ⫽   0.001  volts).  Stated  another  way,  for  a  neuron  at  rest,  V m    ⫽  
 ⫺ 65 mV. This negative resting membrane potential of the neuron is an 
absolute requirement for a functioning nervous system. To understand 
the negative membrane potential, we  look  to  the ions that are  present 
and how they are distributed inside and outside the neuron. 

K+

A–

K+

 Equilibrium Potentials 
 Consider a hypothetical cell in which the inside is separated from the out-
side by a pure phospholipid membrane with no proteins. Inside this cell, 
a concentrated potassium salt solution is dissolved, yielding K ⫹  and A ⫺  
anions (any molecules with a negative charge). Outside the cell is a solu-
A–
tion  with  the  same  salt  but  diluted  twentyfold  with  water.  Although  a 
large concentration gradient exists between the inside of the cell and the 
outside,  there  is  no  net  movement  of  ions  because  the  phospholipid  bi-
layer, having no channel proteins, is impermeable to charged, hydrophilic 
atoms. Under these conditions, a microelectrode would record no potential 
difference between the inside and the outside of the cell. In other words, 
V m  would be equal to 0 mV because the ratio of K ⫹  to A ⫺  on each side of the 
membrane equals 1; both solutions are electrically neutral (Figure 3.12a). 
 Consider how this situation would change if potassium channels were 
inserted  into  the  phospholipid  bilayer.  Because  of  the  selective  perme-
K+
K+
ability of these channels, K ⫹  would be free to pass across the membrane, 
but  A ⫺   would  not.  Initially,  diffusion  rules:  K ⫹   ions  pass  through  the 
channels out of the cell, down the steep concentration gradient. Because 
A–
A–
A ⫺  is left behind, however, the inside of the cell membrane immediately 
begins to acquire a net negative charge, and an electrical potential dif-
ference is established across the membrane (Figure 3.12b). As the inside 

K+
K+

K+

A–
A–

A–

K+

A–

Inside 
"cell"  

Outside 
"cell"  

K+
K+

AA––
A–

K+
K+

AA––
A–

K+
K+
K+

AA––
AA––
A–

–

+

–

–

+

+

K+
K+
K+

AA––
AA––
A–

K+
K+

AA––
A–

K+
K+

AA––
A–

–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–

+
+

+
+
+
+
+
+

(b)  

(c)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 3.12
Establishing equilibrium in a selectively permeable membrane. (a) An imperme-
able membrane separates two regions: one of high salt concentration (inside) and 
the other of low salt concentration (outside). The relative concentrations of potas-
sium (Kⴙ) and an impermeable anion (A⫺) are represented by the sizes of the let-
ters. (b) Inserting a channel that is selectively permeable to Kⴙ into the membrane 
initially results in a net movement of Kⴙ down their concentration gradient, from left 
to right. (c) A net accumulation of positive charge on the outside and negative 
charge on the inside retards the movement of positively charged Kⴙ from the inside 
to the outside. Equilibrium is established such that there is no net movement of 
ions across the membrane, leaving a charge difference between the two sides.

K+
K+

K+

A–

A–
A–

K+

K+
K+

A–
A–

A–

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   67
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   67

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

K+

68

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Equal
+,–

Equal
+,–

Equal
+,–

+
–

+

–

+
+

–

–

–

+
–
+

–

–

+
–

+
+
–
+
–

+

+

–
+

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

–

+

–

+
–

+
–
+

–
+

+

–

+

–

+
–

+

+
–

+

–
+
–

–

–

Cytosol

Extracellular

fluid

Membrane

▲ FIGURE 3.13
The distribution of electrical charge 
across the membrane. The uneven 
charges inside and outside the neuron 
line up along the membrane because of 
electrostatic attraction across this very 
thin barrier. Notice that the bulk of the 
cytosol and extracellular fluid is electri-
cally neutral.

acquires more and more net negative charge, the electrical force starts to 
pull positively charged K ⫹  ions back through the channels into the cell. 
When a certain potential difference is reached, the electrical force pull-
ing K ⫹  ions inside exactly counterbalances the force of diffusion pushing 
them out. Thus, an  equilibrium  state is reached in which the diffusional 
and electrical forces are equal and opposite, and the net movement of K ⫹  
across the membrane ceases (Figure 3.12c). The electrical potential dif-
ference that exactly balances an ionic concentration gradient is called an 
 ionic equilibrium potential , or simply  equilibrium potential , and it 
is represented by the symbol E ion.  In this example, the equilibrium poten-
tial will be about  ⫺ 80 mV. 

 The  example  in  Figure  3.12  demonstrates  that  generating  a  steady 
electrical potential difference across a membrane is a relatively simple 
matter. All that is required is an ionic concentration gradient and selec-
tive ionic permeability. Before moving on to the situation in real neurons, 
however, we can use this example to make four important points. 
 1.  Large changes in membrane potential are caused by minuscule changes 
in  ionic  concentrations .  In  Figure  3.12,  channels  were  inserted,  and 
K ⫹  ions ﬂ owed out of the cell until the membrane potential went from 
0  mV  to  the  equilibrium  potential  of   ⫺ 80  mV.  How  much  does  this 
ionic  redistribution  affect  the  K ⫹   concentration  on  either  side  of  the 
membrane? Not very much. For a cell with a 50  ␮ m diameter, contain-
ing 100 mM K ⫹ , it can be calculated that the concentration change re-
quired to take the membrane from 0 to  ⫺ 80 mV is about 0.00001 mM. 
That is, when the channels were inserted and the K ⫹  ﬂ owed out until 
equilibrium  was  reached,  the  internal  K ⫹   concentration  went  from 
100 to 99.99999 mM—a negligible drop in concentration. 

 2.  The net difference in electrical charge occurs at the inside and outside 
surfaces of the membrane . Because the phospholipid bilayer is so thin 
(less  than  5  nm  thick),  it  is  possible  for  ions  on  one  side  to  interact 
electrostatically with ions on the other side. Thus, the negative charges 
inside the neuron and the positive charges outside the neuron tend to 
be mutually attracted to the cell membrane. Consider how, on a warm 
summer evening, mosquitoes are attracted to the outside face of a win-
dow  pane  when  the  inside  lights  are  on.  Similarly,  the  net  negative 
charge inside the cell is not distributed evenly in the cytosol but rather 
is  localized  at  the  inner  face  of  the  membrane  (Figure  3.13).  In  this 
way, the membrane is said to store electrical charge, a property called 
 capacitance . 

 3.  Ions are driven across the membrane at a rate proportional to the dif-
ference between the membrane potential and the equilibrium potential . 
Notice  in  our  example  in  Figure  3.12  that  when  the  channels  were 
inserted, there was a net movement of K ⫹  only as long as the electri-
cal membrane potential differed from the equilibrium potential. The 
difference between the real membrane potential and the equilibrium 
potential (V m   ⫺  E ion ) for a particular ion is called the  ionic driving 
force . We’ll talk more about this in Chapters 4 and 5 when we discuss 
the movement of ions across the membrane during the action potential 
and synaptic transmission. 

 4.  If the concentration difference across the membrane is known for an ion, 
the equilibrium potential can be calculated for that ion . In our example 
in Figure 3.12, we assumed that K ⫹  was more concentrated inside the 
cell. Based on this knowledge, we were able to deduce that the equi-
librium potential would be negative if the membrane were selectively 
permeable to K ⫹ . Let’s consider another example, in which Na ⫹  is more 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   68
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   68

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

70

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 3.2

B R A I N   F O O D

The Nernst Equation

The equilibrium potential for an ion can be calculated using 

the Nernst equation:

 

Eion ⫽ 2.303 RT
zF

 log 

[ion]o
[ion]i

⫽ charge of the ion

Eion  ⫽ ionic equilibrium potential
R  ⫽ gas constant
T  ⫽ absolute temperature
z 
F  ⫽ Faraday’s constant
log  ⫽ base 10 logarithm
[ion]o ⫽ ionic concentration outside the cell
[ion]i  ⫽ ionic concentration inside the cell

where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Nernst equation can be derived from the basic prin-
ciples of physical chemistry. Let’s see if we can make some 
sense of it.

Remember  that  equilibrium  is  the  balance  of  two  in-
fluences:  diffusion,  which  pushes  an  ion  down  its  con-
centration  gradient,  and  electricity,  which  causes  an  ion 
to be attracted to opposite charges and repelled by like 
charges.  Increasing  the  thermal  energy  of  each  particle 
increases  diffusion  and  therefore  increases  the  potential 
difference  achieved  at  equilibrium.  Thus,  Eion  is  propor-
tional  to  T.  On  the  other  hand,  increasing  the  electrical 
charge of each particle decreases the potential difference 
needed  to   balance  diffusion.  Therefore,  Eion  is  inversely 
proportional  to  the  charge  of  the  ion  (z).  We  need  not 
worry about R and F in the Nernst equation because they 
are constants.

At body temperature (37°C), the Nernst equation for the 

important ions—K⫹, Na⫹, Cl⫺, and Ca2⫹ — simpliﬁ es to:

 

 

 

EK ⫽ 61.54 mV log 

ENa ⫽ 61.54 mV log 

[K⫹]o
[K⫹]i 
⫺  
[Na⫹]o
[Na⫹]i 
[Cl⫺]o
[Cl⫺]i 
[Ca2⫹]o
[Ca2⫹]i 

ECl ⫽ 61.54 mV log 

ECa ⫽ 30.77 mV log 

Therefore, to calculate the equilibrium potential for a cer-
tain type of ion at body temperature, all we need to know is 
the ionic concentrations on either side of the membrane. For 
instance, in the example we used in Figure 3.12, we stipulated 
that K⫹ was twentyfold more concentrated inside the cell:

If 

and 

⫽  1
20

[K⫹]o
[K⫹]
log  1
20

 ⫽ ⫺1.3

then  EK ⫽ 61.54 mV ⫻ ⫺1.3

⫽ ⫺80 mV.

Notice that there is no term in the Nernst equation for per-
meability  or  ionic  conductance.  Thus,  calculating  the  value 
of  Eion  does  not  require  knowledge  of  the  selectivity  or  the 
permeability of the membrane for the ion. There is an equilib-
rium potential for each ion in the intracellular and extracellular 
ﬂ uid. Eion is the membrane potential that would just balance 
the ion’s concentration gradient, so that no net ionic current 
would ﬂ ow if the membrane were permeable to that ion.

ation the charge of the ion, the temperature, and the ratio of the external 
and internal ion concentrations. Using the Nernst equation, we can cal-
culate the value of the equilibrium potential for any ion. For example, if 
K ⫹  is concentrated twentyfold on the inside of a cell, the Nernst equation 
tells us that E K   ⫽   ⫺ 80 mV (Box 3.2). 

 The Distribution of Ions Across the Membrane 
 It should now be clear that the neuronal membrane potential depends on 
the ionic concentrations on both sides of the membrane. Approximate val-
ues for these concentrations appear in Figure 3.15. The important point 
is that  K  ⫹   is more concentrated on the inside, and Na  ⫹   and Ca  2  ⫹   are more 
concentrated on the outside . 

 How  do  these  concentration  gradients  arise?  Ionic  concentration 
gradients  are  established  by  the  actions  of  ion  pumps  in  the  neuronal 
membrane.  Two  ion  pumps  are  especially  important  in  cellular  neuro-
physiology:  the  sodium-potassium  pump  and  the  calcium  pump.  The 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   70
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   70

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

71

Outside

Inside

Ion

K+
Na+
Ca2+
Cl–

Concentration
outside (in mM)

Concentration
inside (in mM)

Ratio
Out : In

Eion

(at 37∞C)

5
150
2
150

100
15

0.0002

13

1 : 20
10 : 1

10,000 : 1
11.5 : 1

–80 mV
62 mV
123 mV
–65 mV

▲ FIGURE 3.15
Approximate ion concentrations on either side of a neuronal membrane. Eion 
is the membrane potential that would be achieved (at body temperature) if the 
membrane were selectively permeable to that ion.

  sodium-potassium pump  is an enzyme that breaks down ATP in the 
presence of internal Na ⫹ . The chemical energy released by this reaction 
drives the pump, which exchanges internal Na ⫹  for external K ⫹ . The ac-
tions of this pump ensure that K ⫹  is concentrated inside the neuron and 
that Na ⫹  is concentrated outside. Notice that the pump pushes these ions 
across the membrane against their concentration gradients (Figure 3.16). 
This work requires the expenditure of metabolic energy. Indeed, it has 
been  estimated  that  the  sodium-potassium  pump  expends  as  much  as 
70% of the total amount of ATP utilized by the brain. 

 The  calcium pump  is also an enzyme that actively transports Ca 2  ⫹  
out  of  the  cytosol  across  the  cell  membrane.  Additional  mechanisms 
 decrease intracellular [Ca 2  ⫹ ] to a very low level (0.0002 mM); these in-
clude intracellular calcium-binding proteins and organelles, such as mi-
tochondria and types of endoplasmic reticulum, which sequester cytosolic 
calcium ions. 

 Ion  pumps  are  the  unsung  heroes  of  cellular  neurophysiology.  They 
work in the background to ensure that the ionic concentration gradients 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   71
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   71

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

72

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Extracellular
fluid

Sodium-potassium pumps

NaNa+Na+

NaNa+Na+
NaNa+Na+

K+K+

K+K+

NaNa+Na+
NaNa+Na+
NaNa+Na+

K+K+

K+K+

Membrane

Cytosol

▲ FIGURE 3.16
The sodium-potassium pump. This ion pump is a membrane-associated protein 
that transports ions across the membrane against their concentration gradients at 
the expense of metabolic energy.

are established and maintained. These proteins may lack the glamour of 
a gated ion channel, but without ion pumps, the resting membrane poten-
tial would not exist and the brain would not function. 

 Relative Ion Permeabilities of the Membrane at Rest 
 The pumps establish ionic concentration gradients across the neuronal 
membrane.  With  knowledge  of  these  ionic  concentrations,  we  can  use 
the Nernst equation to calculate equilibrium potentials for the different 
ions (see Figure 3.15). Remember, though, that an equilibrium potential 
for an ion is the membrane potential that would result if a membrane 
were  selectively permeable  to that ion alone. In reality, however, neurons 
are not permeable to only a single type of ion. How does that affect our 
understanding? 

 Let’s consider a few scenarios involving K ⫹  and Na ⫹ . If the membrane 
of a neuron were permeable only to K ⫹ , the membrane potential would 
equal E K , which, according to Figure 3.15, is  ⫺ 80 mV. On the other hand, 
if the membrane of a neuron were permeable only to Na ⫹ , the membrane 
potential would equal E Na , 62 mV. If the membrane were equally perme-
able to K ⫹  and Na ⫹ , however, the resulting membrane potential would be 
some average of E Na  and E K . What if the membrane were 40 times more 
permeable to K ⫹  than it is to Na ⫹ ? The membrane potential again would 
be between E Na  and E K  but much closer to E K  than to E Na . This approxi-
mates the situation in real neurons. The actual resting membrane poten-
tial of  ⫺ 65 mV approaches, but does not reach, the potassium  equilibrium 
potential of  ⫺ 80 mV. This difference arises because, although the mem-
brane at rest is highly permeable to K ⫹ , there is also a steady leak of Na ⫹  
into the cell. 

 The resting membrane potential can be calculated using the  Goldman 
equation , a mathematical formula that takes into consideration the rel-
ative permeability of the membrane to different ions. If we concern our-
selves only with K ⫹  and Na ⫹ , use the ionic concentrations in Figure 3.15, 
and assume that the resting membrane permeability to K ⫹  is fortyfold 
greater than it is to Na ⫹ , then the Goldman equation predicts a resting 
membrane potential of  ⫺ 65 mV, the observed value (Box 3.3). 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   72
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   72

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

73

BOX 3.3

B R A I N   F O O D

The Goldman Equation

If the membrane of a real neuron were permeable only to K⫹, 

the  resting  membrane  potential  would  equal  EK,  about  ⫺80 
mV. But it does not; the measured resting membrane poten-
tial of a typical neuron is about ⫺65 mV. This discrepancy is 
explained because real neurons at rest are not exclusively per-
meable  to  K⫹;  there  is  also  some  Na⫹  permeability.  Stated 
another way, the relative permeability of the resting neuronal 
membrane is quite high to K⫹ and low to Na⫹. If the relative 
permeabilities are known, it is possible to calculate the mem-
brane potential at equilibrium by using the Goldman equation. 
Thus, for a membrane permeable only to Na⫹ and K⫹ at 37° C:

 

Vm ⫽ 61.54 mV log 

PK [K⫹]o ⫹ PNa [Na⫹]o
PK [K⫹]i ⫹ PNa [Na⫹]i

where Vm is the membrane potential, PK and PNa are the rela-
tive permeabilities to K⫹ and Na⫹, respectively, and the other 
terms are the same as for the Nernst equation.

If the resting membrane ion permeability to K⫹ is 40 times 
greater than it is to Na⫹, then solving the Goldman equation 
using the concentrations in Figure 3.15 yields:

 

Vm ⫽ 61.54 mV log 

40 (5) ⫹ 1 (150)
40 (100) ⫹ 1 (15)
350
4015

⫽ 61.54 mV log 

⫽ ⫺65 mV

 The Wide World of Potassium Channels.  As we have seen, the selective 
permeability of potassium channels is a key determinant of the resting 
membrane potential and therefore of neuronal function. What is the mo-
lecular basis for this ionic selectivity? Selectivity for K ⫹  ions derives from 
the arrangement of amino acid residues that line the pore regions of the 
channels.  It  was  a  major  breakthrough  in  1987  when  researchers  suc-
ceeded in determining the amino acid sequences of a family of potassium 
channels  in  the  fruit  ﬂ y   Drosophila  melanogaster .  While  these  insects 
may be annoying in the kitchen, they are extremely valuable in the lab 
because their genes can be studied and manipulated in ways that are not 
possible in mammals. 

 Normal ﬂ ies, like humans, can be put to sleep with ether vapors. While 
conducting research on anesthetized insects, investigators discovered that 
ﬂ ies of one mutant strain responded to the ether by shaking their legs, 
wings, and abdomen. This strain of ﬂ y was designated  Shaker . Detailed 
studies soon explained the odd behavior by a defect in a particular type of 
potassium channel (Figure 3.17a). Using molecular biological techniques, 
it was possible to map the gene that was mutated in  Shaker . Knowledge 
of the DNA sequence of what is now called the  Shake r potassium chan-
nel enabled researchers to ﬁ nd the genes for other potassium channels 
based  on  sequence  similarity.  This  analysis  has  revealed  the  existence 
of a very large number of different potassium channels, including those 
responsible for maintaining the resting membrane potential in neurons. 
 Most potassium channels have four subunits that are arranged like the 
staves of a barrel to form a pore (Figure 3.17b). Despite their diversity, 
the  subunits  of  different  potassium  channels  have  common  structural 
features that bestow selectivity for K ⫹ . Of particular interest is a region 
called the  pore loop , which contributes to the  selectivity ﬁ lter  that makes 
the channel permeable mostly to K ⫹  (Figure 3.18). 

 In addition to ﬂ ies, the deadly scorpion also made an important contri-
bution to the discovery of the pore loop as the selectivity ﬁ lter. In 1988, 
Brandeis  University  biologist  Chris  Miller  and  his  student  Roderick 
MacKinnon  observed  that  scorpion  toxin  blocks  potassium  channels 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   73
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   73

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

74

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(a)

Extracellular
Membrane
fluid

Cytosol

Shaker
potassium
channel

Membrane

Pore loop

(b)

▲ FIGURE 3.17
The structure of a potassium channel. (a) Shaker potassium channels in the 
cell membrane of the fruit fly Drosophila, viewed from above with an electron mi-
croscope. (Source: Li et al., 1994; Fig. 2.) (b) The Shaker potassium channel has 
four subunits arranged like staves of a barrel to form a pore. Enlargement: The 
tertiary structure of the protein subunit contains a pore loop, a part of the poly-
peptide chain that makes a hairpin turn within the plane of the membrane. The 
pore loop is a critical part of the filter that makes the channel selectively perme-
able to K⫹.

(and poisons its victims) by binding tightly to a site within the channel 
pore. They used the toxin to identify the precise stretch of amino acids 
that forms the inside walls and selectivity ﬁ lter of the channel (Box 3.4). 
MacKinnon went on to solve the three-dimensional atomic structure of a 
potassium channel. This accomplishment revealed, at long last, the phys-
ical basis of ion selectivity and earned MacKinnon the 2003 Nobel Prize 
in Chemistry. It is now understood that mutations involving only a single 
amino acid in this region can severely disrupt neuronal function. 

 An  example  of  this  is  seen  in  a  strain  of  mice  called   Weaver .  These 
animals have difﬁ culty maintaining posture and moving normally. The 
defect has been traced to the mutation of a single amino acid in the pore 
loop of a potassium channel found in speciﬁ c neurons of the cerebellum, a 
region of the brain important for motor coordination. As a consequence of 
the mutation, Na ⫹  as well as K ⫹  can pass through the channel. Increased 
sodium  permeability  causes  the  membrane  potential  of  the  neurons  to 
become  less  negative,  thus  disrupting  neuronal  function.  (Indeed,  the 
absence of the normal negative membrane potential in these cells is be-
lieved  to  be  the  cause  of  their  untimely  death.)  In  recent  years,  it  has 
become increasingly clear that many inherited neurological disorders in 
humans, such as certain forms of epilepsy, are explained by mutations of 
speciﬁ c potassium channels. 

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   74
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   74

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

75

▲ FIGURE 3.18
A view of the potassium channel pore. The atomic structure of potassium-se-
lective ion channels has recently been solved. Here we are looking into the pore 
from the outside in a three-dimensional model of the atomic structure. The red 
ball in the middle is a K⫹. (Source: Doyle et al., 1998.)

 The  Importance  of  Regulating  the  External  Potassium  Concentration. 
 Because the neuronal membrane at rest is mostly permeable to K ⫹ , the mem-
brane potential is close to E K . Another consequence of high K ⫹   permeability 
is that the membrane potential is particularly sensitive to changes in the 
concentration  of  extracellular  potassium.  This  relationship  is  shown  in 
Figure 3.19. A tenfold change in the K ⫹  concentration outside the cell, [K ⫹ ] o , 
from 5 to 50 mM, would change the membrane potential from  ⫺ 65 to  ⫺ 17 
mV. A change in membrane potential from the normal resting  value ( ⫺ 65 
mV) to a less negative value is called a   depolarization  of the membrane. 
Therefore,  increasing extracellular potassium depolarizes neurons . 

20

0

–20

–40

–60

–80

)

V
m

(
 
l

a

i
t

n
e

t

o
p

 

e
n
a
r
b
m
e
M

–100

1

▲ FIGURE 3.19
The dependence of membrane 
potential on external potassium 
concentration.  Because the neuronal 
membrane at rest is mostly permeable 
to potassium, a tenfold change in [Kⴙ]
o, from 5 to 50 mM, causes a 48 mV 
depolarization of the membrane. This 
function was calculated using the 
Goldman equation (see Box 3.3).

10
[K+]o
  (mM)

100

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   75
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   75

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

76

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 3.4

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Feeling Around Inside Ion Channels in the Dark
by Chris Miller

For me, the practice of scientiﬁ c discovery has always been 

tightly linked to play. The self-indulgent pleasure of just ﬁ ddling 
around with a problem is what motivated the early stages of 
every research project I’ve ever engaged in. Only later comes 
the intense itch scratching, scholarship, and sweat needed to 
attack—and sometimes solve—the puzzles presented by na-
ture. The sandbox I’ve been playing in for the past 40 years 
contains what are to me the most fascinating of toys: ion chan-
nels,  the  membrane-spanning  proteins  that  literally  make  the 
electrical signals of neurons, breathing life into the nervous sys-
tem. To the extent that the brain is a computer—an inaccurate 
but evocative analogy—the ion channels are the transistors. In 
response to biological dictates, these tiny proteinaceous pores 
form diffusion pathways for ions such as Na⫹, K⫹, Ca2⫹, H⫹, 
and  Cl⫺,  which  carry  electrical  charge  across  membranes, 
thereby generating, propagating, and regulating cell voltage sig-
nals. I fell in love with these proteins long ago when I acciden-
tally stumbled upon an unexpected K⫹ channel in experiments 
initially aimed at capturing a completely different sort of beast, 
a Ca2⫹-activated enzyme, and over the years that love has only 
deepened as I’ve wandered around in a teeming electrophysi-
ological zoo housing many species of ion channel proteins.

An undergraduate background in physics and subsequent 
experience  as  a  high  school  math  teacher  delivered  me  in 
the  1970s  to  graduate  school,  post-doctoral  training,  and 

my  own  lab  at  Brandeis  with  no  formal  preparation  in  (and 
precious  little  knowledge  of)  neurobiology  or  electrophysiol-
ogy. Picking up bits and pieces of these subjects from read-
ing the literature and osmosing them from my surroundings, I 
became increasingly fascinated by how ion channels, at that 
time only just nailed down as proteins, could do their job of 
producing bioelectricity; in parallel, I grew increasingly horriﬁ ed 
by what struck me as the overwhelming complexity of living 
cells and the ambiguity in molecular interpretation that would 
inevitably  accompany  experiments  done  exclusively  on  cel-
lular membranes. This combination of fascination and horror 
provoked my attraction to simpliﬁ ed “artiﬁ cial membranes” of 
deﬁ ned composition, developed by Paul Mueller in the 1960s, 
with  which  to  follow  the  electrical  activities  of  ion  channels 
isolated  from  their  complex  cellular  homes.  I  worked  out  a 
method for inserting single channel molecules from excitable 
cells into these chemically controllable membranes and used 
it to  record single K⫹ channels at a time when card-carrying 
neurobiologists were beginning to observe single channels in 
native excitable membranes with the then-new cellular patch-
recording methods. I confess that my early technique-building 
experiments were just play. To watch and control individual 
protein molecules dancing electrically before my eyes in real 
time  was—and  still  is—an  indescribable  thrill,  regardless  of 
the particular tasks the channels carry out for the cell.

 The  sensitivity  of  the  membrane  potential  to  [K ⫹ ] o   has  led  to  the 
 evolution  of  mechanisms  that  tightly  regulate  extracellular  potassium 
concentrations in the brain. One of these is the  blood-brain barrier , a 
 specialization of the walls of brain capillaries that limits the movement of 
potassium (and other bloodborne substances) into the extracellular ﬂ uid 
of the brain. 

 Glia,  particularly  astrocytes,  also  possess  efﬁ cient  mechanisms  to 
take up extracellular K ⫹  whenever concentrations rise, as they normally 
do during periods of neural activity. Remember, astrocytes ﬁ ll most of 
the  space  between  neurons  in  the  brain.  Astrocytes  have  membrane 
potassium  pumps  that  concentrate  K ⫹   in  their  cytosol,  and  they  also 
have  potassium  channels.  When  [K ⫹ ] o   increases,  K ⫹   enters  the  astro-
cyte through the potassium channels, causing the astrocyte membrane 
to depolarize. The entry of K ⫹  increases the internal potassium concen-
tration,  [K ⫹ ] i ,  which  is  believed  to  be  dissipated  over  a  large  area  by 
the extensive network of astrocytic processes. This mechanism for the 
regulation  of  [K ⫹ ] o   by  astrocytes  is  called   potassium  spatial  buffering
(Figure 3.20).  

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   76
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   76

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

77

Eventually,  this  play  led  me  to  compelling  problems  that 
could  be  advantageously  attacked  with  this  reductionist  ap-
proach. By the mid-1980s, my lab was home to a collection of 
supremely talented post-docs—Gary Yellen, Rod MacKinnon, 
and Jacques Neyton among them—going after the remarkable 
ion selectivity of various K⫹ channels: How do they tell the dif-
ference between ions as similar as K⫹ and Na⫹, as they must 
do if neurons are to ﬁ re action potentials, and if we are to think, 
feel,  and  act?  Having  stumbled,  while  purposelessly  fooling 
around with natural neurotoxins, on a scorpion venom peptide 
that blocks K⫹ channels, we used the power of single-channel 
analysis to show that this toxin works by plugging up the pro-
tein’s K⫹-selective pore, just like a cork in a bottle (Figure A). In 
1988, Rod took our toxin peptide to a Cold Spring Harbor labo-
ratory course he’d signed up for to learn how to express ion 
channels by recombinant DNA methods. There he made a key 
discovery: that the toxin also blocks Shaker, the ﬁ rst genetically 
manipulable K⫹ channel, cloned the previous year in the lab of 
Lily and Yuh-Nung Jan. This chance ﬁ nding led us, by making 
speciﬁ c mutations, to a localized region in the channel’s amino 
acid sequence that forms the outer entryway of the K⫹ selec-
tive pore, a result immediately applicable to the entire family of 
voltage-dependent K⫹, Na⫹, and Ca2⫹ channels. A few years 
later, Rod and Gary, as newly hatched independent investiga-
tors, collaboratively homed in on these pore sequences to ﬁ nd 
the ion-selectivity hot spots, a result that propelled Rod, 7 years 
later, to bag the ﬁ rst X-ray crystal structure of a K⫹ channel and 
to begin a whole new “structural era” in ion channel studies.

Looking  back  at  my  wrestling  matches  with  ion  channels, 
it is clear that the greatest joy I’ve derived from this endeavor 
has  arisen  from  seeing—and  being  surprised  by—new  and 

Scorpion toxin

Mouth of the
potassium
channel

2 nm

Figure A
 The extracellular opening of a K⫹ channel with bound scorpion toxin 
envisioned indirectly in the “pre-structural” days by probing the chan-
nel with the toxin of known structure. Points of interaction: site on 
channel that makes contact with toxin (dark blue circles), key lysine 
residue on toxin that intrudes into the narrow pore (pale blue circle 
with ⫹), a K⫹ displaced downward into the pore by binding of toxin 
(yellow circle with ⫹). The yellow scale bar represents 2 nm. (Source: 
Adapted from Goldstein et al. 1994. Neuron 12:1377–1388.)

 unexpected elements of beauty and coherence in the natural 
world. This feeling was described by the great theoretical physi-
cist Richard Feynman who, in a riposte to a W.H. Auden poem 
that dismisses scientiﬁ c motivation as merely utilitarian, asserted 
that research scientists, like poets, are driven mainly by aesthetic 
forces: “We want knowledge so we can love Nature more.”

 It is important to recognize that not all excitable cells are protected from 
increases in potassium. Muscle cells, for example, do not have equivalents 
to the blood-brain barrier or glial buffering mechanisms. Consequently, 
although the brain is relatively protected, elevations of [K ⫹ ] in the blood 
can still have serious consequences on body physiology (Box 3.5). 

K+

K+

K+

K+

K+

Astrocyte

K+

K+

K+

K+

K+

o

K+

▲ FIGURE 3.20
Potassium spatial buffering by as-
trocytes. When brain [Kⴙ]o increases 
as a result of local neural activity, Kⴙ 
enters astrocytes via membrane chan-
nels. The extensive network of astro-
cytic processes helps dissipate the Kⴙ 
over a large area.

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   77
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   77

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

78

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 3.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Death by Lethal Injection

On June 4, 1990, Dr. Jack Kevorkian shocked the medical 

profession by assisting in the suicide of Janet Adkins. Adkins, 
a 54-year-old, happily married mother of three, had been di-
agnosed  with  Alzheimer’s  disease,  a  progressive  brain  dis-
order that always results in senile dementia and death. Mrs. 
Adkins had been a member of the Hemlock Society, which 
advocates euthanasia as an alternative to death by terminal 
illness.  Dr.  Kevorkian  agreed  to  help  Mrs.  Adkins  take  her 
own life. In the back of a 1968 Volkswagen van at a camp-
site  in  Oakland  County,  Michigan,  she  was  hooked  to  an 
intravenous  line  that  infused  a  harmless  saline  solution.  To 
choose death, Mrs. Adkins switched the solution to one that 
contained  an  anesthetic  solution,  followed  automatically  by 
potassium  chloride.  The  anesthetic  caused  Mrs.  Adkins  to 
become unconscious by suppressing the activity of neurons 
in part of the brain called the reticular formation. Cardiac ar-
rest and death were then caused by the KCl injection. The 

ionic  basis  of  the  resting  membrane  potential  explains  why 
the heart stopped beating.

Recall that the proper functioning of excitable cells (including 
those of cardiac muscle) requires that their membranes be main-
tained at the appropriate resting potential whenever they are not 
generating impulses. The negative resting potential is a result of 
selective ionic permeability to K⫹ and to the metabolic pumps that 
concentrate potassium inside the cell. However, as Figure 3.19 
shows, membrane potential is very sensitive to changes in the 
extracellular concentration of potassium. A tenfold rise in extra-
cellular K⫹ would severely diminish the resting potential. Although 
neurons in the brain are somewhat protected from large changes 
in [K⫹]o, other excitable cells in the body, such as muscle cells, 
are not. Without negative resting potentials, cardiac muscle cells 
can no longer generate the impulses that lead to contraction, 
and the heart immediately stops beating. Intravenous potassium 
chloride is, therefore, a lethal injection.

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 

 We have now explored the resting membrane potential. The activity of 
the sodium-potassium pump produces and maintains a large K ⫹  concen-
tration gradient across the membrane. The neuronal membrane at rest 
is  highly  permeable  to  K ⫹ ,  owing  to  the  presence  of  membrane  potas-
sium  channels.  The  movement  of  K ⫹   ions  across  the  membrane,  down 
their concentration gradient, leaves the inside of the neuronal membrane 
negatively charged. 

 The electrical potential difference across the membrane can be thought 
of as a battery whose charge is maintained by the work of the ion pumps. 
In the next chapter, we see how this battery runs our brain. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
action potential (p. 57)
excitable membrane (p. 57)
resting membrane potential 

(p. 57)

The Cast of Chemicals
ion (p. 58)
cation (p. 59)
anion (p. 59)
phospholipid bilayer (p. 59)
peptide bond (p. 60)
polypeptide (p. 60)
ion channel (p. 63)

ion selectivity (p. 63)
gating (p. 63)
ion pump (p. 63)

The Movement of Ions
diffusion (p. 64)
concentration gradient (p. 64)
electrical current (p. 64)
electrical potential (p. 65)
voltage (p. 65)
electrical conductance (p. 65)
electrical resistance (p. 65)
Ohm’s law (p. 65)

The Ionic Basis of the Resting 

Membrane Potential

membrane potential (p. 66)
microelectrode (p. 66)
ionic equilibrium potential 

( equilibrium potential) (p. 68)

ionic driving force (p. 68)
Nernst equation (p. 69)
sodium-potassium pump (p. 71)
calcium pump (p. 71)
Goldman equation (p. 72)
depolarization (p. 75)
blood-brain barrier (p. 76)

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   78
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   78

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER 3    THE NEURONAL MEMBRANE AT REST

79

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1. What two functions do proteins in the neuronal membrane perform to establish and maintain

the resting membrane potential?

2. On which side of the neuronal membrane are Na⫹ ions more abundant?
3. When the membrane is at the potassium equilibrium potential, in which direction (in or out) is

there a net movement of potassium ions?

4. There is a much greater K⫹ concentration inside the cell than outside. Why, then, is the resting

membrane potential negative?

5. When the brain is deprived of oxygen, the mitochondria within neurons cease producing ATP.

What effect would this have on the membrane potential? Why?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G 
Hille B. 2001. Ionic Channels of Excitable 

Membranes, 3rd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.

MacKinnon R. 2003. Potassium channels. 

Federation of European Biochemical Societies 
Letters 555:62–65.

Nicholls J, Martin AR, Fuchs PA, Brown DA, 

Diamond ME, Weisblat D. 2011. From Neuron 
to Brain, 5th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Somjen GG. 2004. Ions in the Brain: Normal 
Function, Seizures, and Stroke. New York: 
Oxford University Press.

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   79
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   79

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   80
055–080_Bear_03_revised_final.indd   80

12/20/14   2:57 AM
12/20/14   2:57 AM

CHAPTER FOUR

The Action Potential

INTRODUCTION
PROPERTIES OF THE ACTION POTENTIAL

The Ups and Downs of an Action Potential

 BOX 4.1   BRAIN FOOD: Methods of Recording Action Potentials

The Generation of an Action Potential
The Generation of Multiple Action Potentials

Optogenetics: Controlling Neural Activity with Light
 BOX 4.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY: The Discovery of the Channelrhodopsins, 
by Georg Nagel

THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN THEORY

Membrane Currents and Conductances
The Ins and Outs of an Action Potential

THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN REALITY

The Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel

Sodium Channel Structure
Functional Properties of the Sodium Channel
 BOX 4.3   BRAIN FOOD: The Patch-Clamp Method
The Effects of Toxins on the Sodium Channel

Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels
Putting the Pieces Together

ACTION POTENTIAL CONDUCTION
Factors Inﬂ uencing Conduction Velocity

 BOX 4.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Local Anesthesia

Myelin and Saltatory Conduction

 BOX 4.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Multiple Sclerosis, a Demyelinating Disease

ACTION POTENTIALS, AXONS, AND DENDRITES

 BOX 4.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Eclectic Electric Behavior of Neurons

CONCLUDING REMARKS

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   81
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   81

81818181818181818818111181818181811888181181818111818181181888881118188881811818188181888818118888888888888888118181888881888181111881881

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

82

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Now  we  come  to  the  signal  that  conveys  information  over  distances  in 
the nervous system—the action potential. As we saw in Chapter 3, the 
inside of the neuronal membrane at rest is negatively charged in relation 
to the outside. The action potential is a rapid reversal of this situation 
such that, for an instant, the inside of the membrane becomes positively 
charged in relation to the outside. The action potential is also often called 
a spike, a nerve impulse, or a discharge. 

 The action potentials generated by a patch of membrane are all simi-
lar in size and duration, and they do not diminish as they are conducted 
down the axon. Keep in mind the big picture: The  frequency  and  pattern  of 
action potentials constitute the code used by neurons to transfer informa-
tion from one location to another. In this chapter, we discuss the mecha-
nisms that are responsible for the action potential and how it propagates 
down the axonal membrane. 

PROPERTIES OF THE ACTION POTENTIAL 
PROPPERTIES OF THE ACTIONN POTENTIAL 

 Action  potentials  have  certain  universal  properties,  features  that  are 
shared by axons in the nervous systems of every animal, from a squid to 
a college student. Let’s begin by exploring some of these properties. What 
does the action potential look like? How is it initiated? How rapidly can a 
neuron generate action potentials? 

 The Ups and Downs of an Action Potential 
 In Chapter 3, we saw that the membrane potential, V m , can be determined 
by inserting a microelectrode in the cell. A voltmeter is used to measure 
the  electrical  potential  difference  between  the  tip  of  this  intracellular 
microelectrode and another placed outside the cell. When the neuronal 
membrane is at rest, the voltmeter reads a steady potential difference of 
about  ⫺ 65 mV. During the action potential, however, the membrane po-
tential brieﬂ y becomes positive. Because this occurs so rapidly—100 times 
faster  than  the  blink  of  an  eye—a  special  type  of  voltmeter,  called  an 
oscilloscope , is used to study action potentials. The oscilloscope records 
the voltage as it changes over time (Box 4.1). 

 An  action  potential,  as  it  would  appear  on  the  display  of  an  oscillo-
scope, is shown in Figure 4.1. This graph represents a plot of membrane 
potential versus time. Notice that the action potential has certain identi-
ﬁ able parts. The ﬁ rst part, called the  rising phase , is characterized by a 
rapid depolarization of the membrane. This change in membrane poten-
tial continues until V m  reaches a peak value of about 40 mV. The part of 
the action potential where the inside of the neuron is positively charged 
with respect to the outside is called the  overshoot . The  falling phase  of 
the action potential is a rapid repolarization until the inside of the mem-
brane is actually more negative than the resting potential. This last part 
of the falling phase is called the  undershoot , or  after-hyperpolariza-
tion . Finally, there is a gradual restoration of the resting potential. From 
beginning to end, the action potential lasts about 2 milliseconds (msec). 

 The Generation of an Action Potential 
 In Chapter 3, we said that breaking of the skin by a thumbtack was sufﬁ -
cient to generate action potentials in a sensory nerve. Let’s continue that 
example to see how an action potential begins. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   82
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   82

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

83

BOX 4.1

B R A I N   F O O D

Methods of Recording Action Potentials

Methods for studying nerve impulses may be broadly di-

vided into two types: intracellular and extracellular (Figure A). 
Intracellular recording requires impaling the neuron or axon 
with a microelectrode. The small size of most neurons makes 
this method challenging, which is why so many early studies 
of action potentials were performed on the neurons of inver-
tebrates, which can be 50–100 times larger than mammalian 
neurons. Fortunately, recent technical advances have made 
even the smallest vertebrate neurons accessible to intracel-
lular recording methods, and these studies have conﬁ rmed 
that  much  of  what  was  learned  in  invertebrates  is  directly 
applicable to humans.

The  goal  of  intracellular  recording  is  simple:  to  measure 
the  potential  difference  between  the  tip  of  the  intracellular 
electrode and another electrode placed in the solution bath-
ing  the  neuron  (electrically  continuous  with  the  earth,  and 
thus  called  ground).  The  intracellular  electrode  is  ﬁ lled  with 
a concentrated salt solution (often KCl) having a high electri-
cal conductivity. The electrode is connected to an ampliﬁ er 

Oscilloscope display

Amplifier

Ground

Intracellular
electrode

Extracellular
electrode

Figure A

that  compares  the  potential  difference  between  this  elec-
trode and ground. This potential difference can be displayed 
using an oscilloscope. Early oscilloscopes worked by sweep-
ing a beam of electrons from left to right across a phosphor 
screen.  Vertical  deﬂ ections  of  this  beam  show  changes  in 
voltage. Oscilloscopes today take a digital record of voltage 
across time, but the principle is the same. It is really just a 
sophisticated voltmeter that can record rapid changes in volt-
age (such as an action potential).

As we shall see, the action potential is characterized by a 
sequence of ionic movements across the neuronal membrane. 
These  electrical  currents  can  be  detected,  without  impaling 
the neuron, by placing an electrode near the membrane. This 
is the principle behind extracellular recording. Again, we mea-
sure  the  potential  difference  between  the  tip  of  the  record-
ing electrode and ground. The electrode can be a ﬁ ne glass 
capillary ﬁ lled with a salt solution, but it is often simply a thin 
insulated metal wire. Normally, in the absence of neural activ-
ity, the potential difference between the extracellular record-
ing electrode and ground is zero. However, when the action 
potential  arrives  at  the  recording  position, 
positive charges ﬂ ow away from the record-
ing electrode into the neuron. Then, as the 
action potential passes by, positive charges 
ﬂ ow out across the membrane toward the 
recording electrode. Thus, the extracellular 
action potential is characterized by a brief, 
alternating  voltage  difference  between  the 
recording electrode and ground. (Notice the 
different scale of the voltage changes pro-
duced by the action potential recorded with 
intracellular  and  extracellular  recordings.) 
These changes in voltage can be seen using 
an oscilloscope, but they can also be heard 
by connecting the output of the ampliﬁ er to 
a loudspeaker. Each impulse makes a dis-
tinctive “pop” sound. Indeed, recording the 
activity  of  an  active  sensory  nerve  sounds 
just like popping popcorn.

40 mV
20 mV
0 mV
–20 mV
–40 mV
–60 mV

40 µV
20 µV
0 µV
–20 µV
–40 µV
–60 µV

 The  perception  of  sharp  pain  when  a  thumbtack  enters  your  foot  is 
caused by the generation of action potentials in certain nerve ﬁ bers in the 
skin. (We’ll learn more about pain in Chapter 12.) The membrane of these 
ﬁ bers has a type of gated sodium channel that opens when the nerve end-
ing  is  stretched.  The  chain  of  events  therefore  begins  this  way:  (1)  The 
thumbtack enters the skin, (2) the membrane of the nerve ﬁ bers in the 
skin is stretched, (3) and Na ⫹ -permeable channels open. Because of the 
large concentration gradient and the negative charge of the inside of the 
membrane, Na ⫹  crosses the membrane through these channels. The entry 
of  Na ⫹   depolarizes  the  membrane;  that  is,  the  cytoplasmic  (inside)  sur-
face of the membrane becomes less negative. If this depolarization, called 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   83
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   83

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

84

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

)

V
m

(
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
e
n
a
r
b
m
e
M

40

20

0

–20

–40

–60

–80

0
(a)  

1
Time (msec)

2

Overshoot

Falling
phase

Undershoot

0 mV

Rising
phase

Resting
potential

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 4.1
An action potential. (a) An action 
 potential displayed by an  oscilloscope. 
(b) The parts of an action potential.

a  generator potential,  achieves a critical level, the membrane will gener-
ate an action potential. The critical level of depolarization that must be 
reached in order to trigger an action potential is called  threshold .  Action 
potentials are caused by depolarization of the membrane beyond threshold.  
 The depolarization that causes action potentials arises in different ways 
in  different  neurons.  In  our  previous  example,  depolarization  was  caused 
by the entry of Na ⫹  through specialized ion channels that were sensitive to 
membrane stretching. In interneurons, depolarization is usually caused by 
Na ⫹  entry through channels that are sensitive to neurotransmitters released 
by other neurons. In addition to these natural routes, neurons can be depo-
larized  by  injecting  electrical  current  through  a  microelectrode,  a  method 
commonly used by neuroscientists to study action potentials in different cells. 
 Generating an action potential by depolarizing a neuron is something 
like taking a photograph by pressing the shutter button on an old-fashioned 
camera. Applying pressure on the button has no effect until it increases to 
the point of crossing a threshold, and then “click”—the shutter opens and 
one frame of ﬁ lm is exposed. Increasing depolarization of a neuron simi-
larly has no effect until it crosses threshold, and then “pop”—one action 
potential. For this reason, action potentials are said to be “all-or-none.” 

 The Generation of Multiple Action Potentials 
 Earlier we likened the generation of an action potential by depolarization to 
taking a photograph by pressing the shutter button on a camera. But what 
if the camera is one of those fancy ones used by fashion and sports photog-
raphers where continued pressure on the button causes the camera to shoot 
frame after frame? The same thing is true for a neuron. If, for example, we 
pass continuous depolarizing current into a neuron through a microelectrode, 
we generate not one but many action potentials in succession (Figure 4.2). 

 The  rate  of  action  potential  generation  depends  on  the  magnitude  of 
the continuous depolarizing current. If we pass enough current through a 
microelectrode to depolarize just to threshold, but not far beyond, we might 
ﬁ nd that the cell generates action potentials at a rate of something like one 
per second, or one hertz (1 Hz). If we crank up the current a little bit more, 
however, we will ﬁ nd that the rate of action potential generation increases, 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   84
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   84

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

Injected
current
+

+
+

Stimulating
electrode

Amplifier

Ground

Recording
electrode

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

85

Injected
current

0
40

)

V
m

0

(
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
e
n
a
r
b
m
e
–65M

–40

(a)

Axon

–80

(b)

Time

 ▲ FIGURE 4.2 
 The effect of injecting positive charge into a neuron. (a) The axon hillock is impaled by two 
electrodes, one for recording the membrane potential relative to ground and the other for stim-
ulating the neuron with electrical current.  (b)  When electrical current is injected into the neuron 
(top trace), the membrane is depolarized sufficiently to fire action  potentials (bottom trace). 

say, to 50 impulses per second (50 Hz). Thus, the  ﬁ ring frequency  of action 
potentials reﬂ ects the magnitude of the depolarizing current. This is one way 
that stimulation intensity is encoded in the nervous system (Figure 4.3). 

 Although  ﬁ ring  frequency  increases  with  the  amount  of  depolarizing 
current, there is a limit to the rate at which a neuron can generate action 
potentials. The maximum ﬁ ring frequency is about 1000 Hz; once an action 
potential is initiated, it is impossible to initiate another for about 1 msec. 
This period of time is called the  absolute refractory period . In addition, 

d
e

t
c
e
n

j

I

t

n
e
r
r
u
c
 

0

0

–65 mV

Time

If injected current does 
not depolarize the 
membrane to threshold, 
no action potentials will 
be generated.    

If injected current
depolarizes the mem-
brane beyond threshold, 
action potentials will be 
generated.    

The action potential 
firing rate increases 
as the depolarizing 
current increases.     ▲ FIGURE 4.3

The dependence of action potential firing 
frequency on the level of  depolarization.

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   85
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   85

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

86

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

it can be relatively difﬁ cult to initiate another action potential for several 
milliseconds after the end of the absolute refractory period. During this 
relative refractory period , the amount of current required to depolar-
ize the neuron to action potential threshold is elevated above normal. 

  Optogenetics:  Controlling  Neural  Activity  with  Light.   As  we  have  dis-
cussed, action potentials are caused by the depolarization of the membrane 
beyond a threshold value, as occurs naturally in neurons by the opening 
of  ion  channels  that  allow  Na ⫹   to  cross  the  membrane.  To  artiﬁ cially 
control neuronal ﬁ ring rates, neuroscientists historically have had to use 
microelectrodes to inject electrical current. This limitation was  recently 
overcome with a revolutionary new approach called  optogenetics , which 
introduces into neurons foreign genes that express membrane ion chan-
nels that open in response to light. 

BOX 4.2

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

The Discovery of the Channelrhodopsins
by Georg Nagel

When  I  returned  in  1992  to  the  Max  Planck  Institute  of 

Biophysics  in  Frankfurt,  Germany,  from  my  post-doctoral 
studies at Yale and Rockefeller University, I was mostly inter-
ested in the mechanisms that establish ion gradients across 
cell membranes. Ernst Bamberg, the director of my depart-
ment, convinced me to undertake a novel approach in study-
ing microbial rhodopsins—proteins that transport ions across 
membranes  when  they  absorb  light  energy.  We  expressed 
the  gene  for  bacteriorhodopsin  in  frog  eggs  (oocytes),  and 
measured its light-activated electrical current with microelec-
trodes. In 1995, we demonstrated that illumination of bacteri-
orhodopsin triggered proton (H⫹) pumping across the oocyte 
membrane. We then went on in 1996 to study the light-acti-
vated chloride pump halorhodopsin with this new technique.
We also received DNA for chlamyopsin-1 and -2, proposed to 
be photoreceptor proteins in the green alga Chlamydomonas re-
inhardtii, from Peter Hegemann at the University of Regensburg. 
Unfortunately, like all the other labs who received this DNA, we 
were  unable  to  observe  any  light-induced  electrical  signals. 
Nevertheless, I agreed to test the function of a new presumed 
rhodopsin  from  Chlamydomonas  when  Peter  called  me,  an-
nouncing that they had found a “real light-gated calcium chan-
nel,” which he wanted to name chlamyrhodopsin-3. Although 
this new protein had not been puriﬁ ed, “chlamyopsin-3” was de-
tected in a data bank of DNA sequences from Chlamydomonas, 
produced at the research center in Kazusa, Japan, and showed 
similarities to bacteriorhodopsin. This made it an interesting can-
didate for the long-sought rhodopsin in Chlamydomonas. Peter 
requested the DNA from Japan, and I then expressed it in oo-
cytes. Our initial experiments, however, were disappointing be-
cause removal or addition of calcium to the oocyte bath solution 

made no difference to the light-activated electrical current, as 
would be expected if it actually were a Ca2⫹ permeable channel. 
The photocurrent itself was rather weak and did not seem to be 
inﬂ uenced by any change in the ionic concentrations in the bath 
solution.

As I still liked the idea of a directly light-gated ion channel, 
which most other researchers in the ﬁ eld rejected, I continued 
to test different bath solutions. One evening, I got a stunningly 
large inward light-activated current with a solution designed to 
inhibit calcium currents. It turned out, however, that the solu-
tion I used was badly buffered; in fact, it was quite acidic with 
too much H⫹! But this was a breakthrough as I now had good 
evidence for an inward-directed light-dependent H⫹ conduc-
tance. Then, by acidifying the oocyte (that is, increasing the 
H⫹  concentration  of  the  oocyte  interior  relative  to  the  out-
side), I found I was able to reliably generate outward-directed 
light-activated currents as well. It soon became clear that we 
have with chlamyrhodopsin–3 a light-gated proton channel; 
therefore, I proposed to my colleagues Peter Hegemann and 
Ernst Bamberg to call this new protein channelrhodopsin-1. 
Further experiments revealed that other monovalent cations 
can also permeate channelrhodopsin-1. The small photocur-
rents we observed initially are now understood to be due to 
poor expression of channelrhodopsin-1 in oocytes.

Tantalized by this new ﬁ nding, we prepared a manuscript 
(published  in  2002)  and  applied  for  a  patent  describing  the 
use of light-gated ion channels for noninvasive manipulation 
of cells and even living organisms. I next studied the closely 
related algal protein channelrhodopsin-2, and everything be-
came so much easier as photocurrents were now really large 
and easy to analyze. Channelrhodopsin-2 (chop2), 737 amino 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   86
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   86

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

87

 In Chapter 9, we will discuss how light energy is absorbed by proteins 
called  photopigments  to generate the neural responses in our retinas that 
ultimately  give  us  sight.  Of  course,  sensitivity  to  light  is  a  property  of 
many  organisms.  In  the  course  of  studying  light  responses  in  a  green 
alga, researchers working in Frankfurt, Germany, characterized a photo-
pigment they called  channelrhodopsin-2   (ChR2) . By introducing the 
 ChR2  gene into mammalian cells, they showed that it encodes a light-
sensitive  cation  channel  that  is  permeable  to  Na ⫹   and  Ca 2  ⫹   (Box  4.2). 
The channel opens rapidly in response to blue light, and in neurons the 
inward  ﬂ ow  of  cations  is  sufﬁ cient  to  produce  depolarization  beyond 
 threshold  for  action  potentials.  The  enormous  potential  of  optogenet-
ics was subsequently demonstrated by researchers in the United States 
who  showed  that  the  behavior  of  rats  and  mice  could  be  dramatically 
inﬂ uenced  by  shining  blue  light  onto  neurons  in  which  the   ChR2   gene 

Blue light
(460 nm)

Yellow light
(580 nm)

Channelrhodopsin-2

Halorhodopsin

Na+

Cl-

Light on

Light on

Vm

Vm

Time

Time

Figure A
 Schematic drawings of channelrhodopsin-2 and halorhodopsin in the plasma mem-
brane. Below, the effect of blue and yellow light on membrane potential, mediated 
by channelrhodopsin-2 and halorhodopsin, respectively.

rhodopsin-2  in  mammalian  neurons.  His  exciting 
work with Ed Boyden and Feng Zhang attracted a 
lot of attention, prompting many  requests for the 
DNA to express this protein in the brain. Many col-
leagues from Europe only then realized that chan-
nelrhodopsins were ﬁ rst characterized in Frankfurt.
The  success  and  ease  of  application  of 
channelrhodopsin-2 led Karl and Alexander to won-
der if there are other rhodopsins that might be used 
for  light-induced  inhibition  of  neuronal  activity.  We 
told  them  about  bacteriorhodopsin  and  halorho-
dopsin, the light-activated proton export and chlo-
ride import pumps, respectively. Both pumps render 
the cell interior more negative (i.e., they are light-ac-
tivated hyperpolarizers). We recommended halorho-
dopsin from the microbe Natronomonas pharaonis 
as a light-activated hyperpolarizer. We took advan-
tage  of  what  we  had  learned  back  in  1996:  that 
halorhodopsin  had  a  high  afﬁ nity  for  chloride  and 
that its expression was stable in animal cells.

acids long in its native form, could be shortened to 310 amino 
acids  and  attached  to  yellow  ﬂ uorescent  protein  (YFP)  to 
allow  visualization  of  protein  expression.  After  we  published 
the superior features of chop2 in 2003, requests for the DNA 
started coming in, and we ourselves looked for collaborations 
with neurobiologists. One of our ﬁ rst “victims” was Alexander 
Gottschalk at the nearby University of Frankfurt, as he worked 
with the small translucent nematode worm Caenorhabditis el-
egans (C. elegans). Unfortunately, I made an error in preparing 
the DNA such that that the worms, although nicely labeled by 
YFP, did not react to light. Once I realized my mistake and got 
chop2–YFP  into  C.  elegans  muscle  cells,  we  were  amazed 
how  easily  these  little  worms  could  be  induced  to  contract 
simply by illumination with blue light. At about the same time 
(April 2004) Karl Deisseroth at Stanford University asked for the 
DNA and advice on its use in a collaboration, which I happily 
accepted. Karl quickly demonstrated the power of channel-

As  it  turned  out,  light  activation  of  the  chloride  pump 
halorhodopsin is sufﬁ cient to inhibit action potential ﬁ ring in 
mammalian neurons and to inhibit muscle contraction of the 
nematode C. elegans. Ironically, these neurobiological exper-
iments with halorhodopsin (and the same applies for bacteri-
orhodopsin) could have been done several years earlier, but 
only the discovery and application of channelrhodopsin-2 en-
couraged their use and helped create a new ﬁ eld, now called 
optogenetics.  Many  neurobiologists  are  now  using  these 
tools,  and  a  few  groups,  including  ourselves,  are  engaged 
in further improving and expanding the existing optogenetic 
tool box.

References:
Nagel G, Szellas T, Huhn W, Kateriya S, Adeishvili N, Berthold P, Ollig 
D,  Hegemann  P,  Bamberg  E.  2003.  Channelrhodopsin-2,  a  di-
rectly light-gated cation- selective membrane channel. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of United States of America 
100:13940–13945.

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   87
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   87

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

88

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 4.4
Optogenetic control of neural activity 
in a mouse brain. The gene encoding 
channelrhodopsin-2 was introduced into 
neurons of this mouse’s brain using a vi-
rus. The firing of these neurons can now 
be controlled with blue light delivered via 
an optic fiber. (Source: Courtesy of 
Dr. Ed Boyden, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology.)

was introduced (Figure 4.4). Newer additions to the “optogenetic toolkit” 
available  to  researchers  include  halorhodopsin,  a  protein  derived  from 
single-cell microbes that will inhibit neurons in response to yellow light. 
 Understanding how behaviors arise, of course, requires understanding 
how action potentials arise and propagate through the nervous system. 
We now take a look at how the movement of ions through the neuron’s 
own specialized protein channels causes a neural signal with these inter-
esting properties. 

THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN THEORY 
THE AACTIOON POTENTIAL, IN TTHEORY 

 The action potential is a dramatic redistribution of electrical charge across 
the  membrane.   Depolarization  of  the  cell  during  the  action  potential  is 
caused by the inﬂ ux of sodium ions across the membrane, and repolarization 
is caused by the efﬂ ux of potassium ions . Let’s apply some of the concepts in-
troduced in Chapter 3 to help us understand how ions are driven across the 
membrane, and how these ionic movements affect the membrane potential. 

 Membrane Currents and Conductances 
 Consider the idealized neuron illustrated in Figure 4.5. The membrane of 
this cell has three types of protein molecules: sodium-potassium pumps, 
potassium channels, and sodium channels. The pumps work continuously 
to establish and maintain concentration gradients. As in all our previous 
examples, we’ll assume that K ⫹  is concentrated twentyfold inside the cell 
and that Na ⫹  is concentrated tenfold outside the cell. According to the 
Nernst equation, at 37°C, E K   ⫽   ⫺ 80 mV and E Na   ⫽  62 mV. Let’s use this 
cell to explore the factors that govern the movement of ions across the 
membrane. 

 We  begin  by  assuming  that  both  the  potassium  channels  and  the 
sodium  channels  are  closed,  and  that  the  membrane  potential,  V m ,  is 
equal to 0 mV (Figure 4.5a). Now let’s open the potassium channels only 
(Figure 4.5b). As we learned in Chapter 3, K ⫹  will ﬂ ow out of the cell, 
down  the  concentration  gradient,  until  the  inside  becomes  negatively 
charged, and V m   ⫽  E K  (Figure 4.5c). Here we want to focus our attention 
on the movement of K ⫹  that took the membrane potential from 0 mV to 
⫺ 80 mV. Consider these three points: 
 1. The net movement of K ⫹  across the membrane is an electrical current. 

We can represent this current using the symbol I K . 

 2. The number of open potassium channels is proportional to an electrical 

conductance. We can represent this conductance by the symbol g K . 

 3. Membrane potassium current, I K , will ﬂ ow only as long as V m  ⬆ E K . The 
driving force on K ⫹  is deﬁ ned as the difference between the real mem-
brane potential and the equilibrium potential, which can be written as 
V m   ⫺  E K . 
 There  is  a  simple  relationship  between  the  ionic  driving  force,  ionic 
conductance, and the amount of ionic current that will ﬂ ow. For K ⫹ , this 
may be written: 

 More generally, we write: 

 I K   ⫽  g K  (V m   ⫺  E K ). 

 I ion   ⫽  g ion  (V m   ⫺  E ion ). 

 If this sounds familiar, that is because it is simply an expression of Ohm’s 
law, I  ⫽  gV, which we learned about in Chapter 3. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   88
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   88

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

89

Outside
cell

Sodium
channel

Potassium
channel

Inside
cell

K+
K+
+

–

+

–

K+
K+
+

–

+

–

0

Vm 

EK = – 80 mV
ENa = 62 mV
gK = 0
IK = gK (Vm– EK) = 0

0

Vm 

EK = – 80 mV
ENa = 62 mV
gK > 0
IK = gK (Vm– EK) > 0

0

Vm 

– 80

Outside

Inside

Ideal neuron

K+K+

(a)

(b)

(c)

EK = – 80 mV
ENa = 62 mV
gK > 0
IK = gK (Vm– EK) = 0

+

+

–

–

K+
K+
+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–
K+
K+

K+
K+
+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–
K+
K+

▲ FIGURE 4.5
Membrane currents and conductances. Here is an idealized neuron with sodium-
potassium pumps (not shown), potassium channels, and sodium channels. The pumps 
establish ionic concentration gradients so that K⫹ is concentrated inside the cell and 
Na⫹ is concentrated outside the cell. (a) Initially, we assume that all channels are closed 
and the membrane potential equals 0 mV. (b) Now we open the potassium channels, 
and K⫹ flows out of the cell. This movement of K⫹ is an electrical current, IK, and it 
flows as long as the membrane conductance to K⫹, gK, is greater than zero, and the 
membrane potential is not equal to the potassium equilibrium potential. (c) At equilib-
rium, there is no net potassium current because, although gK ⬎0, the membrane poten-
tial at equilibrium equals EK. At equilibrium, an equal number of K⫹ enters and leaves.

 Now let’s take another look at our example. Initially we began with 
V m   ⫽  0 mV and no ionic membrane permeability (see Figure 4.5a). There 
is  a  large  driving  force  on  K ⫹   because  V m   ⬆  E K ;  in  fact,  (V m    ⫺   E K )   ⫽  
80  mV.  However,  because  the  membrane  is  impermeable  to  K ⫹ ,  the 
 potassium conductance, g K , equals zero. Consequently, I K   ⫽  0. Potassium 
current  ﬂ ows  only  when  the  membrane  has  open  potassium  channels 
and  therefore g K   ⬎  0. Now K ⫹  ﬂ ows out of the cell—as long as the mem-
brane  potential  differs  from  the  potassium  equilibrium  potential  (see 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   89
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   89

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

90

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Figure 4.5b). Notice that the current ﬂ ow is in the direction that takes 
V m  toward E K . When V m   ⫽  E K , the membrane is at equilibrium, and no 
net current will ﬂ ow. In this condition, although there is a large potas-
sium conductance, g K , there is no longer any net driving force on the K ⫹
(Figure 4.5c). 
 The Ins and Outs of an Action Potential 
 Let’s pick up the action where we left off in the last section. The mem-
brane of our ideal neuron is permeable only to K ⫹ , and V m   ⫽  E K   ⫽   ⫺ 80 mV. 
What’s happening with the Na ⫹  concentrated outside the cell? Because 
the membrane potential is so negative relative to the sodium equilibrium 
potential, there is a very large driving force on Na ⫹  ([V m   ⫺  E Na ]  ⫽  [ ⫺ 80 mV 
⫺  62 mV]  ⫽   ⫺ 142 mV). Nonetheless, there can be no net Na ⫹  current as 
long as the membrane is impermeable to Na ⫹ . But now let’s open the so-
dium channels and see what happens to the membrane potential. 

 At  the  instant  we  change  the  ionic  permeability  of  the  membrane, 
g Na  is high, and, as we discussed earlier, there is a large driving force 
pushing on Na ⫹ . Thus, we have what it takes to generate a large sodium 
current, I Na , across the membrane. Na ⫹  passes through the membrane 
sodium channels in the direction that takes V m  toward E Na ; in this case, 
the sodium current, I Na , is inward across the membrane. Assuming the 
membrane permeability is now far greater to sodium than it is to potas-
sium,  this  inﬂ ux  of  Na ⫹   depolarizes  the  neuron  until  V m   approaches 
E Na , 62 mV. 

 Notice that something remarkable happened here. Simply by switch-
ing the dominant membrane permeability from K ⫹  to Na ⫹ , we were able 
to  rapidly  reverse  the  membrane  potential.  In  theory,  then,  the  rising 
phase of the action potential could be explained if, in response to depolar-
ization of the membrane beyond threshold, membrane sodium channels 
opened.  This  would  allow  Na ⫹   to  enter  the  neuron,  causing  a  massive 
depolarization until the membrane potential approached E Na . 

 How  could  we  account  for  the  falling  phase  of  the  action  potential? 
Simply  assume  that  sodium  channels  quickly  close  and  the  potassium 
channels  remain  open,  so  the  dominant  membrane  ion  permeability 
switches back from Na ⫹  to K ⫹ . Then K ⫹  would ﬂ ow out of the cell until 
the membrane potential again equals E K . 

 Our model for the ins and outs, ups and downs of the action potential 
in an idealized neuron is shown in Figure 4.6. The rising phase of the 
action potential is explained by an inward sodium current, and the falling 
phase is explained by an outward potassium current. The action potential 
therefore could be accounted for simply by the movement of ions through 
channels  that  are  gated  by  changes  in  the  membrane  potential.  If  you 
understand this concept, you understand a lot about the ionic basis of the 
action potential. What’s left now is to see how this actually happens—in 
a real neuron. 

 THE ACTION POTENTIAL, IN REALITY 
THE AACTIOON POTENTIAL, IN RREALITY 

 Let’s quickly review our theory of the action potential. When the mem-
brane is depolarized to threshold, there is a transient increase in g Na . The 
increase  in  g Na   allows  the  entry  of  Na ⫹ ,  which  depolarizes  the  neuron. 
And the increase in g Na  must be brief in duration to account for the short 
duration of the action potential. Restoring the negative membrane poten-
tial would be further aided by a transient increase in g K  during the falling 
phase, allowing K ⫹  to leave the depolarized neuron faster. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   90
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   90

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

Outside
cell

K+
K+
K+

Sodium
channel

Potassium
channel

K+
K+
K+

+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

K+
K+
K+

K+
K+
K+

K+
K+

K+
K+

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

91

g

K >>  g

Na

V

m

– 80 mV

g

Na >>  g
K 

V

m

–

–

Inside
cell

(a)

(b)

–

+

(c)

NaNa+
Na+

Sodium influx

NaNa+
Na+

– 80 mV

K+
K+
–

+

K+
K+

Potassium efflux

–

+

–

+

K+
K+

–

+

–

+

K+
K+

–

+

V

m

– 80 mV

g

K >>  g

Na

g

K >>  g

Na

+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

K+
K+

K+
K+

V
m

– 80 mV

(d)
▲ FIGURE 4.6
Flipping the membrane potential by changing the relative ionic permeability of the 
membrane. (a) The membrane of the idealized neuron, introduced in Figure 4.4. We 
begin by assuming that the membrane is permeable only to K⫹ and that Vm ⫽ EK. 
(b) We now stipulate that the membrane sodium channels open so that gNa ⬎⬎ gK. 
There is a large driving force on Na⫹, so Na⫹ rushes into the cell, taking Vm toward ENa. 
(c) Now we close the sodium channels so that gK ⬎⬎ gNa. Because the membrane 
potential is positive, there is a large driving force on K⫹. The efflux of K⫹ takes Vm back 
toward EK. (d) The resting state is restored where Vm ⫽ EK.

Time

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   91
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   91

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

92

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 Testing  this  theory  is  simple  enough  in  principle.  All  one  has  to  do 
is  measure  the  sodium  and  potassium  conductances  of  the  membrane 
during  the  action  potential.  In  practice,  however,  such  a  measurement 
proved  to  be  quite  difﬁ cult  in  real  neurons.  The  key  technical  break-
through  came  with  a  device  called  a   voltage  clamp ,  invented  by  the 
American physiologist Kenneth C. Cole and used in decisive experiments 
performed  by  Cambridge  University  physiologists  Alan  Hodgkin  and 
Andrew  Huxley  around  1950.  The  voltage  clamp  enabled  Hodgkin  and 
Huxley to “clamp” the membrane potential of an axon at any value they 
chose.  They  could  then  deduce  the  changes  in  membrane  conductance 
that occur at different membrane potentials by measuring the currents 
that ﬂ owed across the membrane. In an elegant series of experiments, 
Hodgkin and Huxley showed that the rising phase of the action potential 
was indeed caused by a transient increase in g Na  and an inﬂ ux of Na ⫹ , 
and that the falling phase was associated with an increase in g K  and an 
efﬂ ux of K ⫹ . Their accomplishments were recognized with the Nobel Prize 
in 1963. 

 To account for the transient changes in g Na , Hodgkin and Huxley pro-
posed  the  existence  of  sodium  “gates”  in  the  axonal  membrane.  They 
hypothesized that these gates are “activated” (opened) by depolarization 
above threshold and “inactivated” (closed and locked) when the membrane 
acquires a positive membrane potential. These gates are “deinactivated” 
(unlocked  and  enabled  to  be  opened  again)  only  after  the  membrane 
potential returns to a negative value. 

 It is a tribute to Hodgkin and Huxley that their hypotheses about mem-
brane gates came more than 20 years before the direct demonstration of 
voltage-gated channel proteins in the neuronal membrane. We have a new 
understanding of gated membrane channels, thanks to two more recent 
scientiﬁ c breakthroughs. First, new molecular biological techniques have 
enabled neuroscientists to determine the detailed structure of these pro-
teins. Second, new neurophysiological techniques have enabled neurosci-
entists to measure the ionic currents that pass through single channels. 
We  will  now  explore  the  action  potential  from  the  perspective  of  these 
membrane ion channels. 

 The Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel 
 The  voltage-gated sodium channel  is aptly named. The protein forms 
a pore in the membrane that is highly selective to Na ⫹ , and the pore is 
opened and closed by changes in membrane voltage. 

  Sodium Channel Structure.  The voltage-gated sodium channel is created 
from a single long polypeptide. The molecule has four distinct domains, 
numbered  I–IV;  each  domain  consists  of  six  transmembrane  alpha  he-
lices,  numbered  S1–S6  (Figure  4.7).  The  four  domains  clump  together 
to form a pore between them. The pore is closed at the negative resting 
membrane  potential.  When  the  membrane  is  depolarized  to  threshold, 
however, the molecule twists into a conﬁ guration that allows the passage 
of Na ⫹  through the pore (Figure 4.8). 

 Like the potassium channel, the sodium channel has pore loops that 
are assembled into a selectivity ﬁ lter. This ﬁ lter makes the sodium chan-
nel  twelve  times  more  permeable  to  Na ⫹   than  it  is  to  K ⫹ .  Apparently, 
the Na ⫹  ions are stripped of most, but not all, of their associated water 
molecules as they pass into the channel. The retained water serves as a 
sort of molecular chaperone for the ion, and is necessary for the ion to 
pass  the  selectivity  ﬁ lter.  The  ion–water  complex  can  then  be  used  to 
select Na ⫹  and exclude K ⫹  (Figure 4.9). 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   92
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   92

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

93

Outside cell 

I

+
+
+
+

Inside cell 

II

+
+
+
+

III

+
+
+
+

IV

+
+
+
+

N

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

C

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

S6

+
+
+

+

Pore 
loop

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

Selectivity filter

Voltage sensor
Gate

▲ FIGURE 4.7
The structure of the voltage-gated sodium channel. 
(a) A depiction of how the sodium channel polypeptide chain is believed to be wo-
ven into the membrane. The molecule consists of four domains, I–IV. Each domain 
consists of six alpha helices (represented by the blue and purple cylinders), which 
pass back and forth across the membrane. (b) An expanded view of one domain, 
showing the voltage sensor of alpha helix S4 and the pore loop (red), which con-
tributes to the selectivity filter. (c) A view of the molecule showing how the domains 
may arrange themselves to form a pore between them. (Source: Adapted from 
Armstrong and Hille, 1998, Fig. 1.)

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   93
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   93

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

94

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Closed pore

Open pore

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

▲ FIGURE 4.8
A hypothetical model for changing the config-
uration of the sodium channel by depolarizing 
the membrane.

– 65 mV

– 40 mV

H

H

O

Na+

H

H

O

K+ 

m
n
 
5
.
0

Size of 
partially
hydrated
K+ ion

Size of 
partially
hydrated
Na+ ion

Size of 
sodium
channel 
selectivity
filter
▲ FIGURE 4.9
Dimensions of the sodium channel 
 selectivity filter. Water accompanies the 
ions as they pass through the channel. 
Hydrated Na⫹ fits; hydrated K⫹ does 
not. (Source: Adapted from Hille, 1992, 
Figs. 5, 6.)

 The  sodium  channel  is  gated  by  a  change  in  voltage  across  the 
membrane. It has now been established that the voltage sensor resides 
in segment S4 of the molecule. In this segment, positively charged amino 
acid residues are regularly spaced along the coils of the helix. Thus, the 
entire segment can be forced to move by changing the membrane poten-
tial.  Depolarization  twists  S4,  and  this  conformational  change  in  the 
molecule causes the gate to open. 

  Functional Properties of the Sodium Channel.  Research performed around 
1980 at the Max Planck Institute in Goettingen, Germany, revealed the func-
tional properties of the voltage-gated sodium channel. A new method was 
used, called the  patch clamp , to study the ionic currents passing through 
individual ion channels (Box 4.3). The patch-clamp method entails sealing 
the tip of an electrode to a very small  patch  of neuronal membrane. This 
patch can then be torn away from the neuron, and the ionic currents across 
it can be measured as the membrane potential is  clamped  at any value the 
experimenter selects. With luck, the patch will contain only a single channel, 
and the behavior of this channel can be studied. Patch clamping enabled in-
vestigation of the functional properties of the voltage-gated sodium channel. 
 Changing the membrane potential of a patch of axonal membrane from 
 ⫺ 80  to   ⫺ 65  mV  has  little  effect  on  the  voltage-gated  sodium  channels. 
They remain closed because depolarization of the membrane has not yet 
reached threshold. Changing the membrane potential from  ⫺ 65 to  ⫺ 40 mV, 
however,  causes  these  channels  to  pop  open.  As  shown  in  Figure  4.10, 
voltage-gated sodium channels have a characteristic pattern of behavior: 
 1. They open with little delay. 
 2. They stay open for about 1 msec and then close (inactivate). 
 3. They  cannot  be  opened  again  by  depolarization  until  the  membrane 

potential returns to a negative value near threshold. 
 A hypothetical model for how conformational changes in the voltage-
gated sodium channel could account for these properties is illustrated in 
Figure 4.10c. 

 A single channel does not an action potential make. The membrane of 
an axon may contain thousands of sodium channels per square micrometer 
( ␮ m 2 ), and the concerted action of all these channels is required to gener-
ate what we measure as an action potential. Nonetheless, it is interesting 
to see how many of the properties of the action potential can be explained 
by the properties of the voltage-gated sodium channel. For example, the 
fact that single channels do not open until a critical level of membrane 
depolarization  is  reached  explains  the  action  potential  threshold.  The 
rapid opening of the channels in response to depolarization explains why 
the rising phase of the action potential occurs so quickly. And the short 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   94
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   94

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

95

BOX 4.3

B R A I N   F O O D

The Patch-Clamp Method

The very existence of voltage-gated channels in the neu-

ronal  membrane  was  mere  conjecture  until  methods  were 
developed  to  study  individual  channel  proteins.  A  revolu-
tionary  new  method,  the  patch  clamp,  was  developed  by 
German  neuroscientists  Bert  Sakmann  and  Erwin  Neher  in 
the mid-1970s. In recognition of their contribution, Sakmann 
and Neher were awarded the 1991 Nobel Prize.

Patch  clamping  enables  one  to  record  ionic  currents 
through  single  channels  (Figure  A).  The  ﬁ rst  step  is  gently 
lowering the ﬁ re-polished tip of a glass recording electrode, 
1–5  ␮m  in  diameter,  onto  the  membrane  of  the  neuron 
(part  a),  and  then  applying  suction  within  the  electrode  tip 
(part b). A tight seal forms between the walls of the electrode 
and the underlying patch of membrane. This “gigaohm” seal 
(so named because of its high electrical resistance: ⬎109 ⍀) 
leaves the ions in the electrode only one path to take, through 
the   channels  in  the  underlying  patch  of  membrane.  If  the 

electrode  is  then  withdrawn  from  the  cell,  the  membrane 
patch can be torn away (part c), and ionic currents can be 
measured as steady voltages are applied across the mem-
brane (part d).

With a little luck, one can resolve currents ﬂ owing through 
single channels. If the patch contains a voltage-gated sodium 
channel, for example, then changing the membrane potential 
from  ⫺65 to  ⫺40 mV will cause the channel to open, and 
current  (I)  will  ﬂ ow  through  it  (part  e).  The  amplitude  of  the 
measured current at a constant membrane voltage reﬂ ects 
the  channel  conductance,  and  the  duration  of  the  current 
reﬂ ects the time the channel is open.

Patch-clamp  recordings  reveal  that  most  channels  ﬂ ip 
between  two  conductance  states  that  can  be  interpreted 
as open or closed. The time they remain open can vary, but 
the single-channel conductance value stays the same and is 
therefore said to be unitary. Ions can pass through single chan-
nels at an astonishing rate—well over a million per second.

Pipette
tip

Sodium
channel (closed)

Sodium
channel (open)

Na+

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

Pipette

Neuron

(a)  

Gigaohm
seal

Vm

–65 mV

Voltage change across a patch of membrane

Channel open

Channel closed

Out

I

In

(e)  

Figure A

time  the  channels  stay  open  before  inactivating  (about  1  msec)  partly 
explains why the action potential is so brief. Furthermore, inactivation 
of the channels can account for the absolute refractory period: Another 
action potential cannot be generated until the channels are  activated. 

 There are several different sodium channel genes in the human genome. 
Differences in the expression of these genes among neurons can give rise 
to subtle but important variations in the properties of the action potential. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   95
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   95

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

96

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 4.10
The opening and closing of sodium 
channels upon membrane depolarization. 
(a) This trace shows the electrical potential 
across a patch of membrane. When the 
membrane potential is changed from ⫺65 to 
⫺40 mV, the sodium channels pop open. 
(b) These traces show how three different 
channels respond to the voltage step. Each 
line is a record of the electrical current that 
flows through a single channel. ➀ At ⫺65 mV, 
the channels are closed, so there is no cur-
rent. ➁ When the membrane is depolarized to 
⫺40 mV, the channels briefly open and 
current flows inward, represented by the 
downward deflection in the current traces. 
Although there is some variability from chan-
nel to channel, all of them open with little 
delay and stay open for less than 1 msec. 
Notice that after they have opened once, 
they close and stay closed as long as the 
membrane is maintained at a depolarized Vm. 
➂ The closure of the sodium channel by 
steady depolarization is called inactivation. 
➃ To deinactivate the channels, the mem-
brane must be returned to ⫺65 mV again. 
(c) A model for how changes in the confor-
mation of the sodium channel protein might 
yield its functional properties. ➀ The closed 
channel ➁ opens upon membrane depolar-
ization. ➂ Inactivation occurs when a globular 
portion of the protein swings up and 
occludes the pore. ➃ Deinactivation occurs 
when the globular portion swings away and 
the pore closes by movement of the trans-
membrane domains.

5 msec

– 40 mV

– 65 mV

Vm

(a)

Channel closed

Channel open

1

3

2 

4

Na+

Inward
current

Inward
current

Inward
current

(b)

Sodium
channel

Membrane

1

2

3

4

(c)

Recently,  single  amino  acid  mutations  in  the  extracellular  regions  of  one 
sodium channel have been shown to cause a common inherited disorder in 
human infants known as  generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures . Epileptic 
seizures result from explosive, highly synchronous electrical activity in the 
brain. (Epilepsy is discussed in detail in Chapter 19.) The seizures in this 
disorder occur in response to fever (  febrile  is from the Latin word for “fever”). 
They usually occur only in early childhood, between 3 months and 5 years of 
age. Although precisely how the seizures are triggered by an increase in brain 
temperature is not clear, the  mutations’ effects include slowing the inacti-
vation of the sodium channel, prolonging the action potential. Generalized 
epilepsy with febrile seizures is a  channelopathy , a human genetic disease 
caused by alterations in the structure and function of ion  channels. 

  The  Effects  of  Toxins  on  the  Sodium  Channel.   Researchers  at  Duke 
University discovered in the 1960s that a toxin isolated from the ovaries 
of the puffer ﬁ sh (Figure 4.11) could selectively block the sodium channel. 
 Tetrodotoxin    (TTX)   clogs  the  Na ⫹ -permeable  pore  by  binding  tightly 
to  a  speciﬁ c  site  on  the  outside  of  the  channel. TTX  blocks  all  sodium-
dependent  action  potentials  and  therefore  is  usually  fatal  if  ingested. 
Nonetheless, puffer ﬁ sh are considered a delicacy in Japan. Sushi chefs 
licensed by the government train for years to prepare puffer ﬁ sh in such 
a way that eating them causes only numbness around the mouth. Talk 
about adventuresome eating! 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   96
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   96

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

97

▲ FIGURE 4.11
The puffer fish, source of TTX. (Source: Courtesy of Dr. Toshio Narahashi, Duke 
University.)

 TTX is one of a number of natural toxins that interfere with the func-
tion  of  the  voltage-gated  sodium  channel.  Another  channel-blocking 
toxin  is   saxitoxin ,  produced  by  dinoﬂ agellates  of  the  genus   Gonyaulax . 
Saxitoxin is concentrated in clams, mussels, and other shellﬁ sh that feed 
on these marine protozoa. Occasionally the dinoﬂ agellates bloom, causing 
what is known as a “red tide.” Eating shellﬁ sh at these times can be fatal 
because of the unusually high concentration of the toxin. 

 In  addition  to  the  toxins  that  block  sodium  channels,  certain  com-
pounds interfere with nervous system function by causing the channels to 
open inappropriately. In this category is  batrachotoxin , isolated from the 
skin of a species of Colombian frog. Batrachotoxin causes the channels 
to open at more negative potentials and to stay open much longer than 
usual, thus scrambling the information encoded by the action potentials. 
Toxins  produced  by  lilies  ( veratridine )  and  buttercups  ( aconitine )  have 
a similar mechanism of action. Sodium channel inactivation is also dis-
rupted by toxins from scorpions and sea anemones. 

 What can we learn from these toxins? First, the different toxins disrupt 
channel function by binding to different sites on the protein. Information 
about toxin binding and its consequences have helped researchers deduce 
the three-dimensional structure of the sodium channel. Second, the toxins 
can be used as experimental tools to study the consequences of blocking 
action potentials. For example, as we shall see in later chapters, TTX is 
commonly used in experiments that require blocking impulses in a nerve 
or  muscle.  The  third  and  most  important  lesson  from  studying  toxins? 
Be careful what you put in your mouth! 

 Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels 
 Hodgkin’s and Huxley’s experiments indicated that the falling phase of 
the action potential was explained only partly by the inactivation of g Na . 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   97
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   97

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

98

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

They found there was also a transient increase in g K  that functioned to 
speed the restoration of a negative membrane potential after the spike. 
They  proposed  the  existence  of  membrane  potassium  gates  that,  like 
sodium gates, open in response to depolarization of the membrane. Unlike 
sodium gates, however, potassium gates do not open immediately upon 
depolarization; it takes about 1 msec for them to open. Because of this 
delay, and because this potassium conductance serves to rectify, or reset, 
the membrane potential, they called this conductance the  delayed rectiﬁ er . 
 We now know that there are many different types of  voltage-gated 
potassium channels . Most of them open when the membrane is depo-
larized and function to diminish any further depolarization by giving K ⫹  
a path to leave the cell across the membrane. The known voltage-gated 
potassium channels have a similar structure. The channel proteins con-
sist of four separate polypeptide subunits that come together to form a 
pore between them. Like the sodium channel, these proteins are sensitive 
to changes in the electrical ﬁ eld across the membrane. When the mem-
brane is depolarized, the subunits are believed to twist into a shape that 
allows K ⫹  to pass through the pore. 

  Putting the Pieces Together  
 We can now use what we’ve learned about ions and channels to explain 
the key properties of the action potential (Figure 4.12): 
 (cid:129)   Threshold .  Threshold  is  the  membrane  potential  at  which  enough 
voltage-gated sodium channels open so that the relative ionic perme-
ability of the membrane favors sodium over potassium. 

 (cid:129)   Rising phase . When the inside of the membrane has a negative elec-
trical potential, there is a large driving force on Na ⫹ . Therefore, Na ⫹  
rushes  into  the  cell  through  the  open  sodium  channels,  causing  the 
membrane to rapidly depolarize. 

 (cid:129)   Overshoot . Because the relative permeability of the membrane greatly 
favors  sodium,  the  membrane  potential  goes  to  a  value  close  to  E Na , 
which is greater than 0 mV. 

 (cid:129)   Falling  phase .  The  behavior  of  two  types  of  channels  contributes  to 
the falling phase. First, the voltage-gated sodium channels inactivate. 
Second, the voltage-gated potassium channels ﬁ nally open (triggered 
to do so 1 msec earlier by the depolarization of the membrane). There 
is a great driving force on K ⫹  when the membrane is strongly depolar-
ized. Therefore, K ⫹  rushes out of the cell through the open channels, 
causing the membrane potential to become negative again. 

 (cid:129)   Undershoot .  The  open  voltage-gated  potassium  channels  add  to  the 
resting potassium membrane permeability. Because there is very little 
sodium permeability, the membrane potential goes toward E K , causing 
a hyperpolarization relative to the resting membrane potential until 
the voltage-gated potassium channels close again. 

 (cid:129)   Absolute refractory period . Sodium channels inactivate when the mem-
brane becomes strongly depolarized. They cannot be activated again, 
and another action potential cannot be generated, until the membrane 
potential becomes sufﬁ ciently negative to deinactivate the channels. 

 (cid:129)   Relative refractory period . The membrane potential stays hyperpolarized 
until the voltage-gated potassium channels close. Therefore, more depo-
larizing current is required to bring the membrane potential to threshold. 
 We’ve  seen  that  channels  and  the  movement  of  ions  through  them 
can explain the properties of the action potential. But it is important to 
remember that the sodium-potassium pump also is working quietly in the 
background. Imagine that the entry of Na ⫹  during each action potential is 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   98
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   98

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

99

 
 
x
u
l
f
n
i
 
+
a
N

K
+

 

e

f

f

l

u

x

 

 

Currents
through
voltage-gated
sodium
channels  

Summed
Na+ current 
through all
channels

Currents
through
voltage-gated
potassium
channels  

Summed
K+ current 
through all
channels

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

(e)  

Inward
current

Outward
current

Net 
transmembrane
current

(f)  

Na+ influx 

K+ efflux 

Outward
current
Inward
current

▲ FIGURE 4.12
The molecular basis of the action potential. (a) The mem-
brane potential as it changes in time during an action potential. 
The rising phase of the action potential is caused by the influx 
of Na⫹ through hundreds of voltage-gated sodium channels. 
The falling phase is caused by sodium channel inactivation and 
the efflux of K⫹ through voltage-gated potassium channels. 
(b) The inward currents through three representative voltage-
gated sodium channels. Each channel opens with little delay 
when the membrane is depolarized to threshold. The channels 
stay open for no more than 1 msec and then inactivate. (c) The 
summed Na⫹ current flowing through all the sodium channels. 
(d) The outward currents through three representative voltage-
gated potassium channels. Voltage-gated potassium channels 
open about 1 msec after the membrane is depolarized to 
threshold and stay open as long as the membrane is depolar-
ized. The high potassium permeability causes the membrane to 
hyperpolarize briefly. When the voltage-gated potassium chan-
nels close, the membrane potential relaxes back to the resting 
value, around ⫺65 mV. (e) The summed K⫹ current flowing 
through all the potassium channels. (f) The net transmembrane 
current during the action potential (the sum of parts c and e).

like a wave coming over the bow of a boat making way in heavy seas. Like 
the  continuous  action  of  the  boat’s  bilge  pump,  the  sodium-potassium 
pump works all the time to transport Na ⫹  back across the membrane. The 
pump maintains the ionic concentration gradients that drive Na ⫹  and K ⫹  
through their channels during the action potential. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   99
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   99

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

100

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

ACTION POTENTIAL CONDUCTION 
ACTION POOTENTIAL CONDUCCTION 

 To transfer information from one point to another in the nervous system, 
it  is  necessary  that  the  action  potential,  once  generated,  be  conducted 
down the axon. This process is like the burning of a fuse. Imagine you’re 
holding a ﬁ recracker with a burning match held under the end of the fuse. 
The fuse ignites when it gets hot enough (beyond some threshold). The 
tip of the burning fuse heats up the segment of fuse immediately ahead 
of it until it ignites. In this way, the ﬂ ame steadily works its way down 
the fuse. Note that the fuse lit at one end only burns in one direction; the 
ﬂ ame cannot turn back on itself because the combustible material just 
behind it is spent. 

 Propagation  of  the  action  potential  along  the  axon  is  similar  to 
the  propagation  of  the  ﬂ ame  along  the  fuse.  When  a  patch  of  axonal 
membrane is depolarized sufﬁ ciently to reach threshold, voltage-gated 
 sodium  channels  pop  open,  and  the  action  potential  is  initiated.  The 
inﬂ ux of positive charge spreads inside the axon to depolarize the adja-
cent segment of membrane, and when it reaches threshold, the sodium 
channels in this patch of membrane also pop open (Figure 4.13). In this 
way, the action potential works its way down the axon until it reaches 
the axon terminal, thereby initiating synaptic transmission (the subject 
of Chapter 5). 

 An action potential initiated at one end of an axon propagates only in 
one direction; it does not turn back on itself. This is because the mem-
brane  just  behind  it  is  refractory,  due  to  inactivation  of  the  sodium 
 channels. Normally, action potentials conduct only in one direction, from 
the soma to the axon terminal; this is called  orthodromic  conduction. But, 
just like the fuse, an action potential can be generated by depolarization 
at either end of the axon and can therefore propagate in either direction. 
Backward propagation, elicited experimentally, is called  antidromic  con-
duction.  Note  that  because  the  axonal  membrane  is  excitable  (capable 
of generating action potentials) along its entire length, the impulse will 

+

+

+

Time zero

+

+

+

1 msec later

2 msec later

3 msec later

+

+

+

+

+

+

▲FIGURE 4.13
Action potential conduction. The entry of positive charge during the action po-
tential causes the membrane just ahead to depolarize to threshold.

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   100
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   100

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

101

propagate without decrement. The fuse works the same way because it 
is combustible along its entire length. Unlike the fuse, however, the axon 
can regenerate its ﬁ ring ability. 

 Action potential conduction velocities vary, but 10 m/sec is a typical 
rate.  Remember,  from  start  to  ﬁ nish  the  action  potential  lasts  about 
2 msec. From this, we can calculate the length of membrane that is en-
gaged in the action potential at any instant in time: 

 10 m/sec  ⫻  2  ⫻  10 ⫺  3  sec  ⫽  2  ⫻  10 ⫺  2  m. 

 Therefore, an action potential traveling at 10 m/sec occurs over a 2 cm 

length of axon. 

 Factors Inﬂ uencing Conduction Velocity 
 Remember that the inward Na ⫹  current during the action potential depo-
larizes the membrane just ahead. When this patch of membrane reaches 
threshold, the voltage-gated sodium channels will open, and the action 
potential will “burn” on down the membrane. The speed with which the 
action potential propagates down the axon depends on how far the depo-
larization ahead of the action potential spreads, which in turn depends on 
certain physical characteristics of the axon. 

 Imagine that the inﬂ ux of positive charge into an axon during the ac-
tion potential is like turning on the water to a leaky garden hose. There 
are two paths the water can take: one, down the inside of the hose; the 
other,  through  the  perforated  wall  of  the  hose.  How  much  water  goes 
along each path depends on their relative resistance; most of the water 
will take the path of least resistance. If the hose is narrow and the leaks 
are numerous and large, most of the water will ﬂ ow out through the leaks. 
If the hose is wide and the leaks are few and tiny, most of the water will 
ﬂ ow down the inside of the hose. The same principles apply to positive 
current spreading down the axon ahead of the action potential. 

 There are two paths that positive charge can take: down the inside of 
the axon, or across the axonal membrane. If the axon is narrow and there 
are many open membrane pores, most of the current will ﬂ ow out across 
the  membrane.  If  the  axon  is  wide  and  there  are  few  open  membrane 
pores,  most  of  the  current  will  ﬂ ow  down  inside  the  axon.  The  farther 
the current goes down the axon, the farther ahead of the action potential 
the  membrane  will  be  depolarized,  and  the  faster  the  action  potential 
will propagate. As a rule, therefore, action potential conduction velocity 
increases with increasing axonal diameter. 

 As  a  consequence  of  this  relationship  between  axonal  diameter  and 
conduction  velocity,  neural  pathways  that  are  especially  important  for 
survival  have  evolved  unusually  large  axons.  An  example  is  the  giant 
axon of the squid, which is part of a pathway that mediates an escape 
reﬂ ex in response to strong sensory stimulation. The squid giant axon can 
be 1 mm in diameter, so large that originally it was thought to be part 
of the animal’s circulatory system. Neuroscience owes a debt to British 
zoologist J. Z. Young, who in 1939 called attention to the squid giant axon 
as an experimental preparation for studying the biophysics of the neuro-
nal membrane. Hodgkin and Huxley used this preparation to elucidate 
the ionic basis of the action potential, and the giant axon continues to be 
used today in a wide range of neurobiological studies. 

 It is interesting to note that axonal size and the number of  voltage-gated 
channels in the membrane also affect axonal excitability. Smaller axons 
require greater depolarization to reach action potential threshold and are 
more sensitive to being blocked by local anesthetics (Box 4.4). 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   101
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   101

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

102

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 4.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Local Anesthesia

Although you’ve tried to tough it out, you just can’t take it

anymore. You ﬁ nally give in to the pain of the toothache and 
head for the dentist. Fortunately, the worst part of having a 
cavity ﬁ lled is the pinprick in the gum caused by the injection 
needle. Then your mouth becomes numb and you daydream 
while the dentist drills and repairs your tooth. What was in-
jected, and how did it work?

Local  anesthetics  are  drugs  that  temporarily  block  action 
potentials in axons. They are called “local” because they are in-
jected directly into the tissue where anesthesia—the absence of 
sensation—is desired. Small axons, ﬁ ring a lot of action poten-
tials, are most sensitive to conduction block by local anesthetics.
The ﬁ rst local anesthetic introduced into medical  practice 
was  cocaine.  The  chemical  was  isolated  from  the  leaves 
of  the  coca  plant  in  1860  by  the  German  physician  Albert 
Niemann. According to the custom of the pharmacologists of 
his day, Niemann tasted the new compound and discovered 
that it caused his tongue to go numb. It was soon learned that 
cocaine also had toxic and addictive properties. (The mind-
altering effect of cocaine was studied by another  well-known 
physician of that era, Sigmund Freud. Cocaine alters mood 
by a mechanism distinct from its local anesthetic action, as 
we shall see in Chapter 15.)

The search for a suitable synthetic anesthetic as a substi-
tute for cocaine led to the development of lidocaine, which 
is  now  the  most  widely  used  local  anesthetic.  Lidocaine 
can be dissolved into a jelly and smeared onto the mucous 
 membranes of the mouth (and elsewhere) to numb the nerve 
endings (called  topical anesthesia); it can be injected directly 
into a tissue (inﬁ ltration  anesthesia) or a nerve (nerve block); 
it can even be infused into the cerebrospinal ﬂ uid bathing the 
spinal cord (spinal anesthesia), where it can numb large parts 
of the body.

Lidocaine  and  other  local  anesthetics  prevent  action 
 potentials by binding to the voltage-gated sodium channels. 
The binding site for lidocaine has been identiﬁ ed as the S6 
alpha helix of domain IV of the protein (Figure A). Lidocaine 
cannot gain access to this site from the outside. The anes-
thetic ﬁ rst must cross the axonal membrane and then pass 
through the open gate of the channel to ﬁ nd its binding site 
inside the pore. This explains why active nerves are blocked 
faster (the sodium channel gates are open more often). The 
bound lidocaine interferes with the ﬂ ow of Na⫹ that normally 
results from depolarizing the channel.

Smaller  axons  are  affected  by  local  anesthetics  before 
larger  axons  because  their  action  potentials  have  less  of  a 
safety  margin;  more  of  the  voltage-gated  sodium  channels 
must function to ensure that the action potential doesn’t ﬁ zzle 
out as it conducts down the axon. This increased  sensitivity of 
small axons to local anesthetics is fortuitous in clinical practice. 
As we will discover in Chapter 12, it is the smaller ﬁ bers that 
convey information about painful stimuli—like a toothache.

I

II

III

IV

N

Voltage-
gated
sodium
channel

C

S6 alpha helix 

Lidocaine 
binding
sites

C2H5

C2H5

N

CH2

CO

NH

H3C

CH3

Lidocaine

Figure A
 Lidocaine’s mechanism of action. (Source: Adapted from Hardman, 
et al., 1996, Fig. 15–3.)

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   102
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   102

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

103

 Myelin and Saltatory Conduction 
 The  good  thing  about  fat  axons  is  that  they  conduct  action  potentials 
faster; the bad thing about them is that they take up a lot of space. If all 
the axons in your brain were the diameter of a squid giant axon, your 
head  would  be  too  big  to  ﬁ t  through  a  barn  door.  Fortunately,  verte-
brates evolved another solution for increasing action potential conduction 
 velocity: wrapping the axon with insulation called myelin (see Chapter 2). 
The myelin sheath consists of many layers of membrane provided by glial 
support cells—Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system (outside 
the  brain  and  spinal  cord)  and  oligodendroglia  in  the  central  nervous 
system. Just as wrapping a leaky garden hose with duct tape facilitates 
water  ﬂ ow  down  the  inside  of  the  hose,  myelin  facilitates  current  ﬂ ow 
down the inside of the axon, thereby increasing action potential conduc-
tion velocity (Box 4.5). 

 The  myelin  sheath  does  not  extend  continuously  along  the  entire 
length of the axon. There are breaks in the insulation where ions cross 
the  membrane  to  generate  action  potentials.  Recall  from  Chapter  2 
that  these  breaks  in  the  myelin  sheath  are  the  nodes  of  Ranvier 
(Figure 4.14). Voltage-gated sodium channels are concentrated in the 
membrane of the nodes. The distance between nodes is usually 0.2 ⫺ 2.0 
mm, depending on the size of the axon (fatter axons have larger inter-
nodal distances). 

 Imagine that the action potential traveling along the axon membrane 
is like you traveling down a sidewalk. Action potential conduction with-
out myelin is like walking down the sidewalk in small steps, heel-to-toe, 
using every inch of the sidewalk to creep along. Conduction with  myelin, 

BOX 4.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Multiple Sclerosis, a Demyelinating Disease

The  critical  importance  of  myelin  for  the  normal  transfer 

of  information  in  the  human  nervous  system  is  revealed  by 
the  neurological  disorder  known  as  multiple  sclerosis  (MS). 
Victims of MS often complain of weakness, lack of coordina-
tion, and impaired vision and speech. The disease is capri-
cious, usually marked by remissions and relapses that occur 
over a period of many years. Although the precise cause of 
MS is still poorly understood, the cause of the sensory and 
motor disturbances is now quite clear. MS attacks the myelin 
sheaths  of  bundles  of  axons  in  the  brain,  spinal  cord,  and 
optic nerves. The word sclerosis is derived from the Greek 
word  for  “hardening,”  which  describes  the  lesions  that  de-
velop around bundles of axons, and the sclerosis is multiple 
because the disease attacks many sites in the nervous sys-
tem at the same time.

Lesions  in  the  brain  can  now  be  viewed  noninvasively 
using  new  methods  such  as  magnetic  resonance  imaging 
(MRI). However, neurologists have been able to diagnose MS 
for many years by taking advantage of the fact that  myelin 
serves  the  nervous  system  by  increasing  the  velocity  of 

 axonal conduction. One simple test involves stimulating the 
eye with a checkerboard pattern and measuring the elapsed 
time until an electrical response is noted at the scalp over the 
part  of  the  brain  that  is  a  target  of  the  optic  nerve.  People 
who have MS characteristically have a marked slowing of the 
conduction velocity of their optic nerve.

Another demyelinating disease called Guillain–Barré syn-
drome attacks the myelin of the  peripheral nerves that inner-
vate muscle and skin. This disease may follow minor infec-
tious illnesses and inoculations, and it appears to result from 
an  anomalous  immunological  response  against  one’s  own 
myelin. The symptoms stem directly from the slowing and/
or failure of action potential conduction in the axons that in-
nervate the muscles. This conduction deﬁ cit can be demon-
strated  clinically  by  stimulating  peripheral  nerves  electrically 
through the skin and measuring the time it takes to evoke a 
response (a twitch of a muscle, for instance). Both MS and 
Guillain–Barré  syndrome  are  characterized  by  a  profound 
slowing of the response time because saltatory conduction 
is disrupted.

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   103
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   103

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

104

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Axon

Node of
Ranvier

Myelin sheath

▲ FIGURE 4.14
The myelin sheath and node of Ranvier. 
The electrical insulation provided by myelin helps speed action potential conduction 
from node to node. Voltage-gated sodium channels are concentrated in the axonal 
membrane at the nodes of Ranvier.

in  contrast,  is  like  skipping  down  the  sidewalk.  In  myelinated  axons, 
 action potentials skip from node to node (Figure 4.15). This type of action 
potential  propagation  is  called   saltatory  conduction   (from  the  Latin 
meaning “to leap”). 

ACTION POTENTIALS, AXONS, AND DENDRITES 
ACTION POOTENTIALS, AXONSS, AND DENDRITES 

 Action potentials of the type discussed in this chapter are a feature 
mainly  of  axons.  As  a  rule,  the  membranes  of  dendrites  and  neuro-
nal  cell  bodies  do  not  generate  sodium-dependent  action  potentials 

Myelin
sheath

Node of
Ranvier

Axon

+

++

TIme zero

+

+

+

1 msec later

▲ FIGURE 4.15
Saltatory conduction. Myelin allows current to spread farther and faster between 
nodes, thus speeding action potential conduction. Compare this figure with 
 Figure 4.12.

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   104
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   104

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

105

Pyramidal cell

Membrane
with high density
of voltage-gated
sodium channels

Sensory
neuron

Spike-initiation
zone: axon hillock      

Spike-initiation
zone: sensory nerve ending

(b)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 4.16
The spike-initiation zone. Membrane  proteins specify the function of different 
parts of the neuron. Depicted here are (a) a  cortical pyramidal neuron and (b) a 
primary sensory neuron. Despite the diversity of neuronal structure, the axonal 
membrane can be identified at the molecular level by its high density of 
 voltage-gated sodium channels. This molecular distinction enables axons to 
generate and conduct action  potentials. The region of membrane where action 
potentials are normally generated is called the spike-initiation zone. The arrows 
indicate the normal direction of action  potential propagation in these two types 
of neuron.

 because  they  have  very  few  voltage-gated  sodium  channels.  Only 
membrane  that  contains  these  specialized  protein  molecules  is  ca-
pable of generating  action potentials, and this type of excitable mem-
brane is usually found only in axons. Therefore, the part of the neu-
ron where an axon originates from the soma, the axon hillock, is often 
also  called  the   spike-initiation  zone .  In  a   typical  neuron  in  the 
brain  or  spinal  cord,  the  depolarization  of  the  dendrites  and  soma 
caused by synaptic input from other neurons leads to the generation 
of action potentials if the membrane of the  axon hillock  is depolarized 
beyond threshold (Figure 4.16a). In most sensory neurons, however, 
the spike-initiation zone occurs near the  sensory nerve endings,  where 
the  depolarization  caused  by  sensory  stimulation  leads  to  the  gen-
eration of action  potentials that propagate along the sensory nerves 
(Figure 4.16b). 

 In Chapter 2, we learned that axons and dendrites differ in their 
morphology.  We  now  see  that  they  are  functionally  different,  and 
that  this  difference  in  function  is  specified  at  the  molecular  level 
by the type of protein in the neuronal membrane. Differences in the 
types  and  density  of  membrane  ion  channels  can  also  account  for 
the   characteristic  electrical  properties  of  different  types  of  neurons 
(Box 4.6). 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   105
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   105

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

106

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 4.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 The Eclectic Electric Behavior of Neurons 

 Neurons  are  not  all  alike;  they  vary  in  shape,  size,  gene

expression,  and  connections.  Neurons  also  differ  from  one 
another in their electrical properties. A few examples of the 
diverse behavior of neurons are shown in Figure A. 

 The cerebral cortex has two major types of neurons as de-
ﬁ ned by morphology: aspinous stellate cells and spiny  pyramidal 
cells. A stellate cell typically responds to a steady depolarizing 
current  injected  into  its  soma  by  ﬁ ring  action   potentials  at  a 
relatively  steady  frequency  throughout  the   stimulus  (part  a). 
However, most pyramidal cells cannot sustain a steady ﬁ ring 
rate. Instead, they ﬁ re rapidly at the beginning of the stimulus 
and then slow down, even if the stimulus remains strong (part 
b). This slowing over time is called  adaptation , a very common 
property  among  excitable  cells.  Another  ﬁ ring  pattern  is  the 
burst, a rapid cluster of action potentials followed by a brief 
pause. Some cells, including a particular subtype of large py-
ramidal neuron in the cortex, respond to a steady input with 
rhythmic, repetitive bursts (part c). Variability of ﬁ ring patterns 

is not unique in the cerebral cortex. Surveys of many areas of 
the brain suggest that neurons have as large an assortment of 
electrical behaviors as morphologies. 

 What accounts for the diverse behavior of different types 
of  neurons?  Ultimately,  each  neuron’s  physiology  is  deter-
mined by the properties and numbers of ion channels in its 
membrane. There are many more types of ion channels than 
the  few  described  in  this  chapter,  and  each  has  distinctive 
properties. For example, some potassium channels activate 
only  very  slowly.  A  neuron  with  a  high  density  of  these  will 
show adaptation because during a prolonged stimulus, more 
and more of the slow potassium channels will open, and the 
outward  currents  they  progressively  generate  will  tend  to 
hyperpolarize the membrane. When you realize that a single 
neuron may have more than a dozen types of ion channels, 
the source of diverse ﬁ ring behavior becomes clear. It is the 
complex interactions among multiple ion channels that create 
the eclectic electric signature of each class of neuron. 

Vm

(a)  

(c)  

Depolarizing injected current

25 msec  

(b)  

50 msec  

50 msec  

Figure A 
The diverse behavior of neurons. (Source: Adapted from Agmon and 
Connors, 1992.)

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   106
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   106

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER 4    THE ACTION POTENTIAL

107

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Let’s return brieﬂ y to the example in Chapter 3 of stepping on a thumbtack. 
The breaking of the skin caused by the tack stretches the sensory nerve 
endings of the foot. Special ion channels that are sensitive to the stretching 
of the membrane open and allow positively charged sodium ions to enter 
the ends of the axons in the skin. This inﬂ ux of positive charge  depolarizes 
the  membrane  to  threshold,  and  the  action  potential  is  generated.  The 
positive charge that enters during the rising phase of the action potential 
spreads along the axon and depolarizes the membrane ahead to threshold. 
In this way, the action potential is continuously regenerated as it sweeps 
like a wave along the sensory axon. We now come to the step where this 
information is distributed to and integrated by other neurons in the central 
nervous system. This transfer of information from one neuron to another is 
called  synaptic transmission , the subject of the next two chapters. 

 It should come as no surprise that synaptic transmission, like the action 
potential, depends on specialized proteins in the neuronal membrane. Thus, 
a picture begins to emerge of the brain as a complicated mesh of interacting 
neuronal membranes. Consider that a typical neuron with all its neurites 
has a membrane surface area of about 250,000  ␮ m 2 . The surface area of 
the 85 billion neurons that make up the human brain comes to 21,250 m 2 —
roughly the size of three soccer ﬁ elds. This expanse of membrane, with its 
myriad specialized protein molecules, constitutes the fabric of our minds. 

K E Y   T E R M S

  Properties of the Action Potential  
 rising phase (p. 82) 
 overshoot (p. 82) 
 falling phase (p. 82) 
 undershoot (p. 82) 
 after-hyperpolarization (p. 82) 
 threshold (p. 84) 
 absolute refractory period 

(p. 85) 

 relative refractory period (p. 86) 

 optogenetics (p. 86) 
 channelrhodopsin-2, ChR2 

(p. 87) 

 tetrodotoxin (TTX) (p. 96) 
 voltage-gated potassium 

channel (p. 98) 

  The Action Potential, in Reality  
 voltage clamp (p. 92) 
 voltage-gated sodium channel 

(p. 92) 

 patch clamp (p. 94) 
 channelopathy (p. 96) 

  Action Potential Conduction  
 saltatory conduction (p. 104) 

  Action Potentials, Axons, and 
Dendrites  
 spike-initiation zone (p. 105) 

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

 1.  Deﬁ ne membrane potential (V m ) and sodium equilibrium potential (E Na ). Which of these, if  either, 

changes during the course of an action potential? 

 2.  What ions carry the early inward and late outward currents during the action potential? 
 3.  Why is the action potential referred to as “all-or-none”? 
 4.  Some voltage-gated K ⫹  channels are known as delayed rectiﬁ ers because of the timing of their 
opening during an action potential. What would happen if these channels took much longer than 
normal to open? 

 5.  Imagine we have labeled tetrodotoxin (TTX) so that it can be seen using a microscope. If we wash 
this TTX onto a neuron, what parts of the cell would you expect to be labeled? What would be the 
consequence of applying TTX to this neuron? 

 6.  How does action potential conduction velocity vary with axonal diameter? Why? 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   107
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   107

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

108

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

 Boyden ES, Zhang F, Bamberg E, Nagel G, 

Deisseroth K. 2005. Millisecond-timescale, 
genetically targeted optical control of neural 
activity.  Nature Neuroscience  8:1263–1268. 

 Hille B. 1992 . Ionic Channels of Excitable 

Membranes,  2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Hodgkin A. 1976. Chance and design in electro-

physiology: an informal account of certain experi-
ments on nerves carried out between 1942 and 
1952.  Journal of Physiology  (London) 263:1–21. 
 Kullmann DM, Waxman SG. 2010. Neurological 

channelopathies: new insights into disease 

mechanisms and ion channel function.  Journal 
of Physiology  (London) 588:1823–1827. 

 Neher E. 1992. Nobel lecture: ion channels or 

communication between and within cells. 
Neuron  8:605–612. 

 Neher E, Sakmann B. 1992. The patch clamp 
technique.  Scientiﬁ c American  266:28–35. 
 Nicholls J, Martin AR, Fuchs PA, Brown DA, 

Diamond ME, Weisblat D. 2011.  From Neuron 
to Brain , 5th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   108
081–108_Bear_04_revised_final.indd   108

12/20/14   7:45 AM
12/20/14   7:45 AM

CHAPTER FIVE

Synaptic Transmission

 INTRODUCTION 

  BOX 5.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Otto Loewi’s Dream 

 TYPES OF SYNAPSES 

 Electrical Synapses 
 Chemical Synapses 

 CNS Chemical Synapses 
  BOX 5.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY: For the Love of Dendritic Spines, by Kristen M. 
Harris 
 The Neuromuscular Junction 

 PRINCIPLES OF CHEMICAL SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION 

 Neurotransmitters 
 Neurotransmitter Synthesis and Storage 
 Neurotransmitter Release 

  BOX 5.3   BRAIN FOOD: How to SNARE a Vesicle 

 Neurotransmitter Receptors and Effectors 

 Transmitter-Gated Ion Channels 
  BOX 5.4   BRAIN FOOD: Reversal Potentials 
 G-Protein-Coupled Receptors 
 Autoreceptors 

 Neurotransmitter Recovery and Degradation 
 Neuropharmacology 

  BOX 5.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Bacteria, Spiders, Snakes, and People 

 PRINCIPLES OF SYNAPTIC INTEGRATION 

 The Integration of EPSPS 

 Quantal Analysis of EPSPs 
 EPSP Summation 

 The Contribution of Dendritic Properties to Synaptic Integration 

 Dendritic Cable Properties 
 Excitable Dendrites 

 Inhibition 

  BOX 5.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Startling Mutations and Poisons 
 IPSPs and Shunting Inhibition 
 The Geometry of Excitatory and Inhibitory Synapses 

 Modulation 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   109
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   109

109

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

110

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 In  Chapters  3  and  4,  we  discussed  how  mechanical  energy,  such  as  a 
thumbtack entering your foot, can be converted into a neural signal. First, 
specialized ion channels of the sensory nerve endings allow positive charge 
to  enter  the  axon.  If  this  depolarization  reaches  threshold,  then  action 
 potentials are generated. Because the axonal membrane is excitable and 
has voltage-gated sodium channels, action potentials can propagate with-
out decrement up the long sensory nerves. For this information to be pro-
cessed by the rest of the nervous system, however, these neural signals 
must be passed on to other neurons—for example, the motor neurons that 
control muscle contraction, as well as neurons in the brain and spinal cord 
that lead to a coordinated reﬂ ex response. By the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury, it was recognized that this transfer of information from one neuron to 
another occurs at specialized sites of contact. In 1897, English physiologist 
Charles Sherrington gave these sites their name: synapses. The process of 
information transfer at a synapse is called  synaptic transmission . 

 The physical nature of synaptic transmission was debated for almost 
a century. One attractive hypothesis, which nicely explained the speed of 
synaptic transmission, was that it was simply electrical current ﬂ owing 
from one neuron to the next. The existence of such  electrical synapses
was ﬁ nally proven in the late 1950s by Edwin Furshpan and David Potter, 
American physiologists who were studying the nervous system of crayﬁ sh 
at University College London, and Akira Watanabe, who was studying the 
neurons of lobster at the Tokyo Medical and Dental University. We now 
know that electrical synapses are common in the brains of invertebrates 
and vertebrates, including mammals. 

 An  alternative  hypothesis  about  the  nature  of  synaptic  transmission, 
also dating back to the 1800s, was that chemical neurotransmitters trans-
fer information from one neuron to another at the synapse. Solid support 
for the concept of  chemical synapses  was provided in 1921 by Otto Loewi, 
then the head of the Pharmacology Department at the University of Graz in 
Austria. Loewi showed that electrical stimulation of axons innervating the 
frog’s heart caused the release of a chemical that could mimic the effects of 
neuron stimulation on the heartbeat (Box 5.1). Later, Bernard Katz and his 
colleagues  at  University  College  London  conclusively  demonstrated  that 
fast transmission at the synapse between a motor neuron axon and skeletal 
muscle was chemically mediated. By 1951, John Eccles of the Australian 
National University was studying the physiology of synaptic transmission 
within  the  mammalian  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  using  a  new  tool, 
the glass microelectrode. These experiments indicated that many CNS syn-
apses also use a chemical transmitter; in fact, chemical synapses comprise 
the majority of synapses in the brain. During the last decade, new methods 
of studying the molecules involved in synaptic transmission have revealed 
that synapses are far more complex than most neuroscientists anticipated. 
 Synaptic transmission is a large and fascinating topic. The actions of psy-
choactive drugs, the causes of mental disorders, the neural bases of learning 
and memory—indeed, all the operations of the nervous system—cannot be 
understood without knowledge of synaptic transmission. Therefore, we’ve 
devoted several chapters to this topic, mainly focusing on chemical synapses. 
In  this  chapter,  we  begin  by  exploring  the  basic  mechanisms  of  synaptic 
transmission. What do different types of synapse look like? How are neu-
rotransmitters synthesized and stored, and how are they released in response 
to an action potential in the axon terminal? How do neurotransmitters act 
on the postsynaptic membrane? How do single neurons integrate the inputs 
provided by the thousands of synapses that impinge upon them? 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   110
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   110

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

111

BOX 5.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Otto Loewi’s Dream

One  of  the  more  colorful  stories  in  the  history  of  neuro-

science comes from Otto Loewi, who, working in Austria in 
the  1920s,  showed  deﬁ nitively  that  synaptic  transmission 
 between  nerves  and  the  heart  is  chemically  mediated.  The 
heart  has  two  types  of  innervation;  one  type  speeds  the 
 beating of the heart, and the other slows it. The latter type 
of innervation is supplied by the vagus nerve. Loewi isolated 
a frog heart with the vagal innervation still intact, stimulated 
the nerve electrically, and observed the expected effect: the 
slowing of the heartbeat. The critical demonstration that this 
effect was chemically mediated came when he applied the 
solution that had bathed this heart to a second isolated frog 
heart and found that the beating of this one also slowed.

The idea for this experiment had actually come to Loewi in 

a dream. Below is his own account:

In  the  night  of  Easter  Sunday,  1921,  I  awoke,  turned 
on the light, and jotted down a few notes on a tiny slip of 
paper.  Then,  I  fell  asleep  again.  It  occurred  to  me  at  six 
o’clock in the morning that during the night I had written 
down something most important, but I was unable to deci-
pher the scrawl. That Sunday was the most desperate day 
in my whole scientiﬁ c life. During the next night, however, 

I awoke again, at three o’clock, and I remembered what 
it  was.  This  time  I  did  not  take  any  risk;  I  got  up  imme-
diately,  went  to  the  laboratory,  made  the  experiment  on 
the frog’s heart, described above, and at ﬁ ve o’clock the 
chemical transmission of the nervous impulse was conclu-
sively  proved.  .  .  Careful  consideration  in  daytime  would 
undoubtedly  have  rejected  the  kind  of  experiment  I  per-
formed, because it would have seemed most unlikely that 
if a nervous impulse released a transmitting agent, it would 
do so not just in sufﬁ cient quantity to inﬂ uence the effec-
tor organ, in my case the heart, but indeed in such an ex-
cess that it could partly escape into the ﬂ uid which ﬁ lled 
the heart, and could therefore be detected. Yet the whole 
nocturnal  concept  of  the  experiment  was  based  on  this 
eventuality, and the result proved to be positive, contrary 
to expectation. (Loewi, 1953, pp. 33–34.)
The  active  compound,  which  Loewi  called  vagusstoff 
 (literally  “vagus  substance”  in  German),  turned  out  to  be 
 acetylcholine.  As  we  see  in  this  chapter,  acetylcholine  is 
also a transmitter at the synapse between nerve and skeletal 
muscle. Unlike at the heart, acetylcholine applied to skeletal 
muscle causes excitation and contraction.

TYPEES OF SYNAPSES 
 TYPES OF SYNAPSES 

 We  introduced  the  synapse  in  Chapter  2.  A  synapse  is  the  specialized 
junction where one part of a neuron contacts and communicates with an-
other neuron or cell type (such as a muscle or glandular cell). Information 
generally  ﬂ ows  in  one  direction,  from  a  neuron  to  its  target  cell.  The 
ﬁ rst  neuron  is  said  to  be   presynaptic ,  and  the  target  cell  is  said  to  be 
  postsynaptic . Let’s take a closer look at the different types of synapse. 

 Electrical Synapses 
 Electrical synapses are relatively simple in structure and function, and 
they allow the direct transfer of ionic current from one cell to the next. 
Electrical  synapses  occur  at  specialized  sites  called   gap  junctions . 
Gap junctions occur between cells in nearly every part of the body and 
 interconnect  many  non-neural  cells,  including  epithelial  cells,  smooth 
and cardiac muscle cells, liver cells, some glandular cells, and glia. 

 When gap junctions interconnect neurons, they can function as electri-
cal synapses. At a gap junction, the membranes of two cells are separated 
by only about 3 nm, and this narrow gap is spanned by clusters of special 
proteins called  connexins . There are about 20 different subtypes of con-
nexins, about half of which occur in the brain. Six connexin subunits com-
bine to form a channel called a  connexon , and two connexons (one from 
each cell) meet and combine to form a  gap junction channel  (Figure 5.1). 
The channel allows ions to pass directly from the cytoplasm of one cell 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   111
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   111

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

112

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Cell 1

Gap junction

▼ FIGURE 5.1
A gap junction. (a) Neurites of two cells connected by a gap junction. (b) The 
enlargement shows gap junction channels, which bridge the cytoplasm of the 
two cells. Ions and small molecules can pass in both directions through these 
channels. (c) Six connexin subunits comprise one connexon, two connexons 
comprise one gap junction channel, and many gap junction channels comprise 
one gap junction.

Cell 2

(a)  

Cell 1
cytoplasm

Gap junction channels

3.5 nm

Cell 2
cytoplasm 

(b)  

20 nm

Connexin

(c)  

Ions and 
small molecules

Channel formed by pores
in each membrane

Gap
junction

Connexon

to the cytoplasm of the other. The pore of most gap junction channels is 
relatively large. Its diameter is about 1–2 nm, big enough for all the major 
cellular ions and many small organic molecules to pass through. 

 Most  gap  junctions  allow  ionic  current  to  pass  equally  well  in  both 
directions; therefore, unlike the vast majority of chemical synapses, elec-
trical synapses are bidirectional. Because electrical current (in the form 
of ions) can pass through these channels, cells connected by gap junctions 
are  said  to  be   electrically  coupled .  Transmission  at  electrical  synapses 
is very fast and, if the synapse is large, nearly fail-safe. Thus, an action 
potential in the presynaptic neuron can produce, with very little delay, an 
action potential in the postsynaptic neuron. In invertebrate species, such 
as the crayﬁ sh, electrical synapses are sometimes found between sensory 
and motor neurons in neural pathways mediating escape reﬂ exes. This 
mechanism enables an animal to beat a hasty retreat when faced with a 
dangerous situation. 

 Studies  in  recent  years  have  revealed  that  electrical  synapses  are 
 common in every part of the mammalian CNS (Figure 5.2a). When two 
neurons are electrically coupled, an action potential in the presynaptic 
neuron causes a small amount of ionic current to ﬂ ow across the gap junc-
tion channels into the other neuron. This current causes an electrically 
mediated  postsynaptic potential (PSP)  in the second neuron (Figure 
5.2b). Note that, because most electrical synapses are bidirectional, when 
that second neuron generates an action potential, it will in turn induce 
a PSP in the ﬁ rst neuron. The PSP generated by a single electrical syn-
apse  in  the  mammalian  brain  is  usually  small—about  1  mV  or  less  at 
its  peak—and  may  not,  by  itself,  be  large  enough  to  trigger  an  action 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   112
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   112

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

113

Cell 1

Record Vm
of cell 1

1
 
l
l

e
c
 
f
o
 
m
V

0

– 65

Action
potential

Record Vm
of cell 2

0

1

2

3

Time (msec)

2
 
l
l

e
c
 
f
o
 
m
V

– 63

– 64

– 65

Electrical PSP

0

1

2

3

Time (msec)

Cell 2

Dendrite

Gap
junction

Dendrite

(b)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 5.2
Electrical synapses. (a) A gap junction interconnecting the dendrites of two neu-
rons constitutes an electrical synapse. (b) An action potential generated in one 
neuron causes a small amount of ionic current to flow through gap junction chan-
nels into a second neuron, inducing an electrical PSP. (Source: Part a from Sloper 
and Powell, 1978.)

potential in the postsynaptic cell. One neuron usually makes electrical 
synapses with many other neurons, however, so several PSPs occurring 
simultaneously may strongly excite a neuron. This is an example of syn-
aptic integration, which is discussed later in the chapter. 

 The precise roles of electrical synapses vary from one brain region to 
another.  They  are  often  found  where  normal  function  requires  that  the 
activity of neighboring neurons be highly synchronized. For example, neu-
rons in a brain stem nucleus called the  inferior olive can generate both 
small oscillations of membrane voltage and, more occasionally, action po-
tentials. These cells send axons to the cerebellum and are important in 
motor control. They also make gap junctions with one another. Current 
that  ﬂ ows  through  gap  junctions  during  membrane  oscillations  and  ac-
tion potentials serves to coordinate and synchronize the activity of inferior 
olivary  neurons  (Figure  5.3a),  and  this  in  turn  may  help  to  control  the 
ﬁ ne timing of motor control. Michael Long and Barry Connors, working 
at Brown University, found that genetic deletion of a critical gap junction 
protein called connexin36 (Cx36) did not alter the neurons’ ability to gen-
erate oscillations and action potentials but did abolish the synchrony of 
these events because of the loss of functional gap junctions (Figure 5.3b). 
 Gap junctions between neurons and other cells are particularly com-
mon early in development. Evidence suggests that during prenatal and 
postnatal  brain  development,  gap  junctions  allow  neighboring  cells  to 
share both electrical and chemical signals that may help coordinate their 
growth and maturation. 

 Chemical Synapses 
 Most  synaptic  transmission  in  the  mature  human  nervous  system  is 
chemical, so the remainder of this chapter and the next will now focus 
exclusively on chemical synapses. Before we discuss the different types of 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   113
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   113

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

114

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

With gap junctions:

Action potential

Oscillations

Without gap junctions:

(a)  

– 0

– 65

– 0

– 65

(b)  

– 0

1

 
l
l

e
c
 
f

 

o
m
V

2

 
l
l

e
c
 
f

 

o
m
V

3

 
l
l

e
c
 
f

 

o
m
V

– 65

4

 
l
l

e
c
 
f

 

o
m
V

– 0

– 65

0

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

Record Vm
of cell 1

Gap junction

Record Vm
of cell 2

Record Vm
of cell 3

No gap junction

Record Vm
of cell 4

Time (sec)
▲ FIGURE 5.3
Electrical synapses can help neurons to synchronize their activity. Certain brain 
stem neurons generate small, regular oscillations of Vm and occasional action 
potentials. (a) When two neurons are connected by gap junctions (cells 1 and 
2), their oscillations and action potentials are well synchronized. (b) Similar 
neurons with no gap junctions (cells 3 and 4) generate oscillations and action 
potentials that are entirely uncoordinated. (Source: Adapted from Long et al., 
2002, p. 10903.) 

chemical synapses, let’s take a look at some of their universal character-
istics (Figure 5.4). 

 The  presynaptic  and  postsynaptic  membranes  at  chemical  synapses 
are  separated  by  a   synaptic  cleft   that  is  20–50  nm  wide,  10  times  the 
width of the separation at gap junctions. The cleft is ﬁ lled with a matrix 
of  ﬁ brous  extracellular  protein.  One  function  of  this  matrix  is  to  serve 
as  a  “glue”  that  binds  the  pre-  and  postsynaptic  membranes  together. 
The presynaptic side of the synapse, also called the  presynaptic element , 
is  usually  an  axon  terminal.  The  terminal  typically  contains  dozens  of 
small membrane-enclosed spheres, each about 50 nm in diameter, called 
 synaptic vesicles  (Figure 5.5a). These vesicles store neurotransmitter, the 
chemical used to communicate with the postsynaptic neuron. Many axon 
terminals also contain larger vesicles, each about 100 nm in diameter, 
called  secretory granules . Secretory granules contain soluble protein 
that  appears  dark  in  the  electron  microscope,  so  they  are  sometimes 
called large,  dense-core vesicles  (Figure 5.5b). 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   114
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   114

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

115

Axon terminal
(presynaptic
element)

Secretory
granules

Mitochondria

Synaptic
cleft

Synaptic
vesicles

Active zone

Postsynaptic
density

Membrane
differentiations

Receptors

           Postsynaptic den d r i

t e  

▲ FIGURE 5.4
The components of a chemical synapse.

 Dense  accumulations  of  protein  adjacent  to  and  within  the  mem-
branes on either side of the synaptic cleft are collectively called  mem-
brane differentiations . On the  presynaptic  side, proteins jutting into 
the cytoplasm of the terminal along the intracellular face of the mem-
brane sometimes look like a ﬁ eld of tiny pyramids. The pyramids, and 
the membrane associated with them, are the actual sites of neurotrans-
mitter release, called  active zones . Synaptic vesicles are clustered in 
the cytoplasm adjacent to the active zones (see Figure 5.4). 

 The  protein  thickly  accumulated  in  and  just  under  the   postsynaptic  
membrane is called the  postsynaptic density . The postsynaptic density 
contains the neurotransmitter receptors, which convert the  intercellular  
chemical signal (i.e., neurotransmitter) into an  intracellular  signal (i.e., a 
change in membrane potential or a chemical change) in the postsynaptic 
cell. As we shall see, the nature of this postsynaptic response can be quite 
varied, depending on the type of protein receptor that is activated by the 
neurotransmitter. 

 CNS  Chemical  Synapses.  In  the  CNS,  different  types  of  synapse  may 
be distinguished by which part of the neuron is postsynaptic to the axon 
terminal. If the postsynaptic membrane is on a dendrite, the synapse is 
said to be  axodendritic . If the postsynaptic membrane is on the cell body, 
the  synapse  is  said  to  be   axosomatic .  In  some  cases,  the  postsynaptic 
membrane is on another axon, and these synapses are called  axoaxonic  
(Figure 5.6). When a presynaptic axon contacts a postsynaptic dendritic 
spine,  it  is  called   axospinous   (Figure  5.7a).  In  certain  specialized  neu-
rons,  dendrites  actually form synapses with one another; these are called 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   115
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   115

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

116

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Presynaptic
terminal

Postsynaptic
cell

(a)

Synaptic
vesicles

Mitochondria

Active zone

Dense-core
vesicles

(b)

▲ FIGURE 5.5
Chemical synapses, as seen with the electron microscope. (a) A fast excitatory 
synapse in the CNS. (b) A synapse in the PNS, with numerous dense-core vesicles. 
(Source: Part a adapted from Heuser and Reese, 1977, p. 262; part b adapted from 
Heuser and Reese, 1977, p. 278.)

Synapse

Soma

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

Dendrite

Axon

▲ FIGURE 5.6
Synaptic arrangements in the CNS. (a) An axodendritic synapse. (b) An axoso-
matic synapse. (c) An axoaxonic synapse.

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   116
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   116

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

117

(a)  

Axons

(b)  

Presynaptic
terminals

Postsynaptic
dendritic spine

Axon

(c)  

Axon

(d)  

Postsynaptic
elements

Presynaptic
terminals

(a)  

Active zones

Axon

▲ FIGURE 5.7
Various shapes and sizes of CNS synapses. (a) Axospinous synapse: A small 
presynaptic axon terminal contacts a postsynaptic dendritic spine. Notice that 
presynaptic terminals can be recognized by their many vesicles, and postsynaptic 
elements have postsynaptic densities. (b) An axon branches to form two presyn-
aptic terminals, one larger than the other, and both contact a postsynaptic soma. 
(c) An unusually large axon terminal contacts and surrounds a postsynaptic soma. 
(d) An unusually large presynaptic axon terminal contacts five postsynaptic 
 dendritic spines. Notice that larger synapses have more active zones.

 dendrodendritic   synapses.  The  sizes  and  shapes  of  CNS  synapses  also 
vary widely (Figure 5.7a-d). The ﬁ nest details of synaptic structure can be 
studied only under the powerful magniﬁ cation of the electron microscope 
(Box 5.2). 

 CNS  synapses  may  be  further  classiﬁ ed  into  two  general  categories 
based on the appearance of their presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane 
differentiations. Synapses in which the membrane differentiation on the 
postsynaptic side is thicker than that on the presynaptic side are called 
 asymmetrical synapses , or  Gray’s type I synapses ; those in which the mem-
brane  differentiations  are  of  similar  thickness  are  called   symmetrical 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   117
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   117

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

118

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 5.2

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

For the Love of Dendritic Spines
by Kristen M. Harris

The ﬁ rst time I looked through the microscope and saw a

dendritic  spine,  it  was  love  at  ﬁ rst  sight,  and  the  affair  has 
simply never ended. I was a graduate student in the new neu-
robiology and behavior program at the University of Illinois, 
and it was indeed an exciting time in neuroscience. The 1979 
Society for Neuroscience meeting had only about 5,000 at-
tendees (attendance is now about 25,000), and the member 
number  I  obtained  during  my  ﬁ rst  year  of  graduate  school 
was and remains 2500.

I had hoped to discover what a “learned” dendritic spine 
looks like by training animals and then using the Golgi stain-
ing method to quantify changes in spine number and shape. 
Eagerly, I developed a high-throughput project, preparing the 
brains from many rats at once, sectioning through the whole 
brains, checking that the silver staining had worked, and then 
storing the tissue sections in butanol while engaging under-
graduates to help mount them on microscope slides. To our 
dismay, we found several months later that all the silver had 
been dissolved out of the cells. There were no cells to see, 
and the project died an untimely death.

I was fortunate, however, to meet Professor Timothy Teyler 
at  a  Gordon  Research  Conference.  He  had  recently  brought 
the  hippocampal  slice  preparation  to  the  United  States  from 
Norway and was moving his lab from Harvard to a new medi-
cal school in Rootstown, Ohio. I was completely enamored by 
the experimental control that brain slices might offer, so I de-
veloped  a  Golgi-slice  procedure  and  moved  to  complete  my 
PhD with Teyler. This time, I prepared one slice at a time, and 
as can be seen in Figure A, the spines were exquisitely visible. 
Unfortunately, accurate counts and shape measurements of the 
tiny spines were just beyond the resolution of light microscopy.
While I was a graduate student, I talked my way into the 
esteemed  summer  course  in  neurobiology  at  the  Marine 
Biological  Laboratories  in  Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts. 
There I ﬁ rst learned serial-section three-dimensional electron 

Axonal 
Bouton

Dendritic 

Spine 

Axons 

Dendrites 

Neuron  
Cell Body 

Dendrites 

Rapid Golgi preparation (Harris, 1980) 
Figure A

Adult Rat 

Glia 

Dendrite 

Spine 

Apparatus us 

PSD 

Spine 

Mitochondrion 

Figure B

vesicles 

Axon 

Glia 

1 micron 

microscopy  (3DEM).  I  was  truly  hooked.  With  3DEM,  one 
could  reconstruct  dendrites,  axons,  and  glia,  and  not  only 
measure and count dendritic spines but also see where syn-
apses  formed,  what  was  inside  them,  and  how  glia  asso-
ciated  with  synapses  (Figure  B).  The  3DEM  platform  offers 
enormous possibilities for discovery. My life continues to be 
devoted to uncovering the processes of synapse formation 
and plasticity during learning and memory in the brain.

Early in my career, while the revolution of molecular biology 
was sweeping the ﬁ eld, only a rare student or fellow scien-
tist  shared  my  enthusiasm  for  3DEM.  That  bias  has  shifted 
dramatically as neuroscientists have come to recognize the 
importance of understanding how molecules work in consort 
with intracellular organelles in small spaces like dendrites and 
spines. Furthermore, all maps of neural circuitry must include 
synapses. These endeavors have drawn scientists from nearly 
every ﬁ eld, making 3DEM even more exciting as many of the 
imaging and reconstruction processes previously done man-
ually are being automated. Figure C shows a recent 3DEM 
rendering, with color-coding of organelles and synaptic com-
ponents. It is indeed thrilling to be part of this growth. New 
ﬁ ndings abound regarding the plasticity of synapse structure 
during  normal  changes  in  brain  function  and  as  altered  by 
diseases that tragically affect who we are as human beings.

3D-EM of Dendrite with Synapses (red) and Organelles 

Figure C

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   118
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   118

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

 synapses ,  or   Gray’s  type  II  synapses   (Figure  5.8).  As  we  shall  see  later 
in the chapter, these structural differences reveal functional differences. 
Gray’s type I synapses are usually excitatory, while Gray’s type II syn-
apses are usually inhibitory. 

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

119

Asymmetrical
membrane 
differentiations

Symmetrical
membrane 
differentiations

(b)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 5.8
Two categories of CNS synaptic 
 membrane differentiations. (a) A Gray’s 
type I synapse is asymmetrical and 
usually excitatory. (b) A Gray’s type II 
synapse is symmetrical and usually 
 inhibitory.

 The Neuromuscular Junction. Synaptic junctions also exist outside the 
CNS. For example, axons of the autonomic nervous system innervate 
glands,  smooth  muscle,  and  the  heart.  Chemical  synapses  also  occur 
between  the  axons  of  motor  neurons  of  the  spinal  cord  and  skeletal 
muscle. Such a synapse is called a  neuromuscular junction , and it 
has many of the structural features of chemical synapses in the CNS 
(Figure 5.9). 

 Neuromuscular synaptic transmission is fast and reliable. An action 
potential in the motor axon always causes an action potential in the mus-
cle cell it innervates. This reliability is accounted for, in part, by struc-
tural specializations of the neuromuscular junction. Its most important 
specialization  is  its  size—it  is  one  of  the  largest  synapses  in  the  body. 
The presynaptic terminal also contains a large number of active zones. 
In   addition,  the  postsynaptic  membrane,  also  called  the   motor  end-
plate ,  contains  a  series  of  shallow  folds.  The  presynaptic  active  zones 
are  precisely  aligned  with  these  junctional  folds,  and  the  postsynaptic 
 membrane of the folds is packed with neurotransmitter receptors. This 
structure  ensures  that  many  neurotransmitter  molecules  are  focally 
 released onto a large surface of chemically sensitive membrane. 

 Because neuromuscular junctions are more accessible to researchers 
than  CNS  synapses,  much  of  what  we  know  about  the  mechanisms  of 
synaptic  transmission  was  ﬁ rst  established  here.  Neuromuscular  junc-
tions  are  also  of  considerable  clinical  signiﬁ cance;  diseases,  drugs,  and 
poisons that interfere with this chemical synapse have direct effects on 
vital bodily functions. 

 PRINCIPLES OF CHEMICAL SYNAPTIC 
PRINNCIPLEES OF CHEMICAL SSYNAPTIC 
TRANNSMISSSION 
TRANSMISSION 

 Consider the basic requirements of chemical synaptic transmission. There 
must be a mechanism for synthesizing neurotransmitter and packing it 
into the synaptic vesicles, a mechanism for causing vesicles to spill their 
contents into the synaptic cleft in response to a presynaptic action poten-
tial, a mechanism for producing an electrical or biochemical response to 
neurotransmitter in the postsynaptic neuron, and a mechanism for remov-
ing neurotransmitter from the synaptic cleft. And, to be useful for sensa-
tion, perception, and the control of movement, all these things must often 
occur very rapidly, within milliseconds. No wonder physiologists were ini-
tially skeptical about the existence of chemical synapses in the brain! 

 Fortunately,  thanks  to  several  decades  of  research  on  the  topic,  we 
now understand how many of these aspects of synaptic transmission are 
so efﬁ ciently carried out. Here we’ll present a general survey of the basic 
 principles. In Chapter 6, we will take a more detailed look at the indi-
vidual neurotransmitters and their modes of postsynaptic action. 

 Neurotransmitters 
 Since the discovery of chemical synaptic transmission, researchers have 
been identifying neurotransmitters in the brain. Our current understand-
ing  is  that  the  major  neurotransmitters  fall  into  one  of  three  chemical 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   119
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   119

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

120

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 5.9
The neuromuscular junction. The postsynaptic membrane, known as the motor 
end-plate, contains junctional folds with numerous neurotransmitter receptors.

Muscle fibers

Motor neuron

Myelin

Neuromuscular
junction

Axon

Presynaptic
terminals

Motor end-plate
(postsynaptic)
region

Synaptic
vesicles

Active zone

Synaptic
cleft

Receptors

Junctional fold

Postsynaptic
muscle fiber

categories: (1)  amino acids , (2)  amines , and (3)  peptides  (Table 5.1). Some 
 representatives of these categories are shown in Figure 5.10. The amino acid 
and amine neurotransmitters are all small organic molecules containing at 
least one nitrogen atom, and they are stored in and released from synaptic 
vesicles. Peptide neurotransmitters are large molecules—chains of amino 
acids—stored in and released from secretory granules. As discussed ear-
lier, secretory granules and synaptic vesicles are frequently observed in 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   120
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   120

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

121

TABLE 5.1  The Major Neurotransmitters
Amino Acids

Amines

Peptides

Gamma-aminobutyric 

acid (GABA)
Glutamate (Glu)
Glycine (Gly)

Acetylcholine (ACh)
Dopamine (DA)
Epinephrine
Histamine
Norepinephrine (NE)
Serotonin (5-HT)

Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Dynorphin
Enkephalins (Enk)
N-acetylaspartylglutamate 

(NAAG)

Neuropeptide Y
Somatostatin
Substance P
Thyrotropin-releasing 

hormone

Vasoactive intestinal 

polypeptide (VIP)

COOH

CH2

CH2

COOH

CH2

CH2

NH2

CH COOH

NH2

CH

NH2

CH
2

COOH

(a)  

Glu

GABA

Gly

O

C

CH3

O

CH2

CH2

HO

CH3

HO

CH3
N+

CH3

OH

CH

CH2 NH2

(b)  

ACh

NE

Arg Pro Lys Pro Gln Gln

Phe Phe Gly

Leu Met

Carbon

Oxygen

Nitrogen

Hydrogen

Sulfur

Substance P

(c)  
▲ FIGURE 5.10
Representative neurotransmitters. (a) The amino acid neurotransmitters gluta-
mate, GABA, and glycine. (b) The amine neurotransmitters acetylcholine and nor-
epinephrine. (c) The peptide neurotransmitter substance P. (For the abbreviations 
and chemical structures of amino acids in substance P, see Figure 3.4b.)

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   121
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   121

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

122

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

the same axon terminals. Consistent with this observation, peptides often 
exist in the same axon terminals that contain amine or amino acid neu-
rotransmitters. As we’ll discuss in a moment, these different neurotrans-
mitters are released under different conditions. 

 Different  neurons  in  the  brain  release  different  neurotransmitters. 
The speed of synaptic transmission varies widely. Fast forms of synaptic 
transmission last from about 10–100 msec, and at most CNS synapses are 
mediated by the amino acids  glutamate   (Glu) ,  gamma-aminobutyric 
acid   (GABA) , or  glycine   (Gly) . The amine  acetylcholine   (ACh)  medi-
ates  fast  synaptic  transmission  at  all  neuromuscular  junctions.  Slower 
forms of synaptic transmission may last from hundreds of milliseconds to 
minutes; they can occur in the CNS and in the periphery and are medi-
ated by transmitters from all three chemical categories. 

 Neurotransmitter Synthesis and Storage 
 Chemical synaptic transmission requires that neurotransmitters be synthe-
sized and ready for release. Different neurotransmitters are synthesized in 
different ways. For example, glutamate and glycine are among the 20 amino 
acids that are the building blocks of protein (see Figure 3.4b); consequently, 
they are abundant in all cells of the body, including neurons. In contrast, 
GABA and the amines are made primarily by the neurons that release them. 
These neurons contain speciﬁ c enzymes that synthesize the neurotransmit-
ters from various metabolic precursors. The synthesizing enzymes for both 
amino acid and amine neurotransmitters are transported to the axon termi-
nal, where they locally and rapidly direct transmitter synthesis. 

 Once synthesized in the cytosol of the axon terminal, the amino acid 
and amine neurotransmitters must be taken up by the synaptic vesicles. 
Concentrating  these  neurotransmitters  inside  the  vesicle  is  the  job  of 
 transporters , special proteins embedded in the vesicle membrane. 

 Quite different mechanisms are used to synthesize and store peptides in 
secretory granules. As we learned in Chapters 2 and 3, peptides are formed 
when amino acids are strung together by the ribosomes of the cell body. In the 
case of peptide neurotransmitters, this occurs in the rough ER. Generally, 
a long peptide synthesized in the rough ER is split in the Golgi apparatus, 
and one of the smaller peptide fragments is the active neurotransmitter. 
Secretory granules containing the peptide neurotransmitter bud off from 
the  Golgi  apparatus  and  are  carried  to  the  axon  terminal  by  axoplasmic 
transport.  Figure  5.11  compares  the  synthesis  and  storage  of  amine  and 
amino acid neurotransmitters with that of peptide neurotransmitters. 

 Neurotransmitter Release 
 Neurotransmitter release is triggered by the arrival of an action poten-
tial in the axon terminal. The depolarization of the terminal membrane 
causes   voltage-gated  calcium  channels   in  the  active  zones  to  open. 
These membrane channels are very similar to the sodium channels we 
discussed in Chapter 4, except they are permeable to Ca 2  ⫹  instead of Na ⫹ . 
There is a large inward driving force on Ca 2  ⫹ . Remember that the internal 
calcium ion concentration—[Ca 2  ⫹ ] i —at rest is very low, only 0.0002 mM; 
therefore, Ca 2  ⫹  will ﬂ ood the cytoplasm of the axon terminal as long as the 
calcium channels are open. The resulting elevation in [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  is the signal 
that causes neurotransmitter to be released from synaptic vesicles. 

 The vesicles release their contents by a process called  exocytosis . The 
membrane of the synaptic vesicle fuses to the presynaptic membrane at 
the active zone, allowing the contents of the vesicle to spill out into the 
synaptic cleft (Figure 5.12). Studies of a giant synapse in the squid nervous 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   122
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   122

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

123

Precursor
peptide

Active peptide
neurotransmitter

Synaptic
vesicles

Precursor
molecule
1

Synthesizing enzyme

Neurotransmitter

molecule

2

Transporter protein

Synaptic
vesicle

(b)  

Nucleus 

1

2

3

3

Ribosome

Golgi 
apparatus

Rough ER

4

Secretory
granules

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 5.11
The synthesis and storage of different types of neurotransmitter. (a) Peptides: 
➀ A precursor peptide is synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. ➁ The 
precursor peptide is split in the Golgi apparatus to yield the active neurotransmitter. 
➂ Secretory vesicles containing the peptide bud off from the Golgi apparatus. 
➃ The secretory granules are transported down the axon to the terminal where the 
peptide is stored. (b) Amine and amino acid neurotransmitters: ➀ Enzymes convert 
precursor molecules into neurotransmitter molecules in the cytosol. ➁ Transporter 
proteins load the neurotransmitter into synaptic vesicles in the terminal where they 
are stored.

Presynaptic

Synaptic
vesicle

1

4

3

2

Active
zone

Synaptic
cleft

Voltage-gated
calcium channel

Neurotransmitter
molecules

Postsynaptic

▲ FIGURE 5.12
The release of neurotransmitter by exocytosis. ➀ A synaptic vesicle loaded with 
neurotransmitter, in response to ➁ an influx of Ca2⫹ through voltage-gated calcium 
channels, ➂ releases its contents into the synaptic cleft by the fusion of the vesicle 
membrane with the presynaptic membrane, and ➃ is eventually recycled by the 
 process of endocytosis.

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   123
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   123

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

124

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

system showed that exocytosis can occur very rapidly, within 0.2 msec of 
the Ca 2  ⫹  inﬂ ux into the terminal. Synapses in mammals, which gener-
ally occur at higher temperatures, are even faster. Exocytosis is quick be-
cause Ca 2  ⫹  enters at the active zone precisely where synaptic vesicles are 
ready and waiting to release their contents. In this local  “microdomain” 
around  the  active  zone,  calcium  can  achieve  relatively  high  concentra-
tions (greater than about 0.01 mM). 

 The mechanism by which [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  stimulates exocytosis has been under 
intensive  investigation.  The  speed  of  neurotransmitter  release  suggests 
that the vesicles involved are those already “docked” at the active zones. 
Docking is believed to involve interactions between proteins in the synap-
tic vesicle membrane and the presynaptic cell membrane under the active 
zone (Box 5.3). In the presence of high [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i , these proteins alter their 
conformation so that the lipid bilayers of the vesicle and presynaptic mem-
branes fuse, forming a pore that allows the neurotransmitter to escape into 
the cleft. The mouth of this exocytotic fusion pore continues to expand until 
the membrane of the vesicle is fully incorporated into the presynaptic mem-
brane (Figure 5.13). The vesicle membrane is later recovered by the process 
of  endocytosis , and the recycled vesicle is reﬁ lled with neurotransmitter 
(see Figure 5.12). During periods of prolonged stimulation, vesicles are mo-
bilized from a “reserve pool” that is bound to the cytoskeleton of the axon 
terminal.  The  release  of  these  vesicles  from  the  cytoskeleton,  and  their 
docking to the active zone, is also triggered by elevations of [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i . 

 Secretory  granules  also  release  peptide  neurotransmitters  by  exo-
cytosis,  in  a  calcium-dependent  fashion,  but  typically  not  at  the  active 
zones. Because the sites of granule exocytosis occur at a distance from the 
sites of Ca 2  ⫹  entry, peptide neurotransmitters are usually not released 
in response to every action potential invading the terminal. Instead, the 
release  of  peptides  generally  requires  high-frequency  trains  of  action 
 potentials, so that the [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  throughout the terminal can build to the 
level required to trigger release away from the active zones. Unlike the 
fast release of amino acid and amine neurotransmitters, the release of 
peptides is a leisurely process, taking 50 msec or more. 

 Neurotransmitter Receptors and Effectors 
 Neurotransmitters released into the synaptic cleft affect the postsynaptic 
neuron by binding to speciﬁ c receptor proteins that are embedded in the 
postsynaptic density. The binding of neurotransmitter to the receptor is like 
inserting a key in a lock; this causes conformational changes in the protein 
such that the protein can then function differently. Although there are well 
over 100 different neurotransmitter receptors, they can be classiﬁ ed into 
two types: transmitter-gated ion channels and G-protein-coupled receptors. 

 Transmitter-Gated Ion Channels. Receptors known as  transmitter-gated 
ion channels  are membrane-spanning proteins consisting of four or ﬁ ve 
subunits that come together to form a pore between them (Figure 5.14). 
In the absence of neurotransmitter, the pore is usually closed. When neu-
rotransmitter  binds  to  speciﬁ c  sites  on  the  extracellular  region  of  the 
channel,  it  induces  a  conformational  change—just  a  slight  twist  of  the 
 subunits—which within microseconds causes the pore to open. The func-
tional consequence of this depends on which ions can pass through the pore. 
 Transmitter-gated channels generally do not show the same degree of 
ion selectivity as do voltage-gated channels. For example, the ACh-gated 
ion channels at the neuromuscular junction are permeable to both Na ⫹  
and  K ⫹ .  Nonetheless,  as  a  rule,  if  the  open  channels  are  permeable  to 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   124
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   124

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

BOX 5.3

B R A I N   F O O D

How to SNARE a Vesicle

Yeasts  are  single-cell  organisms  valued  for  their  abil-

ity  to  make  dough  rise  and  grape  juice  ferment  into  wine. 
Remarkably, the humble yeasts have some close similarities 
to the chemical synapses in our brain. Recent research has 
shown  that  the  proteins  controlling  secretion  in  both  yeast 
cells and synapses have only minor differences. Apparently, 
these molecules are so generally useful that they have been 
conserved across more than a billion years of evolution, and 
they are found in all eukaryotic cells.

The trick to fast synaptic function is to deliver neurotrans-
mitter-ﬁ lled  vesicles  to  just  the  right  place—the  presynaptic 
 membrane—and then cause them to fuse at just the right time, 
when an action potential delivers a pulse of high Ca2⫹ concen-
tration to the cytosol. This process of exocytosis is a special 
case of a more general cellular problem, membrane trafﬁ cking. 
Cells have many types of membranes, including those enclos-
ing the whole cell, the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi 
apparatus, and various types of vesicles. To avoid intracellular 
chaos, each of these membranes needs to be moved and deliv-
ered to speciﬁ c locations within the cell. After delivery, one type 
of membrane often has to fuse with another type. A common 
molecular machinery has evolved for the delivery and fusion of 
all these membranes, and small variations in these molecules 
determine how and when membrane trafﬁ cking takes place.

The  speciﬁ c  binding  and  fusion  of  membranes  seem  to 
depend  on  the  SNARE  family  of  proteins,  which  were  ﬁ rst 
found in yeast cells. SNARE is an acronym too convoluted 
to deﬁ ne here, but the name perfectly deﬁ nes the function of 
these proteins: SNAREs allow one membrane to snare an-
other. Each SNARE peptide has a lipid-loving end that em-
beds itself within the membrane and a longer tail that projects 
into  the  cytosol.  Vesicles  have  “v-SNAREs,”  and  the  outer 
membrane has “t-SNAREs” (for target membrane). The cy-
tosolic ends of these two complementary types of SNAREs 
can  bind  very  tightly  to  one  another,  allowing  a  vesicle  to 
“dock” very close to a presynaptic membrane and nowhere 
else (Figure A).

Although  complexes  of  v-SNAREs  and  t-SNAREs  form 
the main connection between vesicle membrane and target 
membrane,  a  large  and  bewildering  array  of  other  presyn-
aptic  proteins  stick  to  this  SNARE  complex.  We  still  don’t 
understand the functions of all of them, but synaptotagmin, 
a vesicle protein, is the critical Ca2⫹ sensor that rapidly trig-
gers vesicle fusion and thus transmitter release. On the pre-
synaptic membrane side, calcium channels may form part of 
the docking complex. As the calcium channels are very close 
to the docked vesicles, inﬂ owing Ca2⫹ can trigger transmit-
ter release with astonishing speed—within about 60 ␮sec in 
a mammalian synapse at body temperature. The brain has 
 several varieties of synaptotagmins, including one that is spe-
cialized for exceptionally fast synaptic transmission.

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

125

We have a way to go before we understand all the mol-
ecules  involved  in  synaptic  transmission.  In  the  meantime, 
we can count on yeasts to provide delightful brain food (and 
drink) for thought.

Neurotransmitter

Vesicle

Synaptotagmin
Synaptotagmin

t-SNARES

Vesicle
membrane

v-SNARE

Presynaptic
terminal membrane

Calcium
channel

Figure A
SNAREs and vesicle fusion.

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   125
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   125

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

126

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 5.13
A “receptor’s eye” view of neurotrans-
mitter release. (a) This is a view of the 
extracellular surface of the active zone 
of a neuromuscular junction in frog. The 
particles are believed to be calcium 
channels. (b) In this view, the presynap-
tic terminal had been stimulated to 
 release neurotransmitter. The exocytotic 
fusion pores are where synaptic vesicles 
have fused with the presynaptic mem-
brane and released their contents. 
(Source: Heuser and Reese, 1973.)

(a)

(b)

Presumed
calcium
channels

Exocytotic
fusion
pore

Membrane

Cytoplasm

(a)

(b)
▲ FIGURE 5.14
The structure of a transmitter-gated 
ion channel. (a) Side view of an ACh-
gated ion channel. (b) Top view of the 
channel, showing the pore at the center 
of the five subunits.

Na ⫹ ,  the  net  effect  will  be  to  depolarize  the  postsynaptic  cell  from  the 
resting membrane potential (Box 5.4). Because it tends to bring the mem-
brane  potential  toward  threshold  for  generating  action  potentials,  this 
effect is said to be  excitatory . A transient postsynaptic membrane depo-
larization caused by the presynaptic release of neurotransmitter is called 
an  excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)  (Figure 5.15). Synaptic 
activation of ACh-gated and glutamate-gated ion channels causes EPSPs. 
 If the transmitter-gated channels are permeable to Cl ⫺ , the usual net 
effect will be to hyperpolarize the postsynaptic cell from the resting mem-
brane potential (because the chloride equilibrium potential is usually neg-
ative; see Chapter 3). Because it tends to bring the membrane potential 
away from threshold for generating action potentials, this effect is said 
to be  inhibitory . A transient hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic mem-
brane  potential  caused  by  the  presynaptic  release  of  neurotransmitter 
is called an  inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP)  (Figure 5.16). 
Synaptic activation of glycine-gated or GABA-gated ion channels cause 
an IPSP. We’ll discuss EPSPs and IPSPs in more detail shortly when we 
explore the principles of synaptic integration. 

 G-Protein-Coupled  Receptors.  Fast  chemical  synaptic  transmission  is 
mediated by amino acid and amine neurotransmitters acting on trans-
mitter-gated ion channels. However, all three types of neurotransmitter, 
acting  on   G-protein-coupled  receptors ,  can  also  have  slower,  longer 
lasting, and much more diverse postsynaptic actions. This type of trans-
mitter action involves three steps: 
 1. Neurotransmitter molecules bind to receptor proteins embedded in the 

postsynaptic membrane. 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   126
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   126

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

127

BOX 5.4

B R A I N   F O O D

Reversal Potentials

In  Chapter  4,  we  saw  that  when  the  membrane  voltage-

gated sodium channels open during an action potential, Na⫹ 
enters  the  cell,  causing  the  membrane  potential  to  rapidly 
 depolarize until it approaches the sodium equilibrium poten-
tial,  ENa,  about  40  mV.  Unlike  the  voltage-gated  channels, 
however, many transmitter-gated ion channels are not per-
meable to a single type of ion. For example, the ACh-gated 
ion  channel  at  the  neuromuscular  junction  is  permeable  to 
both Na⫹ and K⫹. Let’s explore the functional consequence 
of activating these channels.

In  Chapter  3,  we  learned  that  the  membrane  potential, 
Vm,  can  be  calculated  using  the  Goldman  equation,  which 
takes into account the relative permeability of the membrane 
to different ions (see Box 3.3). If the membrane were equally 
permeable to Na⫹ and K⫹, as it would be if many ACh- or 
glutamate-gated  channels  were  open,  then  Vm  would  have 
a value between ENa and EK, around 0 mV. Therefore, ionic 
current would ﬂ ow through the channels in a direction that 
brings  the  membrane  potential  toward  0  mV.  If  the  mem-
brane   potential  were  ⬍0  mV  before  ACh  was  applied,  as 
is usually the case, the direction of net current ﬂ ow through 
the   ACh-gated  ion  channels  would  be  inward,  causing  a 
 depolarization.  However,  if  the  membrane  potential  were 
⬎0 mV before ACh was applied, the direction of net current 
ﬂ ow through the ACh-gated ion channels would be outward, 
causing the membrane potential to become less positive.

Ionic current ﬂ ow at different membrane voltages can be 
graphed,  as  shown  in  Figure  A.  Such  a  graph  is  called  an 
I-V plot (I: current; V: voltage). The critical value of membrane 
potential  at  which  the  direction  of  current  ﬂ ow  reverses  is 
called the reversal potential. In this case, the reversal  potential 
would be 0 mV. The experimental determination of a rever-
sal potential, therefore, helps tell us which types of ions the 
membrane is permeable to.

If, by changing the relative permeability of the membrane 
to different ions, a neurotransmitter causes Vm to move to-
ward a value that is more positive than the action potential 

threshold,  the  neurotransmitter  action  would  be  termed 
excitatory.  As  a  rule,  neurotransmitters  that  open  a  chan-
nel  permeable  to  Na⫹  are  excitatory.  If  a  neurotransmitter 
causes Vm to take on a value that is more negative than the 
action potential threshold, the neurotransmitter action would 
be termed inhibitory. Neurotransmitters that open a channel 
permeable to Cl⫺ tend to be inhibitory, as are neurotransmit-
ters that open a channel permeable only to K⫹.

At positive membrane
potentials, ACh causes
outward current

Out

I-V plot during
ACh application

Membrane
current

Membrane
voltage

–60 mV

60 mV

Reversal
potential

In

At negative membrane
potentials, ACh causes
inward current

Figure A

 2. The  receptor  proteins  activate  small  proteins,  called   G-proteins , 
which are free to move along the intracellular face of the postsynaptic 
membrane. 

 3. The activated G-proteins activate “effector” proteins. 

 Effector proteins can be G-protein-gated ion channels in the membrane 
(Figure 5.17a), or they can be enzymes that synthesize molecules called 
second  messengers   that  diffuse  away  in  the  cytosol  (Figure  5.17b). 
Second messengers can activate additional enzymes in the cytosol that 
can regulate ion channel function and alter cellular metabolism. Because 
G-protein-coupled  receptors  can  trigger  widespread  metabolic  effects, 
they are often referred to as  metabotropic receptors . 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   127
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   127

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

128

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Action potential

Axon

(a)  

Axon terminal

Postsynaptic
dendrite

Neurotransmitter
molecules

Record Vm

Synaptic
cleft

Cytosol

EPSP

Vm 

– 65 mV

(b)

Transmitter-gated
ion channels

0

2

4

6

8

(c)

Time from presynaptic action potential (msec)

▲ FIGURE 5.15
The generation of an EPSP. (a) An action potential arriving in the presynaptic 
terminal causes the release of neurotransmitter. (b) The molecules bind to 
 transmitter-gated ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane. If Na⫹ enters 
the postsynaptic cell through the open channels, the membrane will become 
 depolarized. (c) The resulting change in membrane potential (Vm), as recorded by 
a microelectrode in the cell, is the EPSP.

 We’ll discuss the different neurotransmitters, their receptors, and their 
effectors in more detail in Chapter 6. However, you should be aware that 
the same neurotransmitter can have different postsynaptic actions, de-
pending on what receptors it binds to. An example is the effect of ACh on 
the heart and on skeletal muscles. ACh slows the rhythmic contractions 
of  the  heart  by  causing  a  slow  hyperpolarization  of  the  cardiac  muscle 
cells. In contrast, in skeletal muscle, ACh induces contraction by caus-
ing  a  rapid  depolarization  of  the  muscle  ﬁ bers.  These  different  actions 
are explained by the different receptors involved. In the heart, a metabo-
tropic  ACh  receptor  is  coupled  by  a  G-protein  to  a  potassium  channel. 
The opening of the potassium channel hyperpolarizes the cardiac muscle 
ﬁ bers and reduces the rate at which it ﬁ res action potentials. In skeletal 
muscle,  the  receptor  is  a  transmitter-gated  ion  channel,  speciﬁ cally  an 
ACh-gated ion channel, permeable to Na ⫹ . The opening of this channel 
depolarizes the muscle ﬁ bers and makes them more excitable. 

 Autoreceptors.  Besides  being  a  part  of  the  postsynaptic  density,  neu-
rotransmitter receptors are also commonly found in the membrane of the 
presynaptic axon terminal. Presynaptic receptors that are sensitive to the 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   128
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   128

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

129

Action potential

Axon

(a)  

Axon terminal

Postsynaptic
dendrite

Record Vm

Vm 

IPSP

– 65 mV

Neurotransmitter
molecules

ClCl

ClCl

ClCl

Synaptic
cleft

Cytosol

(b)

Transmitter-gated
ion channels

0

(c)

2

4

6

8

Time from presynaptic action potential (msec)

▲ FIGURE 5.16
The generation of an IPSP. (a) An action potential arriving in the presynaptic 
 terminal causes the release of neurotransmitter. (b) The molecules bind to 
 transmitter-gated ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane. If Cl⫺ enters the 
postsynaptic cell through the open channels, the membrane will become hyper-
polarized. (c) The resulting change in membrane potential (Vm), as recorded by a 
microelectrode in the cell, is the IPSP.

Receptor

Neurotransmitter

G-protein-gated
 ion channel

Receptor

Neurotransmitter

Enzyme

G-protein

G-protein

Second
messengers

(a)
▲ FIGURE 5.17
Transmitter actions at G-protein-coupled receptors.  The binding of neurotrans-
mitter to the receptor leads to the activation of G-proteins. Activated G-proteins 
activate effector proteins, which may be (a) ion channels or (b) enzymes that 
 generate intracellular second messengers.

(b)

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   129
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   129

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

130

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

neurotransmitter released by the presynaptic terminal are called  auto-
receptors . Typically, autoreceptors are G-protein-coupled receptors that 
stimulate  second  messenger  formation. The  consequences  of  activating 
these receptors vary, but a common effect is inhibition of neurotransmit-
ter release and, in some cases, neurotransmitter synthesis. This allows a 
presynaptic terminal to regulate itself. Autoreceptors appear to function 
as a sort of safety valve to reduce release when the concentration of neu-
rotransmitter around the presynaptic terminal gets too high. 

 Neurotransmitter Recovery and Degradation 
 Once  the  released  neurotransmitter  has  interacted  with  postsynaptic 
 receptors,  it  must  be  cleared  from  the  synaptic  cleft  to  allow  another 
round of synaptic transmission. One way this happens is by simple diffu-
sion of the transmitter molecules through the extracellular ﬂ uid and away 
from the synapse. For most of the amino acid and amine neurotransmit-
ters, however, diffusion is aided by their reuptake into the presynaptic 
axon terminal. Reuptake occurs by the action of speciﬁ c neurotransmitter 
transporter proteins located in the presynaptic membrane. Once inside 
the cytosol of the terminal, the transmitters may be reloaded into syn-
aptic vesicles or enzymatically degraded and their breakdown products 
recycled. Neurotransmitter transporters also exist in the membranes of 
glia surrounding the synapse, which assist in the removal of neurotrans-
mitter from the cleft. 

 Neurotransmitter action can also be terminated by enzymatic destruc-
tion in the synaptic cleft itself. This is how ACh is removed at the neuro-
muscular junction, for example. The enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) 
is deposited in the cleft by the muscle cells. AChE cleaves the ACh mol-
ecule, rendering it inactive at the ACh receptors. 

 The importance of transmitter removal from the cleft should not be un-
derestimated. At the neuromuscular junction, for example, uninterrupted 
exposure to high concentrations of ACh after several seconds leads to a 
process called  desensitization , in which, despite the continued presence 
of ACh, the transmitter-gated channels close. This desensitized state can 
persist  for  many  seconds  even  after  the  neurotransmitter  is  removed. 
The rapid destruction of ACh by AChE normally prevents  desensitization 
from  occurring.  However,  if  the  AChE  is  inhibited,  as  it  is  by  various 
nerve  gases  used  as  chemical  weapons,  the  ACh  receptors  will  become 
desensitized and neuromuscular transmission will fail. 

 Neuropharmacology 
 Each of the steps of synaptic transmission we have discussed so far—neu-
rotransmitter synthesis, loading into synaptic vesicles, exocytosis, bind-
ing and activation of receptors, reuptake, and degradation—is chemical, 
and  therefore  these  steps  can  be  affected  by  speciﬁ c  drugs  and  toxins 
(Box 5.5). The study of the effects of drugs on nervous system tissue is 
called  neuropharmacology . 

 Earlier,  we  mentioned  that  nerve  gases  can  interfere  with  synaptic 
transmission  at  the  neuromuscular  junction  by  inhibiting  the  enzyme 
AChE. This interference represents one class of drug action, which is to 
inhibit the normal function of speciﬁ c proteins involved in synaptic trans-
mission; such drugs are called  inhibitors . Inhibitors of neurotransmitter 
receptors, called  receptor antagonists , bind to the receptors and block 
(antagonize) the normal action of the transmitter. An example of a recep-
tor antagonist is curare, an arrow-tip poison traditionally used by South 
American natives to paralyze their prey. Curare binds tightly to the ACh 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   130
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   130

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

131

BOX 5.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Bacteria, Spiders, Snakes, and People

What do the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, black widow

spiders,  cobras,  and  humans  have  in  common?  They  all 
produce  toxins  that  attack  the  chemical  synaptic  transmis-
sion that occurs at the neuromuscular junction. Botulism is 
caused  by  several  kinds  of  botulinum  neurotoxins  that  are 
produced by the growth of C. botulinum in improperly canned 
foods. (The name comes from the Latin word for “sausage” 
because of the early association of the disease with poorly 
preserved meat.) Botulinum toxins are very potent blockers 
of  neuromuscular  transmission;  it  has  been  estimated  that 
as  few  as  10  molecules  of  the  toxins  are  enough  to  inhibit 
a  cholinergic  synapse.  Botulinum  toxins  are  extraordinarily 
speciﬁ c enzymes that destroy certain of the SNARE proteins 
in the presynaptic terminals, which are critical for transmitter 
release (see Box 5.3). This speciﬁ c action of the toxins made 
them important tools in the early research on SNAREs.

Although its mechanism of action is different, black widow 
spider venom also exerts deadly effects by affecting transmit-
ter release (Figure A). The venom contains latrotoxin, which 
ﬁ rst increases, and then eliminates, ACh release at the neu-
romuscular  junction.  Electron  microscopic  examination  of 
synapses poisoned with black widow spider venom reveals 
that the axon terminals are swollen and the synaptic vesicles 
are  missing.  The  action  of  latrotoxin,  a  protein  molecule,  is 
not  entirely  understood.  Venom  binds  with  proteins  on  the 
outside of the presynaptic membrane and forms a membrane 
pore that depolarizes the terminal and allows Ca2⫹ to enter 
and trigger rapid and total depletion of transmitter. In some 
cases, the venom can induce transmitter release even with-
out  the  need  for  Ca2⫹,  perhaps  by  interacting  directly  with 
neurotransmitter release proteins.

The bite of the Taiwanese cobra also results in the block-
ade  of  neuromuscular  transmission  in  its  victim,  by  yet  an-
other  mechanism.  One  of  the  active  compounds  in  the 
snake’s venom, called ␣-bungarotoxin, is a peptide that binds 

so tightly to the postsynaptic nicotinic ACh receptors that it 
takes days to be removed. Often, there is not time for its re-
moval, however, because cobra toxin prevents the activation 
of nicotinic receptors by ACh, thereby paralyzing the respira-
tory muscles of its victims.

We humans have synthesized a large number of chemi-
cals  that  poison  synaptic  transmission  at  the  neuromuscu-
lar junction. Originally motivated by the search for chemical 
warfare agents, this effort led to the development of a new 
class  of  compounds  called  organophosphates.  These  are 
 irreversible inhibitors of AChE. By preventing the degradation 
of ACh, they cause it to accumulate and probably kill victims 
by causing a desensitization of ACh receptors. The organo-
phosphates  used  today  as  insecticides,  like  parathion,  are 
toxic to humans only in high doses.

Figure A
 Black widow spiders. (Source: Matthews, 1995, p. 174.)

receptors on skeletal muscle cells and blocks the actions of ACh, thereby 
preventing muscle contraction. 

 Other  drugs  bind  to  receptors,  but  instead  of  inhibiting  them,  they 
mimic  the  actions  of  the  naturally  occurring  neurotransmitter.  These 
drugs are called  receptor agonists . An example of a receptor agonist is 
nicotine, derived from the tobacco plant. Nicotine binds to and activates 
the ACh receptors in skeletal muscle. In fact, the ACh-gated ion channels 
in muscle are also called  nicotinic ACh receptors , to distinguish them 
from other types of ACh receptors, such as those in the heart, that are not 
activated by nicotine. There are also nicotinic ACh receptors in the CNS, 
and these are involved in the addictive effects of tobacco use. 

 The immense chemical complexity of synaptic transmission makes it 
especially  susceptible  to  the  medical  corollary  of  Murphy’s  law,  which 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   131
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   131

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

132

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

states that if a physiological process can go wrong, it will go wrong. When 
chemical synaptic transmission goes wrong, the nervous system malfunc-
tions. Defective neurotransmission is believed to be the root cause of a 
large number of neurological and psychiatric disorders. The good news is 
that, thanks to our growing knowledge of the neuropharmacology of syn-
aptic transmission, clinicians have new and increasingly effective thera-
peutic drugs for treating these disorders. We’ll discuss the synaptic basis 
of some psychiatric disorders, and their neuropharmacological treatment, 
in Chapter 22. 

PRINCIPLES OF SYNAPTIC INTEGRATION 
PRINNCIPLEES OF SYNAPTIC INNTEGRATION

 Most  CNS  neurons  receive  thousands  of  synaptic  inputs  that  activate 
different combinations of transmitter-gated ion channels and G-protein-
coupled receptors. The postsynaptic neuron integrates all these complex 
ionic and chemical signals to produce a simple form of output: action po-
tentials. The transformation of many synaptic inputs to a single neuronal 
output constitutes a neural computation. The brain performs billions of 
neural computations every second we are alive. As a ﬁ rst step toward un-
derstanding how neural computations are performed, let’s explore some 
basic  principles  of  synaptic  integration.   Synaptic  integration   is  the 
process by which multiple synaptic potentials combine within one post-
synaptic neuron. 

 The Integration of EPSPs 
 The  most  elementary  postsynaptic  response  is  the  opening  of  a  single 
transmitter-gated channel (Figure 5.18). Inward current through these 
channels  depolarizes  the  postsynaptic  membrane,  causing  the  EPSP. 
The  postsynaptic  membrane  of  one  synapse  may  have  from  a  few  tens 
to several thousands of transmitter-gated channels; how many of these 
are activated during synaptic transmission depends mainly on how much 
neurotransmitter is released. 

 Quantal  Analysis  of  EPSPs.  The  elementary  unit  of  neurotransmitter 
 release is the contents of a single synaptic vesicle. Vesicles each contain 
about the same number of transmitter molecules (several thousand); the 
total  amount  of  transmitter  released  is  some  multiple  of  this  number. 

Channels closed

No current
flowing

Channels
open

20 msec

I

n
w
a
r
d
 
c
u
r
r
e
n

t
 
f
l

o
w
n
g

i

Application of neurotransmitter to membrane patch

▲ FIGURE 5.18
A patch-clamp recording from a transmitter-gated ion channel. Ionic current 
passes through the channels when the channels are open. In the presence of 
neurotransmitter, they rapidly alternate between open and closed states. 
(Source: Adapted from Neher and Sakmann, 1992.)

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   132
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   132

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

133

Consequently, the amplitude of the postsynaptic EPSP is some multiple of 
the response to the contents of a single vesicle. Stated another way, post-
synaptic EPSPs at a given synapse are  quantized ; they are multiples of 
an indivisible unit, the  quantum , which reﬂ ects the number of transmit-
ter molecules in a single synaptic vesicle and the number of postsynaptic 
receptors available at the synapse. 

 At many synapses, exocytosis of vesicles occurs at some very low rate 
in the absence of presynaptic stimulation. The size of the postsynaptic re-
sponse to this spontaneously released neurotransmitter can be measured 
electrophysiologically. This tiny response is a  miniature postsynaptic 
potential ,  often  called  simply  a mini.  Each  mini  is  generated  by  the 
transmitter  contents  of  one  vesicle.  The  amplitude  of  the  postsynaptic 
EPSP evoked by a presynaptic action potential, then, is simply an integer 
multiple (i.e., 1 ⫻ , 2 ⫻ , 3 ⫻ , etc.) of the mini amplitude. 

  Quantal analysis , a method of comparing the amplitudes of minia-
ture and evoked PSPs, can be used to determine how many vesicles re-
lease  neurotransmitter  during  normal  synaptic  transmission.  Quantal 
analysis  of  transmission  at  the  neuromuscular  junction  reveals  that  a 
single action potential in the presynaptic terminal triggers the exocytosis 
of about 200 synaptic vesicles, causing an EPSP of 40 mV or more. At 
many CNS synapses, in striking contrast, the contents of only a  single 
vesicle  are released in response to a presynaptic action potential, causing 
an EPSP of only a few tenths of a millivolt. 

 EPSP  Summation.  The  difference  between  excitatory  transmission  at 
neuromuscular junctions and CNS synapses is not surprising. The neu-
romuscular  junction  has  evolved  to  be  fail-safe;  it  needs  to  work  every 
time, and the best way to ensure this is to generate an EPSP of a huge 
size. On the other hand, if every CNS synapse were, by itself, capable of 
triggering an action potential in its postsynaptic cell (as the neuromuscu-
lar junction can), then a neuron would be little more than a simple relay 
station. Instead, most neurons perform more sophisticated computations, 
requiring that many EPSPs add together to produce a signiﬁ cant post-
synaptic depolarization. This is what is meant by integration of EPSPs. 
  EPSP summation  represents the simplest form of synaptic integra-
tion  in  the  CNS.  There  are  two  types  of  summation:  spatial  and  tem-
poral.  Spatial summation  is the adding together of EPSPs generated 
simultaneously  at  many  different  synapses  on  a  dendrite.   Temporal 
 summation   is  the  adding  together  of  EPSPs  generated  at  the  same 
 synapse if they occur in rapid succession, within about 1–15 msec of one 
another (Figure 5.19). 

 The Contribution of Dendritic Properties 
to Synaptic Integration 
 Even with the summation of several EPSPs on a dendrite, the depolar-
ization still may not be enough to cause the neuron to ﬁ re an action po-
tential. The current entering at the sites of synaptic contact must spread 
down the dendrite and through the soma and cause the membrane of the 
spike-initiation zone to be depolarized beyond threshold, before an action 
potential can be generated. The effectiveness of an excitatory synapse in 
triggering an action potential, therefore, depends on how far the synapse 
is  from  the  spike-initiation  zone  and  on  the  properties  of  the  dendritic 
membrane. 

 Dendritic  Cable  Properties.  To  simplify  the  analysis  of  how  dendritic 
properties contribute to synaptic integration, let’s assume that dendrites 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   133
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   133

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

134

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Spatial summation

Action potential

Temporal summation

Presynaptic axon

Record Vm

Record Vm

Record Vm

Vm

– 65 mV

(a)  

EPSP

Time 

Vm

– 65 mV

(b)  

Time 

Vm

– 65 mV

(c)  

EPSP

Time 

▲ FIGURE 5.19
EPSP summation. (a) A presynaptic action potential triggers a small EPSP in a 
postsynaptic neuron. (b) Spatial summation of EPSPs: When two or more presyn-
aptic inputs are active at the same time, their individual EPSPs add together. 
(c) Temporal summation of EPSPs: When the same presynaptic fiber fires action 
potentials in quick succession, the individual EPSPs add together.

function as cylindrical cables that are electrically passive, that is, lack-
ing voltage-gated ion channels (in contrast, of course, with axons). Using 
an analogy introduced in Chapter 4, imagine that the inﬂ ux of positive 
charge at a synapse is like turning on the water that will ﬂ ow down a 
leaky garden hose (the dendrite). There are two paths the water can take: 
down the inside of the hose or through the leaks. By the same token, there 
are two paths that synaptic current can take: down the inside of the den-
drite or across the dendritic membrane. As the current proceeds down the 
dendrite and farther from the synapse, the EPSP amplitude will dimin-
ish because of the leakage of ionic current through membrane channels. 
At some distance from the site of current inﬂ ux, the EPSP amplitude may 
eventually approach zero. 

 The decrease in depolarization as a function of distance along a den-
dritic  cable  is  plotted  in  Figure  5.20.  In  order  to  simplify  the  math-
ematics,  in  this  example,  we’ll  assume  the  dendrite  is  inﬁ nitely  long, 
unbranched,  and  uniform  in  diameter.  We  will  also  use  a  microelec-
trode  to  inject  a  long,  steady  pulse  of  current  to  induce  a  membrane 
depolarization.  Notice  that  the  amount  of  depolarization  falls  off  ex-
ponentially with increasing distance. Depolarization of the membrane 
at a given distance (V x ) can be described by the equation V x   ⫽  V o /e x/  ␭ , 
where V o  is depolarization at the origin (just under the microelectrode), 
e  ( ⫽   2.718  .  .  .)  is  the  base  of  natural  logarithms,  x  is  distance  from 
the synapse, and  ␭  is a constant that depends on the properties of the 
dendrite.  Notice  that  when  x   ⫽    ␭ ,  then  V x    ⫽   V o /e.  Put  another  way, 
V ␭   ⫽  0.37 (V o ). This distance  ␭ , where the depolarization is about 37% of 
that at the origin, is called the dendritic  length constant . (Remember 
that  this  analysis  is  an  oversimpliﬁ cation.  Real  dendrites  have  ﬁ nite 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   134
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   134

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

135

Vm 

Inject 
current

Vm 

Record Vm

Record Vm

Dendritic cable

Toward
soma 

▲ FIGURE 5.20
Decreasing depolarization as a 
 function of distance along a long 
 dendritic cable. (a) Current is injected 
into a dendrite and the depolarization is 
recorded. As this current spreads down 
the dendrite, much of it dissipates 
across the membrane. Therefore, the 
 depolarization measured at a distance 
from the site of current injection is 
smaller than that measured right under 
it. (b) A plot of membrane depolarization 
as a function of distance along the 
 dendrite. At the distance ␭, one length 
constant, the membrane depolarization 
(V␭), is 37% of that at the origin.

Vλ

λ

Distance along
dendrite

(a)

100

37

0

(b)

f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

i

n
g
i
r
o
 
e
h
t
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
a
o
p
e
d

l

lengths, have branches, and tend to taper, and EPSPs are transient—
all of which affect the spread of current, and thus the effectiveness of 
synaptic potentials.) 

 The length constant is an index of how far depolarization can spread 
down  a  dendrite  or  axon.  The  longer  the  length  constant,  the  more 
likely  it  is  that  EPSPs  generated  at  distant  synapses  will  depolarize 
the membrane at the axon hillock. The value of  ␭  in our idealized, elec-
trically  passive  dendrite  depends  on  two  factors:  (1)  the  resistance  to 
current  ﬂ owing  longitudinally  down  the  dendrite,  called  the   internal 
 resistance   (r i );  and  (2)  the  resistance  to  current  ﬂ owing  across  the 
membrane,  called  the   membrane  resistance   (r m ).  Most  current  will 
take the path of least resistance; therefore, the value of  ␭  will increase 
as  membrane  resistance  increases  because  more  depolarizing  current 
will ﬂ ow down the inside of the dendrite rather than “leaking” out the 
membrane. The value of  ␭  will decrease as internal resistance increases 
because more current will then ﬂ ow across the membrane. Just as water 
will ﬂ ow farther down a wide hose with few leaks, synaptic current will 
ﬂ ow  farther  down  a  wide  dendrite  (low  r i )  with  few  open  membrane 
channels (high r m ). 

 The internal resistance depends only on the diameter of the dendrite 
and  the  electrical  properties  of  the  cytoplasm;  consequently,  it  is  rela-
tively  constant  in  a  mature  neuron.  The  membrane  resistance,  in  con-
trast, depends on the number of open ion channels, which changes from 
moment  to  moment  depending  on  what  other  synapses  are  active.  The 
dendritic length constant, therefore, is not constant at all! As we will see 
in  a  moment,  ﬂ uctuations  in  the  value  of   ␭   are  an  important  factor  in 
synaptic integration. 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   135
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   135

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

136

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 Excitable  Dendrites.  Our  analysis  of  dendritic  cable  properties  made 
another important assumption: The dendrite’s membrane is electrically 
passive,  which  means  it  lacks  voltage-gated  channels.  Some  dendrites 
in  the  brain  have  nearly  passive  and  inexcitable  membranes  and  thus 
do follow the simple cable equations. The dendrites of spinal motor neu-
rons, for example, are very close to passive. However, most dendrites are 
decidedly not passive. A variety of neurons have dendrites with signiﬁ -
cant numbers of voltage-gated sodium, calcium, and potassium channels. 
Dendrites rarely have enough ion channels to generate fully propagating 
action potentials, as axons can. But the voltage-gated channels in den-
drites can act as important ampliﬁ ers of small PSPs generated far out 
on dendrites. EPSPs that would diminish to near nothingness in a long, 
passive dendrite may nevertheless be large enough to trigger the opening 
of voltage-gated sodium channels, which in turn add current to boost the 
synaptic signal along toward the soma. 

 Paradoxically, in some cells, dendritic sodium channels may also carry 
electrical  signals  in  the  other  direction,  from  the  soma  outward  along 
dendrites.  This  may  be  a  mechanism  by  which  synapses  on  dendrites 
are informed that a spike occurred in the soma, and it has relevance for 
 hypotheses about the cellular mechanisms of learning that will be dis-
cussed in Chapter 25. 

 Inhibition 
 So far, we’ve seen that whether or not an EPSP contributes to the action 
potential  output  of  a  neuron  depends  on  several  factors,  including  the 
number of coactive excitatory synapses, the distance the synapse is from 
the spike-initiation zone, and the properties of the dendritic membrane. 
Of course, not all synapses in the brain are excitatory. The action of some 
synapses is to take the membrane potential away from action potential 
threshold; these are called inhibitory synapses. Inhibitory synapses exert 
a powerful control over a neuron’s output (Box 5.6). 

 IPSPs  and  Shunting  Inhibition.  The  postsynaptic  receptors  under  most 
inhibitory synapses are very similar to those under excitatory synapses; 
they’re  transmitter-gated  ion  channels. The  only  important  differences 
are that they bind different neurotransmitters (either GABA or glycine) 
and  that  they  allow  different  ions  to  pass  through  their  channels. The 
transmitter-gated channels of most inhibitory synapses are permeable to 
only one natural ion, Cl ⫺ . Opening of the chloride channel allows Cl ⫺ to 
cross the membrane in a direction that brings the membrane potential 
toward  the  chloride  equilibrium  potential,  E Cl ,  about   ⫺ 65  mV.  If  the 
 membrane potential were less negative than  ⫺ 65 mV when the transmit-
ter was released, activation of these channels would cause a hyperpolar-
izing IPSP. 

 Notice that if the resting membrane potential were already  ⫺ 65 mV, 
no IPSP would be visible after chloride channel activation because the 
value of the membrane potential would already equal E Cl  (i.e., the rever-
sal potential for that synapse; see Box 5.4). If there is no visible IPSP, is 
the  neuron  really  inhibited?  The  answer  is  yes.  Consider  the  situation 
illustrated  in  Figure  5.21,  with  an  excitatory  synapse  on  a  distal  seg-
ment  of  dendrite  and  an  inhibitory  synapse  on  a  proximal  segment  of 
dendrite, near the soma. Activation of the excitatory synapse leads to the 
inﬂ ux of positive charge into the dendrite. This current depolarizes the 
membrane as it ﬂ ows toward the soma. At the site of the active inhibi-
tory synapse, however, the membrane potential is approximately equal to 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   136
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   136

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

137

BOX 5.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Startling Mutations and Poisons
A  ﬂ ash  of  lightning  .  .  .  a  thunderclap  .  .  .  a  tap  on  the 

shoulder when you think you’re alone! If you are not expect-
ing them, any of these stimuli can make you jump, grimace, 
hunch your shoulders, and breathe faster. We all know the 
brief but  dramatic nature of the startle response.

Luckily, when lightning strikes twice or a friend taps our 
shoulder  again,  we  tend  to  be  much  less  startled  the  sec-
ond  time.  We  quickly  habituate  and  relax.  However,  for  an 
unfortunate minority of mice, cows, dogs, horses, and peo-
ple,  life  is  a  succession  of  exaggerated  startle  responses. 
Even  normally  benign  stimuli,  such  as  hands  clapping  or  a 
touch  to  the  nose,  may  trigger  an  uncontrollable  stiffening 
of  the  body,  an  involuntary  shout,  ﬂ exion  of  the  arms  and 
legs, and a fall to the ground. Worse yet, these overreactions 
don’t adapt when the stimuli are repeated. The clinical term 
for  startle  disease  is  hyperekplexia,  and  the  ﬁ rst  recorded 
cases  were  members  of  a  community  of  French–Canadian 
lumberjacks in 1878. Hyperekplexia is an inherited condition 
occurring worldwide, and its sufferers are known by colorful 
local names: the “Jumping Frenchmen of Maine” (Quebec), 
“myriachit”  (Siberia),  “latah”  (Malaysia),  and  “Ragin’  Cajuns” 
(Louisiana).

We now know the molecular basis for two general types 
of  startle  diseases.  Remarkably,  both  involve  defects  of  in-
hibitory glycine receptors. The ﬁ rst type, identiﬁ ed in humans 
and  in  a  mutant  mouse  called  spasmodic,  is  caused  by  a 
mutation  of  a  gene  for  the  glycine  receptor.  The  change  is 
the smallest one possible—the abnormal receptors have only 
one amino acid (out of more than 400) coded wrong—but the 
result is a chloride channel that opens less frequently when 
exposed to the neurotransmitter glycine. The second type of 

startle  disease  is  seen  in  the  mutant  mouse  spastic  and  in 
a strain of cattle. In these animals, normal glycine receptors 
are  expressed  but  in  fewer  than  normal  numbers.  The  two 
forms of startle disease thus take different routes to the same 
unfortunate  end:  The  transmitter  glycine  is  less  effective  at 
inhibiting neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem.

Most  neural  circuits  depend  on  a  delicate  balance  of 
synaptic  excitation  and  inhibition  for  normal  functioning. 
If  excitation is increased or inhibition reduced, then a turbu-
lent  and  hyperexcitable  state  may  result.  An  impairment  of 
glycine function yields exaggerated startles; reduced GABA 
function  can  lead  to  the  seizures  of  epilepsy  (as  discussed 
in Chapter 19). How can such diseases be treated? There is 
often a clear and simple logic. Drugs that enhance inhibition 
can be very helpful.

The  genetic  mutations  of  the  glycine  system  resemble 
strychnine poisoning. Strychnine is a powerful toxin found in 
the seeds and bark of certain trees and shrubs of the genus 
Strychnos. It was ﬁ rst isolated and identiﬁ ed chemically in the 
early  nineteenth  century.  Strychnine  has  traditionally  been 
used by farmers to eradicate pesky rodents and by murder-
ers. It has a simple mechanism of action: It is an antagonist 
of glycine at its receptor. Mild strychnine poisoning enhances 
startle and other reﬂ exes and resembles hyperekplexia. High 
doses  nearly  eliminate  glycine-mediated  inhibition  in  circuits 
of the spinal cord and brain stem. This leads to uncontrollable 
seizures and unchecked muscular contractions, spasm and 
paralysis of the respiratory muscles, and ultimately, death from 
asphyxiation. It is a painful, agonizing way to die. Since glycine 
is not a transmitter in the higher centers of the brain, strych-
nine itself does not impair cognitive or sensory functions.

E Cl ,  ⫺ 65 mV. Positive current, therefore, ﬂ ows outward across the mem-
brane at this site to bring V m  to  ⫺ 65 mV. This synapse acts as an electri-
cal shunt, preventing the current from ﬂ owing through the soma to the 
axon hillock. This type of inhibition is called  shunting inhibition . The 
actual  physical basis of shunting inhibition is the  inward movement of 
negatively charged chloride ions,  which is formally equivalent to  outward 
positive current  ﬂ ow. Shunting inhibition is like cutting a big hole in the 
leaky garden hose—more of the water ﬂ ows down this path of least resis-
tance, out of the hose, before it gets to the nozzle where it can “activate” 
the ﬂ owers in your garden. 

 Thus, you can see that the action of inhibitory synapses also  contributes 
to  synaptic  integration.  The  IPSPs  reduce  the  size  of  EPSPs,  making 
the postsynaptic neuron less likely to ﬁ re action potentials. In addition, 
shunting inhibition acts to drastically reduce r m  and consequently  ␭ , thus 
allowing  positive  current  to  ﬂ ow  out  across  the  membrane  instead  of 
 internally down the dendrite toward the spike-initiation zone. 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   137
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   137

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

138

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Excitatory synapse
(active)

Inhibitory synapse
(inactive)

Dendrite

Record Vm

Record Vm

EPSP

Vm of
soma

Excitatory synapse
(active)

Inhibitory synapse
(active)

Vm of
dendrite
(a)

Dendrite

Record Vm

Record Vm

EPSP

Vm of
soma

Vm of
dendrite

(b)

Soma

Axon hillock

Soma

Axon hillock

▲ FIGURE 5.21
Shunting inhibition. A neuron receives one excitatory and one inhibitory input. 
(a) Stimulation of the excitatory input causes inward postsynaptic current that 
spreads to the soma, where it can be recorded as an EPSP. (b) When the inhibi-
tory and excitatory inputs are stimulated together, the depolarizing current leaks 
out before it reaches the soma.

 The  Geometry  of  Excitatory  and  Inhibitory  Synapses.  Inhibitory  syn-
apses in the brain that use GABA or glycine as a neurotransmitter have 
a morphology characteristic of Gray’s type II (see Figure 5.8b). This struc-
ture contrasts with excitatory synapses that use glutamate, which have a 
Gray’s type I morphology. This correlation between structure and function 
has been useful for working out the geometric relationships among excit-
atory and inhibitory synapses on individual neurons. In addition to being 
spread over the dendrites, inhibitory synapses on many neurons are found 
clustered on the soma and near the axon hillock, where they are in an espe-
cially powerful position to inﬂ uence the activity of the postsynaptic neuron. 

 Modulation 
 Most of the postsynaptic mechanisms we’ve discussed so far involve trans-
mitter receptors that are, themselves, ion channels. To be sure, synapses 
with transmitter-gated channels carry the bulk of the speciﬁ c information 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   138
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   138

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

139

that is processed by the nervous system. However, there are many synapses 
with  G-protein-coupled  neurotransmitter  receptors  that  are  not  directly 
 associated with an ion channel. Synaptic activation of these receptors does 
not directly evoke EPSPs and IPSPs but instead  modiﬁ es  the effectiveness 
of  EPSPs  generated  by  other  synapses  with  transmitter-gated  channels. 
This type of synaptic transmission is called  modulation . We’ll give you a 
taste for how modulation inﬂ uences synaptic integration by exploring the 
effects of activating one type of G-protein-coupled receptor in the brain, the 
norepinephrine beta ( ␤ ) receptor. 

 The  binding  of  the  amine  neurotransmitter   norepinephrine    (NE)  
to the  ␤  receptor triggers a cascade of biochemical events within the cell. 
In short, the  ␤  receptor activates a G-protein that, in turn, activates an ef-
fector protein, the intracellular enzyme adenylyl cyclase.  Adenylyl  cyclase  
catalyzes the chemical reaction that converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
the product of oxidative metabolism in the mitochondria, into a compound 
called  cyclic adenosine monophosphate , or  cAMP , that is free to diffuse 
within the cytosol. Thus, the  ﬁ rst  chemical message of synaptic transmis-
sion (the release of NE into the synaptic cleft) is converted by the  ␤  receptor 
into a  second  message (cAMP); cAMP is an example of a second messenger. 
 The  effect  of  cAMP  is  to  stimulate  another  enzyme  known  as  a 
 protein  kinase.   Protein    kinases   catalyze  a  chemical  reaction  called 
  phosphorylation , the transfer of phosphate groups (PO 3 ) from ATP to 
speciﬁ c sites on cell proteins (Figure 5.22). The signiﬁ cance of phosphory-
lation is that it can change the conformation of a protein, thereby chang-
ing that protein’s activity. 

 In  some  neurons,  one  of  the  proteins  that  is  phosphorylated  when 
cAMP  concentration  rises  is  a  particular  type  of  potassium  channel  in 
the  dendritic  membrane.  Phosphorylation  causes  this  channel  to  close, 
thereby reducing the membrane K ⫹  conductance. By itself, this does not 
cause any dramatic effects on the neuron. But consider the wider conse-
quence:  Decreasing the K   ⫹    conductance increases the dendritic membrane 
resistance and therefore increases the length constant.  It is like wrapping 
the leaky garden hose in duct tape; more water can ﬂ ow down the inside 
of the hose and less leaks out the sides. As a consequence of increasing  ␭ , 
distant or weak excitatory synapses will become more effective in depolar-
izing the spike-initiation zone beyond threshold; the cell will become  more 
excitable . Thus, the binding of NE to  ␤  receptors produces little change 
in membrane potential but greatly increases the response produced by 
another neurotransmitter at an excitatory synapse. Because this effect 

␤ receptor

NE

Potassium
channel

Adenylyl
cyclase

1

2

G-protein

3

5

Protein
kinase 

4

▲ FIGURE 5.22
Modulation by the NE ␤ receptor. 
➀ The binding of NE to the receptor 
 activates a G-protein in the membrane. 
➁ The G-protein activates the enzyme 
adenylyl cyclase. ➂ Adenylyl cyclase 
converts ATP into the second messenger 
cAMP. ➃ cAMP activates a protein 
 kinase. ➄ The protein kinase causes a 
 potassium channel to close by attaching 
a phosphate group to it.

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   139
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   139

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

140

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

involves several biochemical intermediaries, it can last far longer than 
the presence of the modulatory transmitter itself. 

 We have described one particular G-protein-coupled receptor and the con-
sequences of activating it in one type of neuron. But it is important to recog-
nize that other types of receptors can lead to the formation of other types of 
second messenger molecules. Activation of each of these receptor types will 
initiate a distinct cascade of biochemical reactions in the postsynaptic neu-
ron that do not always include phosphorylation and decreases in membrane 
conductance. In fact, cAMP in a different cell type with different enzymes 
may produce functionally opposite changes in the excitability of cells. 

 In Chapter 6, we will describe more examples of synaptic modulation 
and  their  mechanisms.  However,  you  can  already  see  that  modulatory 
forms of synaptic transmission offer an almost limitless number of ways 
that information encoded by presynaptic impulse activity can be trans-
formed and used by the postsynaptic neuron. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 This chapter has covered the basic principles of chemical synaptic trans-
mission. The action potential that arose in the sensory nerve when you 
stepped on that thumbtack in Chapter 3, and that swept along the axon 
in Chapter 4, has now reached the axon terminal in the spinal cord. The 
depolarization  of  the  terminal  triggered  the  presynaptic  entry  of  Ca 2  ⫹
through  voltage-gated  calcium  channels,  which  then  stimulated  exocy-
tosis of the contents of synaptic vesicles. Liberated neurotransmitter dif-
fused across the synaptic cleft and attached to speciﬁ c receptors in the 
postsynaptic  membrane.  The  transmitter  (probably  glutamate)  caused 
transmitter-gated  channels  to  open,  which  allowed  positive  charge  to 
enter  the  postsynaptic  dendrite.  Because  the  sensory  nerve  was  ﬁ ring 
 action potentials at a high rate, and because many synapses were acti-
vated at the same time, the EPSPs summed to bring the spike-initiation 
zone of the postsynaptic neuron to threshold, and this cell then generated 
action potentials. If the postsynaptic cell is a motor neuron, this activity 
will cause the release of ACh at the neuromuscular junction and muscle 
contraction to jerk your foot away from the tack. If the postsynaptic cell is 
an interneuron that uses GABA as a neurotransmitter, the activity of the 
cell will result in inhibition of its synaptic targets. If this cell uses a mod-
ulatory transmitter such as NE, the activity could cause lasting changes 
in  the  excitability  or  metabolism  of  its  synaptic  targets.  It  is  this  rich 
diversity of chemical synaptic interactions that allows complex  behaviors 
(such  as  shrieking  with  pain  as  you  jerk  up  your  foot)  to  emerge  from 
simple stimuli (such as stepping on a thumbtack). 

 Although we surveyed chemical synaptic transmission in this  chapter, 
we  did  not  cover  the   chemistry   of  synaptic  transmission  in  any  detail. 
In Chapter 6, we’ll take a closer look at the chemical “nuts and bolts” of 
different neurotransmitter systems. In Chapter 15, after we’ve examined 
the sensory and motor systems in Part II, we’ll explore the contributions 
of several different neurotransmitters to nervous system function and be-
havior. You’ll see that the chemistry of synaptic transmission warrants all 
this attention because defective neurotransmission is the basis for many 
neurological  and  psychiatric  disorders.  And  virtually  all  psychoactive 
drugs, both therapeutic and illicit, exert their effects at chemical synapses. 
 In  addition  to  explaining  aspects  of  neural  information  processing 
and the effects of drugs, chemical synaptic transmission is also the key 
to understanding the neural basis of learning and memory. Memories of 

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   140
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   140

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER 5    SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION

141

past  experiences  are  established  by  modiﬁ cation  of  the  effectiveness  of 
 chemical synapses in the brain. This chapter suggests possible sites of 
modiﬁ cation, ranging from changes in presynaptic Ca 2  ⫹  entry and neu-
rotransmitter  release  to  alterations  in  postsynaptic  receptors  or  excit-
ability. As we shall see in Chapter 25, all of these changes are likely to 
contribute to the storage of information by the nervous system. 

K E Y   T E R M S
K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
synaptic transmission (p. 110)
electrical synapse (p. 110)
chemical synapse (p. 110)

Types of Synapses
gap junction (p. 111)
postsynaptic potential (PSP) 

(p. 112)

secretory granule (p. 114)
dense-core vesicle (p. 114)
membrane differentiation

(p. 115)

active zone (p. 115)
postsynaptic density (p. 115)
neuromuscular junction (p. 119)
motor end-plate (p. 119)

Principles of Chemical 
Synaptic Transmission
glutamate (Glu) (p. 122)
gamma-aminobutyric acid 

(GABA) (p. 122)

glycine (Gly) (p. 122)
acetylcholine (ACh) (p. 122)
transporters (p. 122)
voltage-gated calcium channel 

exocytosis (p. 122)
endocytosis (p. 124)
transmitter-gated ion channels 

(p. 122)

(p. 124)

excitatory postsynaptic 

 potential (EPSP) (p. 126)

inhibitory postsynaptic 

 potential (IPSP) (p. 126)

G-protein-coupled receptors 

(p. 126)

G-proteins (p. 127)
second messengers (p. 127)
metabotropic receptors (p. 127)
autoreceptors (p. 130)
neuropharmacology (p. 130)
inhibitors (p. 130)
receptor antagonists (p. 130)

receptor agonists (p. 131)
nicotinic ACh receptors (p. 131)

Principles of Synaptic Integration
synaptic integration (p. 132)
miniature postsynaptic 

 potential (p. 133)

quantal analysis (p. 133)
EPSP summation (p. 133)
spatial summation (p. 133)
temporal summation (p. 133)
length constant (p. 134)
internal resistance (p. 135)
membrane resistance (p. 135)
shunting inhibition (p. 137)
modulation (p. 139)
norepinephrine (NE) (p. 139)
adenylyl cyclase (p. 139)
cyclic adenosine monophosphate 

(cAMP) (p. 139)

protein kinases (p. 139)
phosphorylation (p. 139)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What is meant by quantal release of neurotransmitter?
2.  You apply ACh and activate nicotinic receptors on a muscle cell. Which way will current ﬂ ow 
through the receptor channels when Vm ⫽ ⫺60 mV? When Vm ⫽ 0 mV? When Vm ⫽ 60 mV? Why?
3.  This chapter discussed a GABA-gated ion channel that is permeable to Cl⫺. GABA also activates 
a G-protein-coupled receptor, called the GABAB receptor, which causes potassium-selective chan-
nels to open. What effect would GABAB receptor activation have on the membrane potential?

4.  You  think  you  have  discovered  a  new  neurotransmitter,  and  you  are  studying  its  effect  on  a 
neuron. The reversal potential for the response caused by the new chemical is ⫺60 mV. Is this 
substance excitatory or inhibitory? Why?

5.  A drug called strychnine, isolated from the seeds of a tree native to India and commonly used as rat 
poison, blocks the effects of glycine. Is strychnine an agonist or an antagonist of the glycine receptor?

6.  How does nerve gas cause respiratory paralysis?
7.  Why is an excitatory synapse on the soma more effective in evoking action potentials in the post-

synaptic neuron than an excitatory synapse on the tip of a dendrite?

8.  What are the steps that lead to increased excitability in a neuron when NE is released presynaptically?

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   141
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   141

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

142

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G
Connors BW, Long MA. 2004. Electrical synapses 

in the mammalian brain. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 27:393–418.

Cowan WM, Südhof TC, Stevens CF. 2001. 

Synapses. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.

Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, 

Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth AJ. 2012. Principles 
of Neural Science, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill Professional.

Koch C. 2004. Biophysics of Computation: 

Information Processing in Single Neurons. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

Nicholls JG, Martin AR, Fuchs PA, Brown DA, 

Diamond ME, Weisblat D. 2007. From Neuron 
to Brain, 5th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Sheng M, Sabatini BL, Südhof TC. 2012. The 

Synapse. New York: Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory Press.

Stuart G, Spruston N, Hausser M. 2007. 
Dendrites, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

Südhof TC. 2013. Neurotransmitter release: the 

last millisecond in the life of a synaptic vesicle. 
Neuron 80:675–690.

109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   142
109–142_Bear_05_revised_final.indd   142

12/20/14   3:43 AM
12/20/14   3:43 AM

CHAPTER SIX

Neurotransmitter 
Systems

INTRODUCTION
STUDYING NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

Localization of Transmitters and Transmitter-Synthesizing Enzymes

Immunocytochemistry
In Situ Hybridization

Studying Transmitter Release
Studying Synaptic Mimicry
Studying Receptors

Neuropharmacological Analysis
Ligand-Binding Methods
 BOX 6.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Finding Opiate Receptors, 
by Solomon H. Snyder
Molecular Analysis

NEUROTRANSMITTER CHEMISTRY

Cholinergic Neurons

 BOX 6.2   BRAIN FOOD: Pumping Ions and Transmitters

Catecholaminergic Neurons
Serotonergic Neurons
Amino Acidergic Neurons
Other Neurotransmitter Candidates and Intercellular Messengers

 BOX 6.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: This Is Your Brain on Endocannabinoids

TRANSMITTER-GATED CHANNELS

The Basic Structure of Transmitter-Gated Channels
Amino Acid-Gated Channels
Glutamate-Gated Channels
 BOX 6.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Exciting Poisons: Too Much of a Good Thing
GABA-Gated and Glycine-Gated Channels

G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTORS AND EFFECTORS

The Basic Structure of G-Protein-Coupled Receptors
The Ubiquitous G-Proteins
G-Protein-Coupled Effector Systems

The Shortcut Pathway
Second Messenger Cascades
Phosphorylation and Dephosphorylation
The Function of Signal Cascades

DIVERGENCE AND CONVERGENCE IN NEUROTRANSMITTER 
SYSTEMS
CONCLUDING REMARKS

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   143
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   143

1431414114111414141414141414141414141141414141411414141411414141414111414141411141441414144444144441414144444414444414444414144441414441441411 3333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333143

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

144

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCCTION

 Normal functions of the human brain require an orderly set of chemical 
reactions. As we have seen, some of the brain’s most important chemi-
cal reactions are those associated with synaptic transmission. Chapter 5 
introduced the general principles of chemical synaptic transmission, using 
a  few  speciﬁ c  neurotransmitters  as  examples.  In  this  chapter,  we  will 
explore in more depth the variety and elegance of the major neurotrans-
mitter systems. 

 Neurotransmitter systems begin with neurotransmitters. In Chapter 5, 
we discussed the three major classes of neurotransmitters:  amino acids , 
 amines , and  peptides . Even a partial list of the known transmitters, such 
as  that  appearing  in  Table  5.1,  has  more  than  20  different  molecules. 
Each  of  these  molecules  can  deﬁ ne  a  particular  transmitter  system. 
In  addition  to  the  molecule  itself,  a  neurotransmitter  system  includes 
all  the  molecular  machinery  responsible  for  transmitter  synthesis, 
vesicular packaging, reuptake and degradation, and transmitter action 
(Figure 6.1). 

 The ﬁ rst molecule positively identiﬁ ed as a neurotransmitter by Otto 
Loewi in the 1920s was acetylcholine, or ACh (see Box 5.1). To describe 
the cells that produce and release ACh, British pharmacologist Henry 
Dale  introduced  the  term   cholinergic .  (Dale  shared  the  1936  Nobel 
Prize with Loewi in recognition of his neuropharmacological studies of 
synaptic  transmission.)  Dale  termed  the  neurons  that  use  the  amine 
neurotransmitter norepinephrine (NE)  noradrenergic . (NE is known 
as  noradrenaline  in  United  Kingdom.)  The  convention  of  using  the 
sufﬁ x   -ergic   continued  when  additional  transmitters  were  identiﬁ ed. 

Presynaptic
axon terminal

Neurotransmitter-synthesizing

enzymes

Synaptic vesicle transporters

Reuptake transporters

 

Degradative enzymes

Transmitter-gated ion channels

G-protein-coupled receptors

G-proteins

G-protein-gated ion channels

Second messenger cascades

Postsynaptic
dendrite

▲ FIGURE 6.1
Elements of neurotransmitter systems.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   144
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   144

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

145

Therefore,  today  we  speak  of   glutamatergic   synapses  that  use  glu-
tamate,  GABAergic  synapses that use GABA,  peptidergic  synapses 
that  use  peptides,  and  so  on.  These  adjectives  are  also  used  to  iden-
tify  the  various  neurotransmitter  systems.  For  example,  ACh  and  all 
the  molecular  machinery  associated  with  it  are  collectively  called  the 
cholinergic system . 

 With  this  terminology  in  hand,  we  can  begin  our  exploration  of  the 
neurotransmitter systems. We start with a discussion of the experimen-
tal  strategies  that  have  been  used  to  study  transmitter  systems.  Then 
we will look at the synthesis and metabolism of speciﬁ c neurotransmit-
ters  and  explore  how  these  molecules  exert  their  postsynaptic  effects. 
In  Chapter  15,  after  we  have  learned  more  about  the  structural  and 
functional  organization  of  the  nervous  system,  we’ll  take  another  look 
at   speciﬁ c  neurotransmitter  systems  in  the  context  of  their  individual 
contributions to the regulation of brain function and behavior. 

 STUDYING NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS 
STUDDYING NEUROTRANSMITTTER SYSTEMS 

 The ﬁ rst step in studying a neurotransmitter system is usually identi-
fying  the  neurotransmitter.  This  is  no  simple  task;  the  brain  contains 
uncountable different chemicals. How can we decide which few chemicals 
are used as transmitters? 

 Over the years, neuroscientists have established certain criteria that 

must be met for a molecule to be considered a neurotransmitter: 
 1. The molecule must be synthesized and stored in the presynaptic neuron.
 2. The molecule must be released by the presynaptic axon terminal upon

stimulation.

 3. The molecule, when experimentally applied, must produce a response
in  the  postsynaptic  cell  that  mimics  the  response  produced  by  the
release of neurotransmitter from the presynaptic neuron.
 Let’s start by exploring some of the strategies and methods that are

used to satisfy these criteria. 

 Localization of Transmitters and Transmitter-
Synthesizing Enzymes 
 The scientist often begins with little more than a hunch that a particular 
molecule may be a neurotransmitter. This idea may be based on observing 
that the molecule is concentrated in brain tissue or that the application 
of the molecule to certain neurons alters their action potential ﬁ ring rate. 
Whatever the inspiration, the ﬁ rst step in conﬁ rming the hypothesis is to 
show that the molecule is, in fact, localized in, and synthesized by, par-
ticular neurons. Many methods have been used to satisfy this criterion for 
different neurotransmitters. Two of the most important techniques used 
today are immunocytochemistry and  in situ  hybridization. 

 Immunocytochemistry.  The method of  immunocytochemistry  is used 
to anatomically localize particular molecules to particular cells. When the 
same  technique  is  applied  to  thin  sections  of  tissue,  including  brain,  it 
is often referred to as  immunohistochemistry . The principle behind the 
method is quite simple (Figure 6.2). Once the neurotransmitter candidate 
has been chemically puriﬁ ed, it is injected under the skin or into the blood-
stream  of  an  animal  where  it  stimulates  an  immune  response.  (Often, 
to  evoke  or  enhance  the  immune  response,  the  molecule  is   chemically 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   145
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   145

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

146

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(a)  

Inject neurotransmitter
candidate

(b)  

Withdraw specific
antibodies from
ear vein

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 6.2
Immunohistochemistry.  This method uses labeled antibodies 
to identify the location of molecules within cells. (a) The mol-
ecule of interest (a neurotransmitter candidate) is injected into 
an animal, causing an immune response and the generation 
of antibodies. (b) Blood is withdrawn from the animal, and the 
antibodies are isolated from the serum. (c) The antibodies are 
tagged with a visible marker and applied to sections of brain 
tissue. The antibodies label only those cells that contain the 
neurotransmitter candidate. (d) A close-up of the complex 
that includes the neurotransmitter candidates, an antibody, 
and its visible marker.

Brain
tissue
section

Labeled neuron
containing
neurotransmitter
candidate

Unlabeled
neuron

Visible marker
attached

Antibody chemically
tagged with visible marker

(d)  

Neurotransmitter candidate

coupled to a larger molecule.) One feature of the immune response is the 
generation of large proteins called antibodies. Antibodies can bind tightly 
to speciﬁ c sites on the foreign molecule, also known as the  antigen —in 
this case, the transmitter candidate. The best antibodies for immunocy-
tochemistry bind very tightly to the transmitter of interest and bind very 
little or not at all to other chemicals in the brain. These speciﬁ c antibody 
molecules can be recovered from a blood sample of the immunized ani-
mal and chemically tagged with a colorful marker that can be seen with 
a microscope. When these labeled antibodies are applied to a section of 
brain  tissue,  they  will  color  just  those  cells  that  contain  the  transmit-
ter  candidate  (Figure  6.3a).  By  using  several  different  antibodies,  each 
labeled with a different marker color, it is possible to distinguish several 
types of cells in the same region of the brain (Figure 6.3b). 

 Immunocytochemistry can be used to localize any molecule for which 
a speciﬁ c antibody can be generated, including the synthesizing enzymes 
for  transmitter  candidates.  Demonstration  that  the  transmitter  candi-
date and its synthesizing enzyme are contained in the same neuron—or 
better yet, in the same axon terminal—can help satisfy the criterion that 
the molecule be localized in, and synthesized by, a particular neuron. 

  In Situ  Hybridization.  The method known as  in situ   hybridization  is 
also useful for conﬁ rming that a cell synthesizes a particular protein or 
peptide. Recall from Chapter 2 that proteins are assembled by the ribo-
somes according to instructions from speciﬁ c mRNA molecules. There is 
a unique mRNA molecule for every polypeptide synthesized by a neu-
ron.  The  mRNA  transcript  consists  of  the  four  different  nucleic  acids 
linked together in various sequences to form a long strand. Each nucleic 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   146
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   146

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

147

▲ FIGURE 6.3
Immunohistochemical localization of 
proteins in neurons.  (a) A neuron in the 
cerebral cortex labeled with antibodies 
that bind to a peptide neurotransmitter. 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Y. Amitai and 
S. L. Patrick.) (b) Three distinct types of 
neurons in the cerebral cortex, each 
labeled with a different antibody tagged 
with a differently colored fluorescent 
marker (green, red, and blue). (Source: 
Courtesy of Dr. S.J. Cruikshank and 
S.L. Patrick.) The image in a is shown at 
a higher magnification than that in b.

Strand of mRNA
in neuron

Radioactively
labeled probe
with proper 
sequence of 
complementary
nucleic acids

Brain tissue
section

▲ FIGURE 6.4
In situ hybridization.  Strands of mRNA 
consist of nucleotides arranged in a spe-
cific sequence. Each nucleotide will stick 
to one other complementary nucleotide. 
In the method of in situ hybridization, a 
synthetic probe is constructed contain-
ing a sequence of complementary nucle-
otides that will allow it to stick to the 
mRNA. If the probe is labeled, the loca-
tion of cells containing the mRNA will 
be revealed.

(a)  

(b)  

acid has the unusual property that it will bind most tightly to one other 
complementary nucleic acid. Thus, if the sequence of nucleic acids in a 
strand of mRNA is known, it is possible to construct in the lab a com-
plementary  strand  that  will  stick,  like  a  strip  of Velcro,  to  the  mRNA 
molecule. The complementary strand is called a  probe , and the process 
by which the probe bonds to the mRNA molecule is called  hybridization  
(Figure 6.4). In order to see if the mRNA for a particular peptide is local-
ized in a neuron, we chemically label the appropriate probe so it can be 
detected, apply it to a section of brain tissue, allow time for the probes 
to stick to any complementary mRNA strands, then wash away all the 
extra  probes  that  have  not  stuck.  Finally,  we  search  for  neurons  that 
contain the label. 

 To  visualize  labeled  cells  after   in  situ   hybridization,  the  probes  can 
be  chemically  tagged  in  several  ways.  A  common  approach  is  to  make 
them  radioactive.  Because  we  cannot  see  radioactivity,  hybridized 
probes are detected by laying the brain tissue on a sheet of special ﬁ lm 
that is sensitive to radioactive emissions. After exposure to the tissue, 
the ﬁ lm is developed like a photograph, and negative images of the ra-
dioactive  cells  are  visible  as  clusters  of  small  white  dots  (Figure  6.5). 
It is also possible to use digital electronic imaging devices to detect the 
radioactivity. This technique for viewing the distribution of radioactivity 
is called   autoradiography . An alternative is to label the probes with 
brightly colorful ﬂ uorescent molecules that can viewed directly with an 
appropriate microscope. Fluorescence  in situ  hybridization is also known 
as FISH. 

 In summary, immunocytochemistry is a method for viewing the loca-
tion of speciﬁ c molecules, including proteins, in sections of brain tissue. 
 In situ  hybridization is a method for localizing speciﬁ c mRNA transcripts 
for proteins. Together, these methods enable us to see whether a neuron 
contains and synthesizes a transmitter candidate and molecules associ-
ated with that transmitter. 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   147
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   147

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

148

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 6.5
In situ hybridization of the mRNA for 
a peptide neurotransmitter in neurons, 
visualized with autoradiography.  Only 
neurons with the proper mRNA are 
labeled, visible here as clusters of white 
dots. (Source: Courtesy of Dr. S. H. C. 
Hendry.)

 Studying Transmitter Release 
 Once we are satisﬁ ed that a transmitter candidate is synthesized by a 
neuron and localized to the presynaptic terminal, we must show that it is 
actually released upon stimulation. In some cases, a speciﬁ c set of cells or 
axons can be stimulated while taking samples of the ﬂ uids bathing their 
synaptic targets. The biological activity of the sample can then be tested 
to see if it mimics the effect of the intact synapses, and then the sample 
can be chemically analyzed to reveal the structure of the active molecule. 
This general approach helped Loewi and Dale identify ACh as a transmit-
ter at many peripheral synapses. 

 Unlike the peripheral nervous system (PNS), the nervous system out-
side the brain and spinal cord studied by Loewi and Dale, most regions 
of the central nervous system (CNS) contain a diverse mixture of inter-
mingled synapses using different neurotransmitters. Until recently, this 
often made it impossible to stimulate a single population of synapses con-
taining  only  a  single  neurotransmitter.  Researchers  had  to  be  content 
with stimulating many synapses in a region of the brain and collecting 
and measuring all the chemicals that were released. One way to do this 
is to use brain slices that are kept alive  in vitro . To stimulate release, the 
slices are bathed in a solution containing a high K ⫹  concentration. This 
treatment  causes  a  large  membrane  depolarization  (see  Figure  3.19), 
thereby stimulating transmitter release from the axon terminals in the 
tissue. Because transmitter release requires the entry of Ca 2  ⫹  into the 
axon terminal, it must also be shown that the release of the neurotrans-
mitter  candidate  from  the  tissue  slice  after  depolarization  occurs  only 
when Ca 2  ⫹  ions are present in the bathing solution. New methods such 
as  optogenetics  (see  Box  4.2)  now  make  it  possible  to  activate  just  one 
speciﬁ c type of synapse at a time. Genetic methods are used to induce one 
particular population of neurons to express light-sensitive proteins, and 
then those neurons can be stimulated with brief ﬂ ashes of light that have 
no effect on the surrounding cells. Any transmitters released are likely to 
have come from the optogenetically selected type of synapse. 

 Even when it has been shown that a transmitter candidate is released 
upon  depolarization  in  a  calcium-dependent  manner,  we  still  cannot 
be  sure  that  the  molecules  collected  in  the  ﬂ uids  were  released  from 
the  axon  terminals;  they  may  have  been  released  as  a  secondary  con-
sequence  of  synaptic  activation.  These  technical  difﬁ culties  make  the 
second  criterion—that a transmitter candidate must be released by the 
presynaptic axon terminal upon stimulation—the most difﬁ cult to satisfy 
unequivocally in the CNS. 

 Studying Synaptic Mimicry 
 Establishing that a molecule is localized in, synthesized by, and released 
from a neuron is still not sufﬁ cient to qualify it as a neurotransmitter. 
A third criterion must be met: The molecule must evoke the same response 
as that produced by the release of the naturally occurring neurotransmit-
ter from the presynaptic neuron. 

 To assess the postsynaptic actions of a transmitter candidate, a method 
called   microiontophoresis   is  sometimes  used.  Most  neurotransmitter 
candidates can be dissolved in solutions that will cause them to acquire a net 
electrical charge. A glass pipette with a very ﬁ ne tip, just a few micrometers 
across, is ﬁ lled with the ionized solution. The tip of the pipette is carefully 
positioned next to the postsynaptic membrane of the neuron, and the trans-
mitter candidate is ejected in very small amounts by passing electrical cur-
rent through the pipette. Neurotransmitter candidates can also be ejected 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   148
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   148

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

149

Drug-containing
micropipette

Apply drug by
passing electrical
current through
the micropipette

Stimulate
axon

Presynaptic terminal

Record Vm with
microelectrode

Postsynaptic
dendrite

▲ FIGURE 6.6
Microiontophoresis.  This method enables a researcher to apply drugs or neurotrans-
mitter candidates in very small amounts to the surface of neurons. The responses 
generated by the drug can be compared to those generated by synaptic stimulation.

from  ﬁ ne  pipettes  with  pulses  of  high  pressure.  A  microelectrode  in  the 
postsynaptic neuron can be used to measure the effects of the transmitter 
candidate on the membrane potential (Figure 6.6). 

 If  iontophoretic  or  pressure  application  of  the  molecule  causes  elec-
trophysiological  changes  that  mimic  the  effects  of  transmitter  released 
at  the  synapse,   and   if  the  other  criteria  of  localization,  synthesis,  and 
release are met, then the molecule and the transmitter are usually con-
sidered to be the same chemical. 

 Studying Receptors 
 Each neurotransmitter exerts its postsynaptic effects by binding to spe-
ciﬁ c  receptors.  As  a  rule,  no  two  neurotransmitters  bind  to  the  same 
receptor;  however,  one  neurotransmitter  can  bind  to  many  different 
receptors. Each of the different receptors a neurotransmitter binds to is 
called a  receptor subtype . For example, in Chapter 5, we learned that 
ACh acts on two different cholinergic receptor  subtypes : One type is pres-
ent in skeletal muscle, and the other is in heart muscle. Both subtypes 
are also present in many other organs and within the CNS. 

 Researchers have tried almost every method of biological and chemical 
analysis to study the different receptor subtypes of the various neurotrans-
mitter systems. Three approaches have proved to be particularly useful: 
neuropharmacological analysis of synaptic transmission,  ligand-binding 
methods, and molecular analysis of receptor proteins. 

 Neuropharmacological  Analysis.   Much  of  what  we  know  about  recep-
tor subtypes was ﬁ rst learned using neuropharmacological analysis. For 
instance, skeletal muscle and heart muscle respond differently to various 
cholinergic drugs.  Nicotine , derived from the tobacco plant, is a receptor 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   149
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   149

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

150

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 6.7
The neuropharmacology of cholinergic synaptic transmission. 
 Sites on  transmitter receptors can bind either the transmitter itself 
(ACh), an agonist that mimics the transmitter, or an antagonist that 
blocks the effects of the transmitter and agonists.

Neurotransmitter:

ACh

Agonists:

Nicotine

Muscarine

+

+

+

Antagonists:

Curare

–

Atropine

+

–

Receptors:

Nicotinic
receptor

Muscarinic
receptor

agonist  in  skeletal  muscle  but  has  no  effect  in  the  heart.  On  the  other 
hand,  muscarine , derived from a poisonous species of mushroom, has little 
or no effect on skeletal muscle but is an agonist at the cholinergic recep-
tor subtype in the heart. (Recall that ACh slows the heart rate; muscarine 
is poisonous because it causes a precipitous drop in heart rate and blood 
pressure.) Thus, two ACh receptor subtypes can be distinguished by the ac-
tions of different drugs. In fact, the receptors were given the names of their 
agonists:  nicotinic ACh receptors  in skeletal muscle and   muscarinic 
ACh receptors  in the heart. Nicotinic and muscarinic receptors also exist 
in the brain, and some neurons have both types of receptors. 

 Another way to distinguish receptor subtypes is to use selective antag-
onists. The South American arrow-tip poison  curare  inhibits the action 
of ACh at nicotinic receptors (thereby causing paralysis), and  atropine , 
derived from belladonna plants (also known as deadly nightshade), an-
tagonizes  ACh  at  muscarinic  receptors  (Figure  6.7).  (The  eye  drops  an 
ophthalmologist uses to dilate your pupils are related to atropine.) 

 Different drugs were also used to distinguish several subtypes of gluta-
mate receptors, which mediate much of the synaptic excitation in the CNS. 
Three subtypes are  AMPA receptors ,  NMDA receptors , and  kainate 
receptors , each named for a different chemical agonist. (AMPA stands for 
 ␣ -amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole  propionate,  and  NMDA  stands 
for   N -methyl- D -aspartate.)  The  neurotransmitter  glutamate  activates 
all three receptor subtypes, but AMPA acts only at the AMPA receptor, 
NMDA acts only at the NMDA receptor, and so on (Figure 6.8). 

Neurotransmitter:

Glutamate

Agonists:

AMPA

NMDA

Kainate

▲ FIGURE 6.8
The neuropharmacology of glutamatergic 
synaptic transmission.  There are three main 
subtypes of glutamate receptors, each of which 
binds glutamate and each of which is activated 
selectively by a  different agonist.

Receptors:

AMPA
receptor

NMDA
receptor

Kainate
receptor

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   150
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   150

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

151

TABLE 6.1  Neurotransmitters, Some Receptors, and Their 
Pharmacology
Neurotransmitter

Receptor Subtype Agonist

Antagonist

Acetylcholine (ACh) Nicotinic receptor

Nicotine

Muscarinic receptor Muscarine

Curare
Atropine

Glutamate (Glu)

Norepinephrine (NE) ␣ receptor
␤ receptor
AMPA
NMDA
GABAA
GABAB
P2X
A type

ATP
Adenosine

GABA

Phenylephrine Phenoxybenzamine
Isoproterenol
AMPA
NMDA
Muscimol
Baclofen
ATP
Adenosine

Propranolol
CNQX
AP5
Bicuculline
Phaclofen
Suramin
Caffeine

 Similar pharmacological analyses were used to split the NE receptors 
into two subtypes,  ␣  and  ␤ , and to divide GABA receptors into GABA A
and  GABA B   subtypes.  The  same  can  be  said  for  virtually  all  the  neu-
rotransmitter systems. Thus, selective drugs have been extremely useful 
for categorizing receptor subclasses (Table 6.1). In addition, neurophar-
macological analysis has been invaluable for assessing the contributions 
of neurotransmitter systems to brain function. 

 Ligand-Binding  Methods.   As  we  said,  the  ﬁ rst  step  in  studying  a  neu-
rotransmitter system is usually identifying the neurotransmitter. However, 
with the discovery in the 1970s that many drugs interact selectively with 
neurotransmitter receptors, researchers realized that they could use these 
compounds  to  begin  analyzing  receptors  even  before  the  neurotransmit-
ter itself had been identiﬁ ed. The pioneers of this approach were Solomon 
Snyder and his then student Candace Pert at Johns Hopkins University, 
who  were  interested  in  studying  compounds  called  opiates  (Box  6.1). 
Opiates  are a class of drugs, derived from the opium poppy, that are both 
medically important and commonly abused.  Opioids  are the broader class 
of opiate-like chemicals, both natural and synthetic. Their effects include 
pain relief, euphoria, depressed breathing, and constipation. 

 The  question  Snyder  and  Pert  originally  set  out  to  answer  was  how 
heroin,  morphine,  and  other  opiates  exert  their  effects  on  the  brain. 
They and others hypothesized that opiates might be agonists at speciﬁ c 
receptors  in  neuronal  membranes.  To  test  this  idea,  they  radioactively 
labeled opiate compounds and applied them in small quantities to neuro-
nal membranes that had been isolated from different parts of the brain. 
If  appropriate  receptors  existed  in  the  membrane,  the  labeled  opiates 
should bind tightly to them. This is just what they found. The radioactive 
drugs labeled speciﬁ c sites on the membranes of some, but not all, neu-
rons  in  the  brain  (Figure  6.9).  Following  the  discovery  of  opioid  recep-
tors, the search was on to identify endogenous opioids, or  endorphins , the 
naturally occurring neurotransmitters that act on these receptors. Two 
peptides called  enkephalins  were soon isolated from the brain, and they 
eventually proved to be opioid neurotransmitters. 

 Any chemical compound that binds to a speciﬁ c site on a receptor is 
called a  ligand  for that receptor (from the Latin meaning “to bind”). The 
technique of studying receptors using radioactively or nonradioactively 
labeled  ligands  is  called  the   ligand-binding  method .  Notice  that  a 
ligand for a receptor can be an agonist, an antagonist, or the chemical 
 neurotransmitter  itself.  Speciﬁ c  ligands  were  invaluable  for  isolating 
neurotransmitter  receptors  and  determining  their  chemical  structure. 

▲ FIGURE 6.9
Opiate receptor binding to a slice of 
rat brain.  Special film was exposed to a 
brain section that had radioactive opiate 
receptor ligands bound to it. The dark 
regions contain more receptors. (Source: 
Snyder, 1986, p. 44.)

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   151
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   151

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

152

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 6.1

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Finding Opiate Receptors
by Solomon H. Snyder

Like so many events in science, identifying the opiate re-

ceptors was not simply an intellectual feat accomplished in an 
ethereal pursuit of pure knowledge. Instead, it all began with 
President Nixon and his “war on drugs” in 1971, at the height 
of  very  well-publicized  use  of  heroin  by  hundreds  of  thou-
sands  of  American  soldiers  in  Vietnam.  To  combat  all  this, 
Nixon appointed as czar of drug abuse research Dr. Jerome 
Jaffe, a psychiatrist who had pioneered in methadone treat-
ment  for  heroin  addicts.  Jaffe  was  to  coordinate  the  sev-
eral  billions  of  federal  dollars  in  agencies  ranging  from  the 
Department of Defense to the National Institutes of Health.

Jerry, a good friend, pestered me to direct our research 
toward the “poor soldiers” in Vietnam. So I began wondering 
how opiates act. The notion that drugs act at receptors, spe-
ciﬁ c recognition sites, had been appreciated since the turn 
of  the  century.  In  principle,  one  could  identify  such  recep-
tors simply by measuring the binding of radioactive drugs to 
tissue membranes. However, countless researchers had ap-
plied this strategy to opiates with no success.

About  this  time,  a  new  Johns  Hopkins  faculty  member, 
Pedro Cuatrecasas, located his laboratory adjacent to mine, 
and  we  became  fast  friends.  Pedro  had  recently  attained 
fame  for  his  discovery  of  receptors  for  insulin.  His  success 
depended  upon  seemingly  simple  but  important  technical 
advances. Past efforts to identify receptors for hormones had 
failed because hormones can bind to many nonspeciﬁ c sites, 
comprising proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. The numbers 
of  these  nonspeciﬁ c  sites  would  likely  be  millions  of  times 
greater  than  the  number  of  speciﬁ c  receptors.  To  identify 
the “signal” of insulin receptors binding above the “noise” of 
nonspeciﬁ c interactions, Pedro developed a simple ﬁ ltration 
assay. Since insulin should adhere more tightly to its recep-
tors than to nonspeciﬁ c sites, he incubated liver membranes 
with radioactive insulin and poured the mixture over ﬁ lters at-
tached to a vacuum that rapidly sucked away the incubation 
ﬂ uid,  leaving  the  membrane  with  attached  insulin  stuck  to 
the ﬁ lters. He then “washed” the ﬁ lters with large volumes of 
saline, but did this very rapidly so as to preserve insulin bound 
to receptors while washing away nonspeciﬁ c binding.

Despite Pedro’s proximity, it did not immediately occur to 
me that the insulin success could be transferred to the opi-
ate receptor problem. Instead, I had read a paper on nerve 
growth factor, showing that its amino acid sequence closely 
resembled that of insulin. Pedro and I soon collaborated in a 
successful search for the nerve growth factor receptor. Only 
then did I marshal the courage to extend this approach from 
proteins  such  as  insulin  and  nerve  growth  factor  to  much 
smaller molecules such as opiates. Candace Pert, a gradu-
ate  student  in  my  laboratory,  was  eager  to  take  on  a  new 
research project. We obtained a radioactive drug and moni-
tored  its  binding  to  brain  membranes  using  Pedro’s  magic 
ﬁ lter  machine.  The  very  ﬁ rst  experiment,  which  took  only 
about two hours, was successful.

Within a few months, we were able to characterize many 
features of opiate receptors. Knowing the exact sites where 
receptors are concentrated in the brain explained all the major 
actions of opiates, such as euphoria, pain relief, depression of 
breathing, and pupillary constriction. The properties of opiate 
receptors resembled very much what one would expect for 
neurotransmitters. Accordingly, we used similar approaches 
to search for receptors for neurotransmitters in the brain, and 
within a few years had identiﬁ ed receptors for most of them.
These ﬁ ndings raised an obvious question: Why do opi-
ate  receptors  exist?  Humans  were  not  born  with  morphine 
in them. Might the opiate receptor be a receptor for a new 
transmitter  that  regulates  pain  perception  and  emotional 
states? We and other groups attempted to isolate the hypoth-
esized, normally occurring, morphine-like neurotransmitters. 
John  Hughes  and  Hans  Kosterlitz  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland, 
were  the  ﬁ rst  to  succeed.  They  isolated  and  obtained  the 
chemical structures of the ﬁ rst “endorphins,” which are called 
the enkephalins. In our own laboratory, Rabi Simantov and I 
obtained the structure of the enkephalins soon after the pub-
lished success of the Scottish group.

From the ﬁ rst experiments identifying opiate receptors until 
the isolation of the enkephalins, only three years elapsed—an 
interval of frantic, exhilarating work that changed profoundly 
how we think about drugs and the brain.

Ligand-binding  methods have been enormously important for mapping 
the  anatomical  distribution  of  different  neurotransmitter  receptors  in 
the brain. 

 Molecular  Analysis.   There  has  been  an  explosion  of  information  about 
neurotransmitter receptors in recent decades, thanks to modern methods 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   152
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   152

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

153

for studying protein molecules. Information obtained with these methods 
has enabled us to divide the neurotransmitter receptor proteins into two 
groups: transmitter-gated ion channels and G-protein-coupled (metabo-
tropic) receptors (see Chapter 5). 

 Molecular neurobiologists have determined the structure of the poly-
peptides that make up many proteins, and these studies have led to some 
startling conclusions. Receptor subtype diversity was expected from the 
actions of different drugs, but the breadth of the diversity was not ap-
preciated until researchers determined how many different polypeptides 
could serve as subunits of functional receptors. 

 Consider  as  an  example  the  GABA A   receptor,  a  transmitter-gated 
chloride  channel.  Each  channel  requires  ﬁ ve  subunits  (similar  to  the 
ACh-gated  ion  channel,  Figure  5.14),  and  there  are  ﬁ ve  major  classes 
of  subunit  proteins,  designated   ␣ ,   ␤ ,   ␥ ,   ␦ ,  and   ␳ .  At  least  six  different 
polypeptides  (designated   ␣ 1–6)  can  substitute  for  one  another  as  an   ␣
subunit. Four different polypeptides (designated  ␤ 1–4) can substitute as 
a  ␤  subunit, and four different polypeptides ( ␥ 1–4) can be used as a  ␥  sub-
unit. Although this is not the complete tally, let’s make an interesting cal-
culation. If it takes ﬁ ve subunits to form a GABA A  receptor-gated channel 
and there are 15 possible subunits to choose from, then there are 151,887 
possible combinations and arrangements of subunits. This means there 
are at least 151,887 potential subtypes of GABA A   receptors! 

 It is important to recognize that the vast majority of the possible sub-
unit combinations are never manufactured by neurons, and even if they 
were, they would not work properly. Nonetheless, it is clear that receptor 
classiﬁ cations like those appearing in Table 6.1, while still useful, seri-
ously underestimate the diversity of receptor subtypes in the brain. 

NEUROTRANSMITTER CHEMISTRY 
NEURROTRAANSMITTER CHEMISTRY 

 Research using methods such as those discussed previously has led to the 
conclusion  that  the  major  neurotransmitters  are  amino  acids,  amines, 
and  peptides.  Evolution  is  conservative  and  opportunistic,  and  it  often 
puts common and familiar things to new uses. This also seems true about 
the evolution of neurotransmitters. For the most part, they are similar 
or identical to the basic chemicals of life, the same substances that cells 
in all species, from bacteria to giraffes, use for metabolism. Amino acids, 
the  building  blocks  of  protein,  are  essential  to  life.  Most  of  the  known 
neurotransmitter molecules are either (1) amino acids, (2) amines derived 
from amino acids, or (3) peptides constructed from amino acids. ACh is 
one exception, but it is derived from acetyl CoA, a ubiquitous product of 
cellular respiration in mitochondria, and choline, which is important for 
fat metabolism throughout the body. 

 Amino acid and amine transmitters are generally each stored in and 
released by different sets of neurons. The convention established by Dale 
classiﬁ es  neurons  into  mutually  exclusive  groups  by   neurotransmitter 
(cholinergic,  glutamatergic,  GABAergic,  and  so  on).  The  idea  that  a 
neuron has only one neurotransmitter is often called  Dale’s principle . 
Many peptide-containing neurons violate Dale’s principle because these 
cells usually release more than one neurotransmitter: an amino acid or 
amine  and  a peptide. When two or more transmitters are released from 
one  nerve  terminal,  they  are  called   co-transmitters .  Many  examples 
of  neurons  with  co-transmitters  have  been  identiﬁ ed  in  recent  years, 
 including some that release two small transmitters (e.g., GABA and gly-
cine). Nonetheless, most neurons seem to release only a single amino acid 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   153
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   153

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

154

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

or amine neurotransmitter, which can be used to assign them to distinct, 
nonoverlapping classes. Let’s take a look at the biochemical mechanisms 
that differentiate these neurons. 

 Cholinergic Neurons 
Acetylcholine  (ACh)   is  the  neurotransmitter  at  the  neuromuscular 
junction  and  is  therefore  synthesized  by  all  the  motor  neurons  in  the 
 spinal cord and brain stem. Other cholinergic cells contribute to the func-
tions of speciﬁ c circuits in the PNS and CNS, as we will see in Chapter 15. 
 ACh  synthesis  requires  a  speciﬁ c  enzyme,   choline  acetyltransferase
( ChAT )  (Figure  6.10).  Like  nearly  all  presynaptic  proteins,  ChAT  is 
manufactured in the soma and transported to the axon terminal. Only 
cholinergic neurons contain ChAT, so this enzyme is a good marker for 
cells  that  use  ACh  as  a  neurotransmitter.  Immunohistochemistry  with 
ChAT-speciﬁ c antibodies, for example, can be used to identify cholinergic 
neurons. ChAT synthesizes ACh in the cytosol of the axon terminal, and 
the neurotransmitter is concentrated in synaptic vesicles by the actions 
of a vesicular ACh  transporter  (Box 6.2). 

 ChAT  transfers  an  acetyl  group  from  acetyl  CoA  to  choline 
(Figure  6.11a).  The  source  of  choline  is  the  extracellular  ﬂ uid,  where 

BOX 6.2

B R A I N   F O O D

Pumping Ions and Transmitters
Neurotransmitters may lead an exciting life, but the most

mundane part would seem to be the steps that recycle them 
back  from  the  synaptic  cleft  and  eventually  into  a  vesicle. 
Where synapses are concerned, the exotic proteins of exo-
cytosis and the innumerable transmitter receptors get most 
of  the  publicity.  Yet,  the  neurotransmitter  transporters  are 
very interesting for at least two reasons: They succeed at an 
extraordinarily difﬁ cult job, and they are the molecular site at 
which many important psychoactive drugs act.

The hard job of transporters is to pump transmitter mol-
ecules  across  membranes  so  effectively  that  they  become 
highly concentrated in very small places. There are two gen-
eral  types  of  neurotransmitter  transporters.  One  type,  the 
neuronal  membrane  transporter,  shuttles  transmitter  from 
the extracellular ﬂ uid, including the synaptic cleft, and con-
centrates it up to 10,000 times higher within the cytosol of 
the presynaptic terminal. A second type, the vesicular trans-
porter, then crams transmitter into vesicles at concentrations 
that may be 100,000 times higher than in the cytosol. Inside 
cholinergic vesicles, for example, ACh may reach the incred-
ible concentration of 1000 mM, or 1 molar—in other words, 
about twice the concentration of salt in seawater!

How do transporters achieve such dramatic feats of con-
centration? Concentrating a chemical is like carrying a weight 
uphill; both are extremely unlikely to occur unless energy is 
applied  to  the  task.  Recall  from  Chapter  3  that  ion  pumps 
in the plasma membrane use ATP as their source of energy 
to transport Na⫹, K⫹, and Ca2⫹ against their concentration 

 gradients.  These  ion  gradients  are  essential  for  setting  the 
resting potential and for powering the ionic currents that un-
derlie  action  and  synaptic  potentials.  Similarly,  membranes 
of  synaptic  vesicles  have  pumps  that  use  ATP  to  fuel  the 
transport  of  H⫹  into  vesicles.  Notice  that  once  ionic  gradi-
ents  are  established  across  a  membrane,  they  can  them-
selves be tapped as sources of energy. Just as the energy 
spent  in  pulling  up  the  weights  on  a  cuckoo  clock  can  be 
reclaimed to turn the gears and hands of the clock (as the 
weights slowly fall down again), transporters use transmem-
brane gradients of Na⫹ or H⫹ as an energy source for moving 
transmitter molecules up steep concentration gradients. The 
transporter lets one transmembrane gradient, that of Na⫹ or 
H⫹, run down a bit in order to build up another gradient, that 
of the  transmitter.

The transporters themselves are large proteins that span 
membranes. There can be several transporters for one trans-
mitter  (e.g.,  at  least  four  subtypes  are  known  for  GABA). 
Figure  A  shows  how  they  work.  Plasma  membrane  trans-
porters use a cotransport mechanism, carrying two Na⫹ ions 
along  with  one  transmitter  molecule.  By  contrast,  vesicular 
membrane transporters use a countertransport mechanism 
that trades a transmitter molecule from the cytosol for a H⫹ 
from inside the vesicle. Vesicle membranes have ATP-driven 
H⫹ pumps that keep their contents very acidic, or high in pro-
tons (i.e., H⫹ ions).

What  is  the  relevance  of  all  this  to  drugs  and  disease? 
Many  psychoactive  drugs,  such  as  amphetamines  and 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   154
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   154

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

155

Presynaptic cell

Choline
transporter

ACh
transporter

ACh

ChAT Choline

+
   
   

Acetyl CoA

Ach
ACh

ACh

Vesicle

AChE

Choline

+
   
   

Acetic acid

ACh receptors

Postsynaptic cell

▲ FIGURE 6.10
The life cycle of ACh.

 cocaine, potently block certain transporters. By altering the 
normal  recycling  process  of  various  transmitters,  the  drugs 
lead to chemical imbalances in the brain that can have pro-
found effects on mood and behavior. It is also possible that 
defects in transporters can lead to psychiatric or  neurological 

disease;  certainly,  some  of  the  drugs  that  are  therapeuti-
cally useful in psychiatry work by blocking transporters. The 
 numerous  links  between  transmitters,  drugs,  disease,  and 
treatment are tantalizing but complex, and will be discussed 
further in Chapters 15 and 22.

Presynaptic:
GABAergic

GABA
transporter

Glutamate
transporter

Presynaptic:
Glutamatergic

Vesicular
GABA
transporter

2

GABA

Glu

2

Vesicular
glutamate
transporter

GABA

H+

Glu

H+

Postsynaptic membrane

Figure A
 Neurotransmitter transporters.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   155
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   155

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

156

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

O

CH3C

CoA

HOCH2CH2

+
N(CH3)3

Acetyl CoA

+

Choline

O

CH3C

OCH2CH2

+
N(CH3)3

+

CoA

ACh

Choline 

acetyltransferase

(ChAT)

(a)

(b)

O

CH3C

OCH2CH2

+
N(CH3)3

ACh

Acetylcholinesterase

O

CH3C OH

HOCH2CH2

+
N(CH3)3

Acetic acid

+

Choline

▲ FIGURE 6.11
Acetylcholine.  (a) ACh synthesis. (b) ACh degradation.

it   exists  in  low   micromolar  concentrations.  Choline  is  taken  up  by  the 
cholinergic  axon  terminals  via  a  speciﬁ c  transporter  that  requires  the 
 cotransport  of  Na ⫹   to  power  the  movement  of  choline  (see  Box  6.2). 
Because the availability of choline limits how much ACh can be synthe-
sized  in  the  axon  terminal,  the  transport  of  choline  into  the  neuron  is 
said to be the  rate-limiting step  in ACh synthesis. For certain diseases 
in  which  a  deﬁ cit  in  cholinergic  synaptic  transmission  has  been  noted, 
dietary  supplements  of  choline  are  sometimes  prescribed  to  boost  ACh 
levels in the brain. 

 Cholinergic  neurons  also  manufacture  the  ACh  degradative  enzyme 
 acetylcholinesterase   (AChE) . AChE is secreted into the synaptic cleft and 
is associated with cholinergic axon terminal membranes. However, AChE 
is also manufactured by some noncholinergic neurons, so this enzyme is 
not as useful a marker for cholinergic synapses as ChAT. 

 AChE degrades ACh into choline and acetic acid (Figure 6.11b). This 
happens very quickly because AChE has one of the fastest catalytic rates 
among  all  known  enzymes.  Much  of  the  resulting  choline  is  taken  up 
by  the  cholinergic  axon  terminal  via  a  choline  transporter  and  reused 
for ACh synthesis (see the red arrow in Figure 6.10). In Chapter 5, we 
mentioned that AChE is the target of many nerve gases and insecticides. 
Inhibition of AChE prevents the breakdown of ACh, disrupting transmis-
sion at cholinergic synapses on skeletal muscle and heart muscle. Acute 
effects include marked decreases in heart rate and blood pressure; how-
ever, death from the irreversible inhibition of AChE typically results from 
respiratory paralysis. 

 Catecholaminergic Neurons 
 The amino acid tyrosine is the precursor for three different amine neu-
rotransmitters  that  contain  a  chemical  structure  called  a   catechol  
(Figure 6.12a). These neurotransmitters are collectively called  catechol-
amines .  The  catecholamine  neurotransmitters  are   dopamine    (DA) , 
 norepinephrine    (NE) ,  and   epinephrine ,  also  called   adrenaline  
(Figure  6.12b).  Catecholaminergic  neurons  are  found  in  regions  of  the 

HO

HO

(a)

Catechol group

HO

HO

CH2CH2NH2

Dopamine (DA)

HO

HO

CHCH2NH2

OH

Norepinephrine (NE)
(Noradrenaline)

HO

HO

(b)

CHCH2NHCH3

OH

Epinephrine
(Adrenaline)

▲ FIGURE 6.12
The catecholamines.  (a) A catechol 
group. (b) The catecholamine 
 neurotransmitters.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   156
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   156

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

157

Tyrosine

HO

CH2CHNH2

COOH  

Tyrosine
hydroxylase
(TH)

L-Dihydroxy-
phenylalanine

(dopa)

HO

COOH  

HO

CH2CNH2

Dopa
decarboxylase

HO

Dopamine

(DA)

HO

CH2CH2NH2

(a)

(b)

Dopamine
β-hydroxylase
(DBH)

(c)

Norepinephrine

(NE)

Phentolamine
N-methyltransferase
(PNMT)

(d)

Epinephrine

CHCH2NH2

OH

HO

HO

HO

HO

CHCH2NHCH3

OH

▲ FIGURE 6.13
The synthesis of catecholamines from tyrosine.  The catecholamine neurotrans-
mitters are in boldface type.

nervous system involved in the regulation of movement, mood, attention, 
and visceral function (discussed further in Chapter 15). 

 All  catecholaminergic  neurons  contain  the  enzyme   tyrosine  hydroxy-
lase   (TH) , which catalyzes the ﬁ rst step in catecholamine synthesis, the 
conversion  of  tyrosine  to  a  compound  called   dopa   ( L -dihydroxyphenyl-
alanine) (Figure 6.13a). The activity of TH is rate limiting for catechol-
amine synthesis. The enzyme’s activity is regulated by various signals in 
the cytosol of the axon terminal. For example, decreased catecholamine 
release by the axon terminal causes the catecholamine concentration in 
the cytosol to rise, thereby inhibiting TH. This type of regulation is called 
 end-product inhibition.  On the other hand, during periods when catechol-
amines are released at a high rate, the elevation in [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  that accom-
panies  neurotransmitter  release  triggers  an  increase  in  the  activity  of 
TH, so transmitter supply keeps up with demand. In addition, prolonged 
periods of stimulation actually cause the synthesis of more mRNA that 
codes for the enzyme. 

 Dopa  is  converted  into  the  neurotransmitter  DA  by  the  enzyme 
 dopa decarboxylase  (Figure 6.13b). Dopa decarboxylase is abundant in 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   157
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   157

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

158

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 catecholaminergic  neurons,  so  the  amount  of  DA  synthesized   depends 
primarily  on  the  amount  of  dopa  available.  In  the  movement  disorder 
known as Parkinson’s disease, dopaminergic neurons in the brain slowly 
degenerate  and  eventually  die.  One  strategy  for  treating  Parkinson’s 
disease is the administration of dopa, which causes an increase in DA 
synthesis in the surviving neurons, increasing the amount of DA avail-
able for release. (We will learn more about dopamine and movement in 
Chapter 14.) 

 Neurons  that  use  NE  as  a  neurotransmitter  contain,  in  addition  to 
TH and dopa decarboxylase, the enzyme  dopamine   ␤  -hydroxylase   (DBH) , 
which converts DA to NE (Figure 6.13c). Interestingly, DBH is not found 
in the cytosol but instead is located within the synaptic vesicles. Thus, in 
noradrenergic axon terminals, DA is transported from the cytosol to the 
synaptic vesicles, and there it is made into NE. 

 The  last  in  the  line  of  catecholamine  neurotransmitters  is  epineph-
rine  (adrenaline).  Adrenergic  neurons  contain  the  enzyme   phentol-
amine  N -methyltransferase   (PNMT) , which converts NE to epinephrine 
(Figure 6.13d). Curiously, PNMT is in the cytosol of adrenergic axon ter-
minals. Thus, NE must ﬁ rst be synthesized in the vesicles and released 
into the cytosol for conversion into epinephrine, and then the epinephrine 
must again be transported into vesicles for release. In addition to serving 
as a neurotransmitter in the brain, epinephrine acts as a hormone when 
it is released by the adrenal gland into the bloodstream. As we shall see 
in Chapter 15, circulating epinephrine acts at receptors throughout the 
body to produce a coordinated visceral response. 

 The  catecholamine  systems  have  no  fast  extracellular  degradative 
 enzyme analogous to AChE. Instead, the actions of catecholamines in the 
synaptic cleft are terminated by selective uptake of the neurotransmitters 
back into the axon terminal via Na ⫹ -dependent transporters. This step is 
sensitive to a number of different drugs. For example, amphetamine and 
cocaine block catecholamine uptake and therefore prolong the actions of 
the neurotransmitter in the cleft. Once inside the axon terminal, the cat-
echolamines may be reloaded into synaptic vesicles for reuse, or they may 
be enzymatically destroyed by the action of   monoamine oxidase   (MAO) , 
an enzyme found on the outer membrane of mitochondria. 

 Serotonergic Neurons 
 The  amine  neurotransmitter   serotonin ,  also  called   5-hydroxytrypta-
mine  and abbreviated  5-HT , is derived from the amino acid tryptophan. 
 Serotonergic  neurons are relatively few in number, but, as we shall see 
in Part III, they appear to play an important role in the brain systems 
that regulate mood, emotional behavior, and sleep. 

 The synthesis of serotonin occurs in two steps, just like the synthesis 
of DA (Figure 6.14). Tryptophan is converted ﬁ rst into an intermediary 
called 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) by the enzyme  tryptophan hydroxy-
lase . The 5-HTP is then converted to 5-HT by the enzyme  5-HTP decar-
boxylase .  Serotonin  synthesis  appears  to  be  limited  by  the  availability 
of tryptophan in the extracellular ﬂ uid bathing neurons. The source of 
brain tryptophan is the blood, and the source of blood tryptophan is the 
diet (grains, meat, dairy products, and chocolate are particularly rich in 
tryptophan). 

 Following release from the axon terminal, 5-HT is removed from the 
synaptic cleft by the action of a speciﬁ c transporter. The process of sero-
tonin reuptake, like catecholamine reuptake, is sensitive to a number of 
different drugs. For example, numerous clinically useful antidepressant 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   158
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   158

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

159

Tryptophan

Tryptophan
hydroxylase

5-Hydroxytryptophan

(5-HTP)

5-HTP
decarboxylase

5-Hydroxytryptamine

(Serotonin, 5-HT)

HO

HO

COOH  

CH2CHNH2

COOH  

CH2CHNH2

CH2CH2NH2

N 

N 

N 

▲ FIGURE 6.14
The synthesis of serotonin from tryptophan.

and antianxiety drugs, including ﬂ uoxetine (trade name Prozac), are se-
lective inhibitors of serotonin reuptake. Once it is back in the cytosol of 
the  serotonergic  axon  terminal,  the  transmitter  is  either  reloaded  into 
synaptic vesicles or degraded by MAO. 

 Amino Acidergic Neurons 
 The amino acids  glutamate   (Glu) ,  glycine   (Gly) , and  gamma-amino-
butyric acid   (GABA)  serve as neurotransmitters at most CNS synapses 
(Figure 6.15). Of these, only GABA is unique to those neurons that use 
it as a neurotransmitter; the others are among the 20 amino acids that 
make up proteins. 

 Glutamate and glycine are synthesized from glucose and other precur-
sors by the action of enzymes that exist in all cells. Differences among 
neurons in the synthesis of these amino acids are therefore quantitative 
rather than qualitative. For example, the average glutamate concentra-
tion in the cytosol of glutamatergic axon terminals has been estimated to 
be about 20 mM, two or three times higher than that in nonglutamatergic 
cells. The more important distinction between glutamatergic and nonglu-
tamatergic neurons, however, is the transporter that loads the synaptic 
vesicles. In glutamatergic axon terminals, but not in other types, gluta-
mate transporters concentrate glutamate until it reaches a value of about 
50 mM in the synaptic vesicles. 

 Because  GABA  is  not  one  of  the  20  amino  acids  used  to  construct 
proteins, it is synthesized in large quantities only by the neurons that 
use  it  as  a  neurotransmitter.  The  precursor  for  GABA  is  glutamate, 
and the key synthesizing enzyme is  glutamic acid decarboxylase   (GAD)  
(Figure 6.16). GAD, therefore, is a good marker for GABAergic neurons. 
Immunocytochemical  studies  have  shown  that  GABAergic  neurons  are 
distributed widely in the brain. GABAergic neurons are the major source 
of synaptic inhibition in the nervous system. Therefore, remarkably, in 
one chemical step, the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain is 
converted into the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain! 

 The synaptic actions of the amino acid neurotransmitters are termi-
nated by selective uptake into the presynaptic terminals and glia, once 

COOH

Glutamate

NH3CHCH2CH2COOH

COOH

Glycine

NH3CH2

GABA

γ-aminobutyric acid  NH3CH2CH2CH2COOH
▲ FIGURE 6.15
The amino acid neurotransmitters.

COOH

Glutamate NH3CHCH2CH2COOH

Glutamic acid
decarboxylase
(GAD)

GABA

+
NH3CHCH2CH2COOH

▲ FIGURE 6.16
The synthesis of GABA from glutamate.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   159
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   159

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

160

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

again  via  speciﬁ c  Na ⫹ -dependent  transporters.  Inside  the  terminal  or 
glial cell, GABA is metabolized by the enzyme  GABA transaminase . 

 Other Neurotransmitter Candidates and Intercellular 
Messengers 
 In addition to the amines and amino acids, a few other small molecules 
serve as chemical messengers between neurons. One of the most common 
is  adenosine triphosphate (ATP) , a key molecule in cellular metabo-
lism (see Figure 2.13). ATP is also a neurotransmitter. It is concentrated 
in all synaptic vesicles in the CNS and PNS, and it is released into the 
cleft by presynaptic spikes in a Ca 2  ⫹ -dependent manner, just as the clas-
sic transmitters are. ATP is often packaged in vesicles along with another 
classic transmitter. For example, catecholamine-containing vesicles may 
have 100 mM of ATP, an enormous quantity, in addition to 400 mM of 
the  catecholamine  itself.  In  this  case,  the  catecholamine  and  ATP  are 
co-transmitters. ATP also occurs as a co-transmitter with GABA, gluta-
mate, ACh, DA, and peptide transmitters in various specialized types of 
neurons. 

 ATP directly excites some neurons by gating cation channels. In this 
sense,  some  of  the  neurotransmitter  functions  of  ATP  are  similar  to 
those of glutamate and ACh. ATP binds to  purinergic receptors , some of 
which are transmitter-gated ion channels. There is also a large class of 
G-protein-coupled  purinergic  receptors.  Following  its  release  from  syn-
apses,  ATP  is  degraded  by  extracellular  enzymes,  yielding  adenosine. 
Adenosine itself does not meet the standard deﬁ nition of a neurotrans-
mitter because it is not packaged in vesicles, but it does activate several 
adenosine-selective receptors. 

 The most interesting discovery about neurotransmitters in the past few 
years is that small lipid molecules, called  endocannabinoids  ( endogenous 
cannabinoids),  can  be  released  from  postsynaptic  neurons  and  act  on 
presynaptic  terminals  (Box  6.3).  Communication  in  this  direction,  from 
“post” to “pre,” is called  retrograde signaling ; thus,  endocannabinoids are 
  retrograde messengers . Retrograde messengers serve as a kind of feed-
back system to regulate the conventional forms of synaptic transmission, 
which of course go from “pre” to “post.” The details about endocannabi-
noid signaling are still emerging, but one basic mechanism is now clear 
(Figure 6.17). Vigorous ﬁ ring of action potentials in the postsynaptic neu-
ron causes voltage-gated calcium channels to open, Ca 2  ⫹  enters the cell in 
large quantities, and intracellular [Ca 2  ⫹ ] rises. The elevated [Ca 2  ⫹ ] then 
stimulates the synthesis of endocannabinoid molecules from membrane 
lipids  by  somehow  activating  endocannabinoid-synthesizing  enzymes. 
There are several unusual qualities about endocannabinoids: 
 1. They are not packaged in vesicles like most other neurotransmitters; 

instead, they are manufactured rapidly and on demand. 

 2. They are small and membrane permeable; once synthesized, they can 
diffuse rapidly across the membrane of their cell of origin to contact 
neighboring cells. 

 3. They bind selectively to the CB1 type of cannabinoid receptor, which is 

mainly located on certain presynaptic terminals. 
 CB1 receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors, and their main effect is 
often to reduce the opening of presynaptic calcium channels. With its cal-
cium channels inhibited, the ability of the presynaptic terminal to release 
its  neurotransmitter  (usually  GABA  or  glutamate)  is  impaired.  Thus, 
when a postsynaptic neuron is very active, it releases endocannabinoids, 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   160
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   160

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

161

BOX 6.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

This Is Your Brain on Endocannabinoids

Most neurotransmitters were discovered long before their 

receptors,  but  modern  techniques  have  tended  to  reverse 
this  tradition.  In  this  story,  the  receptors  were  discovered 
 before their transmitters.

Cannabis sativa is the botanical name for hemp, a ﬁ brous 
plant used through the ages for making rope and cloth. These 
days,  cannabis  is  much  more  popular  as  dope  than  rope. 
It is widely, and usually illegally, sold as marijuana or hash-
ish, although medical uses of cannabis-related compounds 
are  slowly  being  recognized,  and  medical  or  recreational 
use is being legalized in some states and other parts of the 
world. The Chinese ﬁ rst recognized the potent psychoactive 
properties of cannabis 4000 years ago, but Western society 
learned  of  its  intoxicating  properties  only  in  the  nineteenth 
century, when Napoleon III’s troops returned to France with 
Egyptian hashish. As a member of Napoleon’s Commission 
of Sciences and Arts reported in 1810, “For the Egyptians, 
hemp is the plant par excellence, not for the uses they make 
of it in Europe and many other countries, but for its peculiar 
effects. The hemp cultivated in Egypt is indeed intoxicating 
and narcotic” (cited in Piomelli, 2003, p. 873).

At low doses, the effects of cannabis can be euphoria, 
feelings of calm and relaxation, altered sensations, reduced 
pain,  increased  laughter,  talkativeness,  hunger,  and  light-
headedness, as well as decreased problem-solving ability, 
short-term  memory,  and  psychomotor  performance  (i.e., 
the  skills  necessary  for  driving).  High  doses  of  cannabis 
can  cause  profound  personality  changes  and  even  hal-
lucinations.  In  recent  years,  forms  of  cannabis  have  been 
approved  for  limited  medicinal  use  in  the  United  States, 
primarily to treat nausea and vomiting in cancer patients un-
dergoing chemotherapy and to stimulate appetite in some 
AIDS patients.

The active ingredient in cannabis is an oily chemical called 
⌬9-tetrahydrocannabinol,  or  THC.  During  the  late  1980s,  it 
became apparent that THC can bind to speciﬁ c G-protein-
coupled “cannabinoid” receptors in the brain, particularly in 
motor control areas, the cerebral cortex, and pain pathways. 
At about the same time, a group at the National Institute of 
Mental Health cloned the gene for an unknown (or “orphan”) 
G-protein-coupled  receptor.  Further  work  showed  that  the 
mystery  receptor  was  a  cannabinoid  (CB)  receptor.  Two 
types  of  cannabinoid  receptors  are  known:  CB1  receptors 
are in the brain, and CB2 receptors are mainly in immune tis-
sues elsewhere in the body.

Remarkably,  the  brain  has  more  CB1  receptors  than 
any other G-protein-coupled receptor. What are they doing 

there? We are quite certain they did not evolve to bind the 
THC from hemp. The natural ligand for a receptor is never the 
synthetic drug, plant toxin, or snake venom that might have 
helped us identify that receptor in the ﬁ rst place. It is much 
more likely that the cannabinoid receptors exist to bind some 
signaling  molecule  made  naturally  by  the  brain:  THC-like 
neurotransmitters  called  endocannabinoids.  Research  has 
identiﬁ ed  two  major  endocannabinoids:  anandamide  (from 
ananda, the Sanskrit word for “internal bliss”) and arachidon-
oylglycerol (2-AG). Anandamide and 2-AG are both small lipid 
molecules  (Figure  A),  quite  different  from  any  other  known 
neurotransmitter.

As the search for new transmitters continues, the hunt is 
also on for more selective compounds that bind to the CB 
receptors.  Cannabinoids  are  potentially  useful  for  relieving 
nausea,  suppressing  pain,  relaxing  muscles,  treating  sei-
zures, and decreasing the intraocular pressure of glaucoma. 
Antagonists  of  CB1  receptors  have  recently  been  tested 
as  appetite  suppressants,  but  they  cause  unfortunate  side 
 effects. Cannabinoid therapies might be more practical if new 
drugs can be developed that retain the therapeutic beneﬁ ts 
without causing psychoactive and other side effects.

OH

O

9-THC

O

NH

OH

Anandamide 

O

O

OH

OH

2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) 

Figure A
 Endocannabinoids.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   161
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   161

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

162

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 6.17
Retrograde signaling with endocannabinoids.

Presynaptic terminal

CB1
receptor

Vesicles

Calcium
channel

G-protein

Calcium
channel

Ca2+

Ca2+

Neurotransmitter
receptors

Postsynaptic

element

Enzyme

HO

O

NH

Endocannabinoid 

which suppress either the inhibitory or excitatory drive onto the neuron 
(depending on which presynaptic terminals have the CB1 receptors). This 
general endocannabinoid mechanism is used throughout the CNS, for a 
wide range of functions that we don’t completely understand. 

 One of the more exotic chemical messengers to be proposed for inter-
cellular  communication  is  actually  a  gaseous  molecule,   nitric  oxide  
 (NO) . The gases carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen sulﬁ de (H 2 S) have 
also been suggested to be messengers in the brain, although evidence for 
“gasotransmitter” functions is still sparse. These are the same NO, car-
bon monoxide, and hydrogen sulﬁ de that are often major air pollutants. 
NO is synthesized from the amino acid arginine by many cells of the body 
and has powerful biological effects, particularly in the regulation of blood 
ﬂ ow. In the nervous system, NO may be another example of a retrograde 
messenger.  Because  NO  is  small  and  membrane  permeable,  similar  to 
 endocannabinoids, it can diffuse much more freely than most other trans-
mitter molecules, even penetrating through one cell to affect another be-
yond it. Its inﬂ uence may spread throughout a small region of local tissue, 
rather than being conﬁ ned to the site of the cells that released it. On the 
other hand, NO is evanescent and breaks down very rapidly. The functions 
of gaseous transmitters are being extensively studied and hotly debated. 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   162
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   162

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

163

 Before leaving the topic of neurotransmitter chemistry, we point out, 
once again, that many of the chemicals we call neurotransmitters may 
also be present in high concentrations in non-neural parts of the body. 
A  chemical  may  serve  dual  purposes,  mediating  communication  in  the 
nervous system but doing something entirely different elsewhere. Amino 
acids, of course, are used to make proteins throughout the body. ATP is 
the energy source for all cells. NO is released from endothelial cells and 
causes the smooth muscle of blood vessels to relax. (One consequence in 
males  is  penile  erection.)  The  cells  with  the  highest  levels  of  ACh  are 
not in the brain but in the cornea of the eye, where there are no ACh re-
ceptors. Likewise, the highest serotonin levels are not in neurons but in 
blood platelets. These observations underscore the importance of rigorous 
analysis before a chemical is assigned a neurotransmitter role. 

 The  operation  of  a  neurotransmitter  system  is  like  a  play  with  two 
acts.  Act  I  is  presynaptic  and  culminates  in  the  transient  elevation  of 
neurotransmitter concentration in the synaptic cleft. We are now ready to 
move on to Act II, the generation of electrical and biochemical signals in 
the postsynaptic neuron. The main players are transmitter-gated chan-
nels and G-protein-coupled receptors. 

TRANSMITTER-GATED CHANNELS 
TRANNSMITTTER-GATED CHANNNELS 

 In Chapter 5, we learned that ACh and the amino acid neurotransmitters 
mediate  fast  synaptic  transmission  by  acting  on  transmitter-gated  ion 
channels. These channels are magniﬁ cent minuscule machines. A single 
channel can be a sensitive detector of chemicals and voltage, it can regu-
late  the  ﬂ ow  of  surprisingly  large  currents  with  great  precision,  it  can 
sift and select between very similar ions, and it can be regulated by other 
receptor systems. Yet each channel is only about 11 nm long, just barely 
visible with the best computer-enhanced electron microscopic methods. 

 The Basic Structure of Transmitter-Gated Channels 
 The most thoroughly studied transmitter-gated ion channel is the nico-
tinic ACh receptor at the neuromuscular junction in skeletal muscle. It is 
a pentamer, an amalgam of ﬁ ve protein subunits arranged like the staves 
of a barrel to form a single pore through the membrane (Figure 6.18a). 
Four different types of polypeptides are used as subunits for the nicotinic 
receptor, designated  ␣ ,  ␤ ,  ␥ , and  ␦ . A complete mature channel is made 
from  two   ␣   subunits,  and  one  each  of   ␤ ,   ␥ ,  and   ␦   (abbreviated   ␣  2  ␤  ␥  ␦ ). 
There  is  one  ACh  binding  site  on  each  of  the   ␣   subunits;  the  simulta-
neous  binding  of  ACh  to  both  sites  is  required  for  the  channel  to  open 
(Figure 6.18b). The nicotinic ACh receptor on neurons is also a pentamer, 
but, unlike the muscle receptor, most of these receptors are composed of 
 ␣  and  ␤  subunits only (in a ratio of  ␣  3  ␤  2 ). 

 Although each type of receptor subunit has a different primary struc-
ture,  there  are  stretches  where  the  different  polypeptide  chains  have 
a similar sequence of amino acids. For example, each subunit polypep-
tide  has  four  separate  segments  that  will  coil  into  alpha  helices  (see 
Figure 6.18a). Because the amino acid residues of these segments are hy-
drophobic, the four alpha helices are believed to be where the polypeptide 
is threaded back and forth across the membrane, similar to the pore loops 
of potassium and sodium channels (see Chapters 3 and 4). 

 The  primary  structures  of  the  subunits  of  other  transmitter-gated 
channels in the brain are also known, and there are obvious similarities 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   163
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   163

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

164

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

NH2

COOH

M4

M1

M3

M2

▲ FIGURE 6.18
The subunit arrangement of the nicotinic ACh 
 receptor.  (a) Side view, with an enlargement showing 
how the four alpha helices of each subunit are packed 
together. (b) Top view, showing the location of the two 
ACh binding sites.

α

δ

γ

α

β

(a)

ACh binding sites

γ

α

α

δ

β

(b)

(Figure 6.19). Most contain the four hydrophobic segments that span the 
membrane in subunits of the nicotinic ACh receptor, the GABA A  recep-
tor, and the glycine receptor. These three neurotransmitter receptors are 
all pentameric complexes of subunits (Figure 6.19b). The glutamate-gated 
channels are slightly different. Glutamate receptors are tetramers, having 
four subunits that comprise a functional channel. The M2 region of the glu-
tamate subunits does not span the membrane but instead forms a hairpin 
that both enters and exits from the inside of the membrane (Figure 6.19c). 
The structure of the glutamate receptors resembles that of some potas-
sium channels (see Figure 3.17), and this has inspired the surprising hy-
pothesis that glutamate receptors and potassium channels evolved from a 
common ancestral ion channel. The purinergic (ATP) receptors also have 
an  unusual  structure.  Each  subunit  has  only  two  membrane-spanning 
segments, and three subunits make up a complete  receptor. 

 The most interesting variations among channel structures are the ones 
that account for their differences. Different transmitter binding sites let 
one channel respond to Glu while another responds to GABA; certain amino 
acids around the narrow ion pore allow only Na ⫹  and K ⫹  to ﬂ ow through 
some channels, Ca 2  ⫹  through others, and only Cl ⫺  through yet others. 

 Amino Acid-Gated Channels 
 Amino acid-gated channels mediate most of the fast synaptic transmis-
sion in the CNS. Let’s take a closer look at their functions because they 
are central to topics as diverse as sensory systems, memory, and disease. 
Several properties of these channels distinguish them from one another 
and deﬁ ne their functions within the brain. 
 (cid:129) The  pharmacology  of their binding sites describes which transmitters

 determine the duration of their effect.

affect them and how drugs interact with them.

 (cid:129) The   kinetics   of  the  transmitter  binding  process  and  channel  gating

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   164
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   164

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

165

M1

M2

M3

M4

Receptor

Subunit

ACh

GABAA

GABAA

GABAA

Gly

Gly

Kainate

Kainate

α

α1

β1

γ2

α

β

GLuK1

GLuK2

(a)  

Extra-
cellular
side

Membrane

Intra-
cellular
side

M1 M2 M3

M4

M1

M3

M4

M2

ACh
GABAA
Glycine receptors

Glutamate receptor

(b)  

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 6.19
Similarities in the structure of  subunits for 
different transmitter-gated ion channels. 
 (a) If the  polypeptides for various channel sub-
units were stretched out in a line, this is how 
they would compare. They have in common 
the four regions called M1 to M4, which are 
segments where the polypeptides will coil into 
alpha helices to span the membrane. Kainate 
receptors are  subtypes of glutamate receptors. 
(b) M1–M4 regions of the ACh ␣ subunit as 
they are threaded through the membrane. 
(c) M1–M4 regions of the glutamate receptor 
subunits; M1, M3, and M4 span the entire 
thickness of the membrane, whereas M2 pene-
trates only part way.

 (cid:129)  The   selectivity   of  the  ion  channels  determines  whether  they  produce 
excitation or inhibition and whether Ca 2  ⫹  enters the cell in signiﬁ cant 
amounts. 

 (cid:129)  The  conductance  of open channels helps determine the magnitude of 

their effects. 
 All of these properties are a direct result of the molecular structure of 

the channels. 

 Glutamate-Gated  Channels.  As  we  discussed  previously,  three  gluta-
mate receptor subtypes bear the names of their selective agonists: AMPA, 
NMDA,  and  kainate.  Each  of  these  is  a  glutamate-gated  ion  channel. 
The  AMPA-gated  and  NMDA-gated  channels  mediate  the  bulk  of  fast 
 excitatory  synaptic  transmission  in  the  brain.  Kainate  receptors  also 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   165
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   165

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

166

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

▲ FIGURE 6.20
The coexistence of NMDA and AMPA receptors in 
the postsynaptic membrane of a CNS synapse. 
 (a) An action potential arriving in the presynaptic ter-
minal causes the release of glutamate. (b) Glutamate 
binds to AMPA receptor channels and NMDA recep-
tor channels in the postsynaptic membrane. (c) The 
entry of Na⫹ through the AMPA channels, and Na⫹ 
and Ca2⫹ through the NMDA channels, causes an 
EPSP.

(a)  

Impulse

Axon

Axon terminal

Postsynaptic
dendrite

Record Vm

Ca2+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Glutamate
molecule

Ca2+

Na+

Na+

K+

K+

K+

K+

K+

EPSP

Vm 

– 65 mV

(b)

NMDA
receptor

AMPA
receptor

0
(c)

2

4

6

8

Time from presynaptic action potential (msec)

exist throughout the brain, on both presynaptic and postsynaptic mem-
branes, but their functions are not clearly understood. 

 AMPA-gated channels are permeable to both Na ⫹  and K ⫹ , and most of 
them are not permeable to Ca 2  ⫹ . The net effect of activating them at nor-
mal, negative membrane potentials is to admit an excess of cations into 
the cell (i.e., more Na ⫹  enters than K ⫹  leaves), causing a rapid and large 
depolarization.  Thus,  AMPA  receptors  at  CNS  synapses  mediate  excit-
atory transmission in much the same way as nicotinic receptors mediate 
synaptic excitation at neuromuscular junctions. 

 AMPA  receptors  coexist  with  NMDA  receptors  at  many  synapses  in 
the brain, so most glutamate-mediated excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
(EPSPs)  have  components  contributed  by  both  (Figure  6.20).  NMDA-
gated channels also cause excitation of a cell by admitting an excess of 
Na ⫹ , but they differ from AMPA receptors in two very important ways: (1) 
NMDA-gated channels are permeable to Ca 2  ⫹ , and (2) inward ionic cur-
rent through NMDA-gated channels is voltage dependent. We’ll discuss 
each of these properties in turn. 

 It is hard to overstate the importance of intracellular Ca 2  ⫹  to cell func-
tions. We have already seen that Ca 2  ⫹  can trigger presynaptic neurotrans-
mitter release. Postsynaptically, Ca 2  ⫹  can also activate many enzymes, 
regulate the opening of a variety of channels, and affect gene expression; 
in excessive amounts, Ca 2  ⫹  can even trigger the death of a cell (Box 6.4). 
Thus, activation of NMDA receptors can, in principle, cause widespread 
and lasting changes in the postsynaptic neuron. Indeed, as we will see in 
Chapter  25,  Ca 2  ⫹   entry  through  NMDA-gated  channels  may  cause  the 
changes that lead to long-term memory. 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   166
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   166

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

167

BOX 6.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Exciting Poisons: Too Much of a Good Thing

Neurons of the mammalian brain almost never regenerate, 

so each dead neuron is one less we have for thinking. One 
of  the  fascinating  ironies  of  neuronal  life  and  death  is  that 
glutamate, the most essential neurotransmitter in the brain, 
is  also  a  common  killer  of  neurons.  A  large  percentage  of 
the  brain’s  synapses  release  glutamate,  which  is  stored  in 
large quantities. Even the cytosol of nonglutamatergic neu-
rons has a very high glutamate concentration, greater than 
3 mM. An ominous observation is that when you apply this 
same amount of glutamate to the outside of isolated neurons, 
they die within minutes. Mae West once said, “Too much of 
a good thing can be wonderful,” but apparently she wasn’t 
talking about glutamate.

The voracious metabolic rate of the brain demands a con-
tinuous supply of oxygen and glucose. If blood ﬂ ow ceases, 
as in cardiac arrest, neural activity will stop within seconds, 
and  permanent  damage  will  result  within  a  few  minutes. 
Disease states such as cardiac arrest, stroke, brain trauma, 
seizures, and oxygen deﬁ ciency can initiate a vicious cycle of 
excess glutamate release. Whenever neurons cannot gener-
ate enough ATP to keep their ion pumps working hard, mem-
branes depolarize, and Ca2⫹ leaks into cells. The entry of Ca2⫹ 
triggers the synaptic release of glutamate. Glutamate further 
depolarizes  neurons,  which  further  raises  intracellular  Ca2⫹ 
and causes still more glutamate to be released. At this point, 
there  may  even  be  a  reversal  of  the  glutamate  transporter, 
further contributing to the cellular leakage of glutamate.

When glutamate reaches high concentrations, it kills neu-
rons  by  overexciting  them,  a  process  called  excitotoxicity. 
Glutamate  simply  activates  its  several  types  of  receptors, 

which allow excessive amounts of Na⫹, K⫹, and Ca2⫹ to ﬂ ow 
across the membrane. The NMDA subtype of the glutamate-
gated channel is a critical player in excitotoxicity because it is 
the main route for Ca2⫹ entry. Neuron damage or death occurs 
because of swelling resulting from water uptake and stimula-
tion  by  Ca2⫹  of  intracellular  enzymes  that  degrade  proteins, 
lipids, and nucleic acids. Neurons literally digest themselves.

Excitotoxicity has been implicated in several progressive 
neurodegenerative human diseases such as amyotrophic lat-
eral  sclerosis  (ALS,  also  known  as  Lou  Gehrig  disease),  in 
which spinal motor neurons slowly die, and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, in which brain neurons slowly die. The effects of various 
environmental toxins mimic aspects of these diseases. Eating 
large quantities of a certain type of chickpea can cause lath-
yrism,  a  degeneration  of  motor  neurons.  The  pea  contains 
an  excitotoxin  called  ␤-oxalylaminoalanine,  which  activates 
glutamate  receptors.  A  toxin  called  domoic  acid,  found  in 
contaminated shellﬁ sh, is also a glutamate receptor agonist. 
Ingesting small amounts of domoic acid causes seizures and 
brain damage. And another plant excitotoxin,  ␤-methylami-
noalanine,  may  cause  a  hideous  condition  that  combines 
signs of ALS, Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease 
in individual patients on the island of Guam.

As researchers sort out the tangled web of excitotoxins, 
receptors,  enzymes,  and  neurological  disease,  new  strate-
gies  for  treatment  emerge.  Glutamate  receptor  antagonists 
that can obstruct these excitotoxic cascades and minimize 
neuronal suicide have shown some clinical promise. Genetic 
manipulations may eventually thwart neurodegenerative con-
ditions in susceptible people.

 When  the  NMDA-gated  channel  opens,  Ca 2  ⫹   and  Na ⫹   enter  the  cell 
(and K ⫹  leaves), but the magnitude of this inward ionic current depends 
on the postsynaptic membrane potential in an unusual way, for an un-
usual  reason.  When  glutamate  binds  to  the  NMDA  receptor,  the  pore 
opens as usual. However, at normal negative resting membrane poten-
tials, the channel becomes clogged by Mg 2  ⫹  ions, and this “magnesium 
block” prevents other ions from passing freely through the NMDA chan-
nel. Mg 2  ⫹  pops out of the pore only when the membrane is depolarized, 
which usually follows the activation of AMPA channels at the same and 
neighboring  synapses.  Thus,  inward  ionic  current  through  the  NMDA 
channel is  voltage dependent , in addition to being transmitter gated. Both 
glutamate and depolarization must coincide before the channel will pass 
current (Figure 6.21). This property has a signiﬁ cant impact on synaptic 
integration at many locations in the CNS. 

 GABA-Gated  and  Glycine-Gated  Channels.  GABA  mediates  most  syn-
aptic inhibition in the CNS, and glycine mediates most of the rest. Both 
the  GABA A   receptor  and  the  glycine  receptor  gate  a  chloride  channel. 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   167
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   167

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

168

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Vm = – 65 mV

Vm = – 30 mV

Glutamate

Mg2+

CaCa2+2+

NaNa++

Mg2+

NMDA
receptor

KK++

(a) Glutamate

(b) Glutamate and
depolarization

▲ FIGURE 6.21
Inward ionic current through the 
NMDA-gated channel.  (a) Glutamate 
alone causes the channel to open, but at 
the resting membrane potential, the pore 
becomes blocked by Mg2⫹. (b) Depolar-
ization of the membrane relieves the Mg2⫹ 
block and allows Na⫹ and Ca2⫹ to enter.

Surprisingly,  inhibitory  GABA A   and  glycine  receptors  have  a  structure 
very similar to that of excitatory nicotinic ACh receptors, despite the fact 
that the ﬁ rst two are selective for anions while the last is selective for cat-
ions. Each receptor has  ␣  subunits that bind the transmitter and  ␤  sub-
units that do not. 

 Synaptic  inhibition  must  be  tightly  regulated  in  the  brain.  Too  much 
causes a loss of consciousness and coma; too little leads to a seizure. The 
need  to  control  inhibition  may  explain  why  the  GABA A   receptor  has,  in 
addition to its GABA binding site, several other sites where chemicals can 
dramatically modulate its function. For example, two classes of drugs,  ben-
zodiazepines   (such  as  the  tranquilizer  diazepam,  with  the  trade  name 
Valium) and  barbiturates  (including phenobarbital and other sedatives 
and anticonvulsants), each bind to their own distinct site on the outside 
face of the GABA A  channel (Figure 6.22). By themselves, these drugs do 
very little to the channel. But when GABA is present, benzodiazepines in-
crease the frequency of channel openings, while barbiturates increase the 
duration of channel openings. The result in each case is more inhibitory 
Cl ⫺  current, stronger inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs), and the 
behavioral consequences of enhanced inhibition. The actions of benzodiaze-
pines and barbiturates are selective for the GABA A  receptor, and the drugs 
have no effect on glycine receptor function. Some of this selectivity can be 
understood in molecular terms; only receptors with the  ␥  type of GABA A  
subunit, in addition to  ␣  and  ␤  subunits, respond to benzodiazepines. 

 Another  popular  drug  that  strongly  enhances  the  function  of  the 
GABA A   receptor  is  ethanol,  the  form  of  alcohol  imbibed  in  beverages. 
Ethanol has complex actions that include effects on NMDA, glycine, nico-
tinic ACh, and serotonin receptors. Its effects on GABA A  channels depend 
on their speciﬁ c structure. Evidence indicates that particular  ␣ ,  ␤ , and 
 ␥   subunits  are  necessary  for  constructing  an  ethanol-sensitive  GABA A  
receptor, similar to the structure that is benzodiazepine sensitive. This 
explains  why  ethanol  enhances  inhibition  in  some  brain  areas  but  not 
others. By understanding this molecular and anatomical speciﬁ city, we 
can begin to appreciate how drugs like ethanol lead to such powerful, and 
addictive, effects on behavior. 

 These  myriad  drug  effects  present  an  interesting  paradox.  Surely, 
the GABA A  receptor did not evolve modulatory binding sites just for the 
beneﬁ t of our modern drugs. The paradox has motivated researchers to 
search for endogenous ligands, natural chemicals that might bind to ben-
zodiazepine and barbiturate sites and serve as regulators of inhibition. 

GABA

Benzodiazepine

Ethanol

Barbiturate

Neurosteroids

▲ FIGURE 6.22
The binding of drugs to the GABAA 
 receptor.  The drugs by themselves do 
not open the channel, but they change 
the effect that GABA has when it 
binds to the channel at the same time 
as the drug.

GABA-gated Cl– channel

(GABAA receptor)

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   168
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   168

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

169

Substantial evidence indicates that natural benzodiazepine-like ligands 
exist, although identifying them and understanding their functions are 
proving difﬁ cult. Other good candidates as natural modulators of GABA A
receptors are the  neurosteroids , natural metabolites of steroid hormones 
that are synthesized from cholesterol primarily in the gonads and adrenal 
glands, but also in glial cells of the brain. Some neurosteroids enhance 
inhibitory function while others suppress it, and they seem to do both by 
binding to their own sites on the GABA A  receptor (see Figure 6.22), distinct 
from those of the other drugs we’ve mentioned. The functions of natural 
neurosteroids are also obscure, but they suggest a means by which brain 
and body physiology could be regulated in parallel by the same chemicals. 

G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTORS AND 
G-PRROTEINN-COUPLED RECEPPTORS AND
EFFEECTORRS 
EFFECTORS 

 There  are  multiple  subtypes  of  G-protein-coupled  receptors  in  every 
known  neurotransmitter  system.  In  Chapter  5,  we  learned  that  trans-
mission at these receptors involves three steps: (1) binding of the neu-
rotransmitter  to  the  receptor  protein,  (2)  activation  of  G-proteins,  and 
(3)  activation of effector systems. Let’s focus on each of these steps. 

 The Basic Structure of G-Protein-Coupled Receptors 
 Most G-protein-coupled receptors are simple variations on a common plan, 
consisting of a single polypeptide containing seven membrane-spanning 
alpha helices (Figure 6.23). Two of the extracellular loops of the polypep-
tide form the transmitter binding sites. Structural variations in this re-
gion determine which neurotransmitters, agonists, and antagonists bind 
to the receptor. Two of the intracellular loops can bind to and activate 
G-proteins. Structural variations here determine which G-proteins and, 
consequently, which effector systems are activated in response to trans-
mitter binding. 

 A very partial list of G-protein-coupled receptors appears in Table 6.2. 
The human genome has genes coding for about 800 different G-protein-
coupled  receptors,  which  are  organized  into  ﬁ ve  major  families  with 

Neurotransmitter

Neurotransmitter binding site

Membrane-
spanning
alpha helix

G-protein-coupled
receptor

Extracellular
side

Intracellular
side

G-protein

▲ FIGURE 6.23
The basic structure of a G-protein-coupled receptor.  Most metabotropic re-
ceptors have seven membrane-spanning alpha helices, a transmitter binding site 
on the extracellular side, and a G-protein binding site on the intracellular side.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   169
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   169

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

170

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

TABLE 6.2  Some G-Protein-Coupled Neurotransmitter Receptors
Neurotransmitter

Receptors

Acetylcholine (ACh)
Glutamate (Glu)
GABA
Serotonin (5-HT)

Dopamine (DA)
Norepinephrine (NE)
Opioids
Cannabinoid
ATP
Adenosine

Muscarinic receptors (M1, M2, M3, M4, M5)
Metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1–8)
GABAB1, GABAB2
5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, 5-HT1E, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 

5-HT4, 5-HT5A

D1, D2, D3, D4, D5
␣1, ␣2, ␤1, ␤2, ␤3
␮, ␦, ␬
CB1, CB2
P2Y2, P2Y11, P2T, P2U
A1, A2A, A2B, A3

 similar structures. Most of these receptors were unknown before the pow-
erful methods of molecular biology were applied to their discovery. It is 
also important to recall that G-protein-coupled receptors are important in 
all of the body’s cell types, not just neurons. 

 The Ubiquitous G-Proteins 
 G-proteins are the common link in most signaling pathways that start 
with a neurotransmitter receptor and end with effector proteins. G-protein 
is short for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding protein, which is actu-
ally a diverse family of about 20 types. There are many more transmitter 
receptors than G-proteins, so some types of G-proteins can be activated 
by many receptors. 

 Most G-proteins have the same basic mode of operation (Figure 6.24): 
 1. Each G-protein has three subunits, termed  ␣ ,  ␤ , and  ␥ . In the resting 
state, a guanosine diphosphate (GDP) molecule is bound to the G ␣  sub-
unit, and the whole complex ﬂ oats around on the inner surface of the 
membrane. 

 2. If this GDP-bound G-protein bumps into the proper type of receptor 
 and  if that receptor has a transmitter molecule bound to it, then the 
G-protein releases its GDP and exchanges it for a GTP that it picks up 
from the cytosol. 

 3. The activated GTP-bound G-protein splits into two parts: the G ␣  sub-
unit plus GTP and the G ␤  ␥  complex. Both can then move on to inﬂ uence 
various effector proteins. 

 4. The G ␣  subunit is itself an enzyme that eventually breaks down GTP 
into GDP. Therefore, G ␣  eventually terminates its own activity by con-
verting the bound GTP to GDP. 

 5. The  G ␣   and  G ␤  ␥   subunits  come  back  together,  allowing  the  cycle  to 

begin again. 
 The ﬁ rst G-proteins that were discovered had the effect of stimulating 
effector proteins. Subsequently, it was found that other G-proteins could 
inhibit these same effectors. Thus, the simplest scheme for subdividing 
the G-proteins is G S , designating that the G-protein is stimulatory, and 
G i , designating that the G-protein is inhibitory. 

 G-Protein-Coupled Effector Systems 
 In Chapter 5, we learned that activated G-proteins exert their effects by 
binding  to  either  of  two  types  of  effector  proteins:  G-protein-gated  ion 
channels  and  G-protein-activated  enzymes.  Because  the  effects  do  not 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   170
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   170

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

171

G-protein-coupled
receptor

Membrane

Effector
protein 1

▲ FIGURE 6.24
The basic mode of operation of  G-proteins.  (a) In its 
inactive state, the ␣ subunit of the G-protein binds GDP. 
(b) When activated by a G-protein-coupled receptor, the 
GDP is exchanged for GTP. (c) The activated G-protein 
splits, and both the G␣ (GTP) subunit and the G␤␥ subunit 
become available to activate effector proteins. (d) The G␣ 
subunit slowly removes phosphate (PO4) from GTP, con-
verting GTP to GDP and terminating its own activity.

Effector
protein 2

γ

β

α

G-protein

Transmitter

Effector
protein 2

γ

β

α

Activated Gα binds GTP

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

γ
β

α

Gβγ-stimulated
effector protein

Gα (GTP)-stimulated
effector protein

γ
β

α

+ PO4

involve any other chemical intermediaries, the ﬁ rst route is sometimes 
called the shortcut pathway. 

 The  Shortcut  Pathway.  A  variety  of  neurotransmitters  use  the  short-
cut pathway, from receptor to G-protein to ion channel. One example is 
the muscarinic receptors in the heart. These ACh receptors are coupled 
via G-proteins to particular types of potassium channels, explaining why 
ACh  slows  the  heart  rate  (Figure  6.25).  In  this  case,  the   ␤  ␥   subunits 
migrate laterally along the membrane until they bind to the right type 
of potassium channel and induce it to open. Another example is neuro-
nal GABA B  receptors, also coupled by the shortcut pathway to potassium 
channels. 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   171
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   171

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

172

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Potassium channel
(closed)

Muscarinic
receptor

ACh

γ

β

α

G-protein

ACh

(a)  

Potassium channel
(open)

γ

β

α

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 6.25
The shortcut pathway.  (a) G-proteins in heart muscle are activated by ACh 
 binding to muscarinic receptors. (b) The activated G␤␥ subunit directly induces a 
potassium channel to open.

 Shortcut  pathways  are  the  fastest  of  the  G-protein-coupled  systems, 
having  responses  beginning  within  30–100  msec  of  neurotransmit-
ter binding. Although not quite as fast as a transmitter-gated channel, 
which uses no intermediary between receptor and channel, this is faster 
than the second messenger cascades we describe next. The shortcut path-
way is also very localized compared with other effector systems. As the 
G-protein diffuses within the membrane, it apparently cannot move very 
far, so only channels nearby can be affected. Because all the action in the 
shortcut pathway occurs within the membrane, it is sometimes called the 
 membrane-delimited pathway . 

 Second Messenger Cascades. G-proteins can also exert their effects by 
directly activating certain enzymes. Activation of these enzymes can trig-
ger an elaborate series of biochemical reactions, a cascade that often ends 
in the activation of other “downstream” enzymes that alter neuronal func-
tion. Between the ﬁ rst enzyme and the last are several  second messengers . 
The whole process that couples the neurotransmitter, via multiple steps, 
to  activation  of  a  downstream  enzyme  is  called  a   second   messenger 
cascade  (Figure 6.26). 

 In Chapter 5, we introduced the cAMP second messenger cascade initi-
ated by the activation of the NE  ␤  receptor (Figure 6.27a). It begins with 
the  ␤  receptor activating the stimulatory G-protein, G S , which proceeds 
to  stimulate  the  membrane-bound  enzyme  adenylyl  cyclase.  Adenylyl 
 cyclase converts ATP to cAMP. The subsequent rise of cAMP in the cytosol 
activates a speciﬁ c downstream enzyme called  protein kinase A (PKA) . 
 Many biochemical processes are regulated with a push–pull method, 
one  to  stimulate  them  and  one  to  inhibit  them,  and  cAMP  production 
is  no  exception.  The  activation  of  a  second  type  of  NE  receptor,  called 

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   172
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   172

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

Receptor

Neurotransmitter

Membrane-bound
enzyme

▲ FIGURE 6.26
The components of a second 
 messenger cascade.

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

173

␥

␤

␣

G-protein

␣

Secondary
chemical
reactions

Activation
of downstream
enzyme

the  ␣  2  receptor, leads to the activation of G i  (the inhibitory G-protein). G i  
suppresses the activity of adenylyl cyclase, and this effect can take prece-
dence over the stimulatory system (Figure 6.27b). 

 Some messenger cascades can branch. Figure 6.28 shows how the acti-
vation of various G-proteins can stimulate  phospholipase C   (PLC) , an 
enzyme that ﬂ oats in the membrane-like adenylyl cyclase. PLC acts on a 
membrane phospholipid (PIP 2 , or phosphatidylinositol-4, 5- bisphosphate), 
splitting  it  to  form  two  molecules  that  serve  as  second  messengers: 
  diacylglycerol    (DAG)   and   inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate  (IP  3  ) .  DAG, 
which  is  lipid-soluble,  stays  within  the  plane  of  the  membrane  where 
it  activates  a  downstream  enzyme,   protein  kinase  C    (PKC) .  At  the 
same time, the water-soluble IP 3  diffuses away in the cytosol and binds 
to speciﬁ c receptors on the smooth ER and other membrane-enclosed or-
ganelles in the cell. These receptors are IP 3 -gated calcium channels, so 

NE

Stimulatory
␤ receptor

Adenylyl
cyclase

NE

Inhibitory
␣2 receptor

␥

␤

␣

␣

+

–

␣

Stimulatory
G-protein
(Gs)

(a)

+

Protein
kinase A 

▲ FIGURE 6.27
The stimulation and inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by different G-proteins. 
 (a) Binding of NE to the ␤ receptor activates Gs, which in turn activates adenylyl 
cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase generates cAMP, which activates the downstream 
 enzyme protein kinase A. (b) Binding of NE to the ␣2 receptor activates Gi, which 
 inhibits adenylyl cyclase.

␣

␥

␤

Inhibitory
G-protein
(Gi)

(b)

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   173
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   173

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

174

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Neurotransmitter

G-protein-coupled
receptor

␥

␤

1

PIP2

␣

2
PLC

Activated 
G-protein

Neuronal
membrane

3

PKC

IP3

4

DAG

Ca2+

Smooth ER

Ca2+

▲ FIGURE 6.28
Second messengers generated by the breakdown of PIP2, a membrane 
phospholipid.  ① Activated G-proteins stimulate the enzyme phospholipase C 
(PLC). ② PLC splits PIP2 into DAG and IP3. ③ DAG stimulates the downstream 
enzyme protein kinase C (PKC). ④ IP3 stimulates the release of Ca2⫹ from intra-
cellular stores. The Ca2⫹ can go on to stimulate various downstream enzymes.

IP 3  causes the organelles to discharge their stores of Ca 2  ⫹ . As we have 
said, elevations in cytosolic Ca 2  ⫹  can trigger widespread and long-lasting 
 effects. One effect is activation of the enzyme  calcium-calmodulin-de-
pendent protein kinase , or  CaMK . CaMK is an enzyme implicated in, 
among other things, the molecular mechanisms of memory, as we’ll see 
in Chapter 25. 

 Phosphorylation and Dephosphorylation. The preceding examples show 
that  key  downstream  enzymes  in  many  of  the  second  messenger  cas-
cades are  protein kinases  (PKA, PKC, CaMK). As mentioned in Chapter 5, 
 protein  kinases  transfer  phosphate  from ATP  ﬂ oating  in  the  cytosol  to 
proteins,  a  reaction  called   phosphorylation.   The  addition  of  phosphate 
groups to a protein changes its conformation slightly, thereby changing 
its biological activity. The phosphorylation of ion channels, for example, 
can strongly inﬂ uence the probability that they will open or close. 

 Consider  the  consequence  of  activating  the   ␤   type  of  NE  receptors 
on  cardiac  muscle  cells.  The  subsequent  rise  in  cAMP  activates  PKA, 
which  phosphorylates  the  cell’s  voltage-gated  calcium  channels,  and 
this   enhances  their activity. More Ca 2  ⫹  ﬂ ows, and the heart beats more 
strongly. By contrast, the stimulation of  ␤ -adrenergic receptors in many 
neurons seems to have no effect on calcium channels, but instead causes 
 inhibition  of certain potassium channels. Reduced K ⫹  conductance causes 
a  slight  depolarization,  increases  the  length  constant,  and  makes  the 
neuron more excitable (see Chapter 5). 

 If transmitter-stimulated kinases were allowed to phosphorylate with-
out some method of reversing the process, all proteins would quickly be-
come saturated with phosphates, and further regulation would become 
impossible. Enzymes called  protein phosphatases  save the day because 
they act rapidly to remove phosphate groups. The degree of channel phos-
phorylation  at  any  moment  therefore  depends  on  the  dynamic  balance 
of  phosphorylation  by  kinases  and  dephosphorylation  by  phosphatases 
(Figure 6.29). 

 The  Function  of  Signal  Cascades.  Synaptic  transmission  using 
transmitter- gated channels is simple and fast. Transmission involving 

Protein

Protein
kinase

Protein

phosphatase

Protein — PO4

▲ FIGURE 6.29
Protein phosphorylation and 
 dephosphorylation.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   174
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   174

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

175

Transmitter

Transmitter
activates 
receptor

␥

␤

␣

␥

␤

␣

␥

␤

␣

Receptor activates

G-protein

␣

Adenylyl
␣
cyclase

␣

Adenylyl
cyclase

␣

Adenylyl
cyclase

G-protein stimulates
adenylyl cyclase to

convert ATP to cAMP

cAMP activates
 protein kinase A

PKA

PKA

PKA

Protein kinase A
phosphorylates

potassium channels

G-protein-coupled receptors is complex and slow. What are the advan-
tages  of   having  such  long  chains  of  command?  One  important  advan-
tage  is   signal  ampliﬁ cation :  The  activation  of  one  G-protein-coupled 
receptor can lead to the activation of not one, but many, ion channels 
(Figure 6.30). 

 Signal  ampliﬁ cation  can  occur  at  several  places  in  the  cascade.  A 
single  neurotransmitter  molecule,  bound  to  one  receptor,  can  acti-
vate  perhaps  10–20  G-proteins;  each  G-protein  can  activate  an  ade-
nylyl cyclase, which can make many cAMP molecules that can spread 
to   activate  many  kinases.  Each  kinase  can  then  phosphorylate  many 
channels. If all cascade components were tied together in a clump, sig-
naling  would  be  severely  limited.  The  use  of  small  messengers  that 
can diffuse quickly (such as cAMP) also allows signaling at a distance, 
over  a  wide  stretch  of  cell  membrane.  Signal  cascades  also  provide 
many sites for further regulation, as well as interaction between cas-
cades. Finally, signal cascades can generate very long-lasting chemical 
changes in cells, which may form the basis for, among other things, a 
lifetime of  memories. 

▲ FIGURE 6.30
Signal amplification by G-protein-
coupled second messenger 
 cascades.  When a transmitter acti-
vates a G-protein-coupled receptor, 
there can be amplification of the 
messengers at several stages of the 
cascade, so that ultimately, many 
 channels are affected.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   175
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   175

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

176

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

DIVERGENCE AND CONVERGENCE IN 
DIVERGENCE AND CONVERGGENCE IN 
NEURROTRAANSMITTER SYSTEEMS 
NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS 

 Glutamate is the most common excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, 
while GABA is the pervasive inhibitory neurotransmitter. But this is only 
part of the story because any single neurotransmitter can have many dif-
ferent effects. A molecule of glutamate can bind to any of several kinds of 
glutamate receptors, and each of these can mediate a different response. 
The ability of one transmitter to activate more than one subtype of re-
ceptor, and cause more than one type of postsynaptic response, is called 
divergence . 

 Divergence is the rule among neurotransmitter systems. Every known 
neurotransmitter can activate multiple receptor subtypes (see Table 6.2), 
and evidence indicates that the number of known receptors will continue 
to escalate as the powerful methods of molecular neurobiology are applied 
to each system. Because of the multiple receptor subtypes, one transmit-
ter can  affect different neurons (or even different parts of the same neu-
ron) in very different ways. Divergence also occurs at points beyond the 
receptor level, depending on which G-proteins and which effector systems 
are  activated. Divergence may occur at any stage in the cascade of trans-
mitter effects (Figure 6.31a). 

Receptor subtype 1

Transmitter

Receptor subtype 2

(a)  

Receptor subtype 3

Effector
system X

Effector
system Y

Effector
system Z

Transmitter A

A receptor

Transmitter B

B receptor

Effector system

Transmitter C

C receptor

(b)  

Transmitter A

A1 receptor

A2 receptor

Transmitter B

  B receptor

(c)  

Effector 1

Effector 2

Effector 3

Effector 4

Effector 5

▲ FIGURE 6.31
Divergence and convergence in neurotransmitter signaling systems.  (a) Diver-
gence. (b) Convergence. (c) Integrated divergence and convergence.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   176
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   176

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER 6    NEUROTRANSMITTER SYSTEMS

177

 Neurotransmitters  can  also  exhibit   convergence   of  effects.  Multiple 
transmitters,  each  activating  their  own  receptor  type,  can  converge  to 
 inﬂ uence  the  same  effector  system  (Figure  6.31b).  Convergence  in  a 
single  cell  can  occur  at  the  level  of  the  G-protein,  the  second  messen-
ger cascade, or the type of ion channel. Neurons integrate divergent and 
convergent  signaling  systems,  resulting  in  a  complex  map  of  chemical 
 effects (Figure 6.31c). The wonder is that it ever works; the challenge is 
to  understand how it does. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Neurotransmitters are the essential links between neurons, and between 
neurons and other effector cells, such as muscle cells and glandular cells. 
But it is important to think of transmitters as one link in a chain of events, 
inciting chemical changes both fast and slow, divergent and convergent. 
You can envision the many signaling pathways onto and within a single 
neuron as a kind of information network. This network is in delicate bal-
ance, shifting its effects dynamically as the demands on a neuron vary 
with changes in the organism’s behavior. 

 The signaling network within a single neuron resembles in some ways 
the  neural  networks  of  the  brain  itself.  It  receives  a  variety  of  inputs, 
in the form of transmitters bombarding it at different times and places. 
These inputs cause an increased drive through some signal pathways and 
a decreased drive through others, and the information is recombined to 
yield a particular output that is more than a simple summation of the in-
puts. Signals regulate signals, chemical changes can leave lasting traces 
of their history, drugs can shift the balance of signaling power—and, in a 
literal sense, the brain and its chemicals are one. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
cholinergic (p. 144)
noradrenergic (p. 144)
glutamatergic (p. 145)
GABAergic (p. 145)
peptidergic (p. 145)

Studying Neurotransmitter 
Systems
immunocytochemistry (p. 145)
in situ hybridization (p. 146)
autoradiography (p. 147)
microiontophoresis (p. 148)
receptor subtype (p. 149)
nicotinic ACh receptors (p. 150)
muscarinic ACh receptors (p. 150)
AMPA receptors (p. 150)
NMDA receptors (p. 150)
kainate receptors (p. 150)
ligand-binding method (p. 151)

Neurotransmitter Chemistry
Dale’s principle (p. 153)
co-transmitters (p. 153)
acetylcholine (ACh) (p. 154)
transporter (p. 154)
rate-limiting step (p. 156)
catecholamines (p. 156)
dopamine (DA) (p. 156)
norepinephrine (NE) (p. 156)
epinephrine (adrenaline) (p. 156)
dopa (p. 157)
serotonin (5-HT) (p. 158)
serotonergic (p. 158)
glutamate (Glu) (p. 159)
glycine (Gly) (p. 159)
gamma-aminobutyric acid 

(GABA) (p. 159)

adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 

(p. 160)

retrograde messenger (p. 160)
nitric oxide (NO) (p. 162)

Transmitter-Gated Channels
benzodiazepine (p. 168)
barbiturate (p. 168)

G-Protein-Coupled Receptors 
and Effectors
second messenger cascade 

(p. 172)

protein kinase A (PKA) (p. 172)
phospholipase C (PLC) (p. 173)
diacylglycerol (DAG) (p. 173)
inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) 

(p. 173)

protein kinase C (PKC) (p. 173)
calcium-calmodulin-dependent 

protein kinase (CaMK) 
(p. 174)

endocannabinoids (p. 160)

protein phosphatases (p. 174)

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   177
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   177

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

178

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  List the criteria that are used to determine whether a chemical serves as a neurotransmitter. 
What are the various experimental strategies you could use to show that ACh fulﬁ lls the criteria 
of a neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction?

2.  What are three methods that could be used to show that a neurotransmitter receptor is synthe-

sized or localized in a particular neuron?

3.  Compare  and  contrast  the  properties  of  (a)  AMPA  and  NMDA  receptors  and  (b)  GABAA  and 

GABAB receptors.

4.  Synaptic inhibition is an important feature of the circuitry in the cerebral cortex. How would you 
determine whether GABA or Gly, or both, or neither, is the inhibitory neurotransmitter of the 
cortex?

5.  Glutamate activates a number of different metabotropic receptors. The consequence of activating 
one subtype is the inhibition of cAMP formation. A consequence of activating a second subtype is 
activation of PKC. Propose mechanisms for these different effects.

6.  Do convergence and divergence of neurotransmitter effects occur in single neurons?
7.  Ca2⫹ are considered to be second messengers. Why?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Cooper JR, Bloom FE, Roth RH. 2009. 

Introduction to Neuropsychopharmacology. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

Cowan WM, Südhof TC, Stevens CF. 2001. 

Synapses. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.

Katritch V, Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2012. 

Diversity and modularity of G protein-
coupled receptor structures. Trends in 
Pharmacological Sciences 33:17–27.

Mustafa AK, Gadalla MM, Snyder SH. 2009. 

Signaling by gasotransmitters. Science 
Signaling 2(68):re2.

Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Malenka RC. 2008. 

Molecular Neuropharmacology: A Foundation 
for Clinical Neuroscience, 2nd ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Professional.

Piomelli D. 2003. The molecular logic of 

 endocannabinoid signalling. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 4:873–884.

Regehr WG, Carey MR, Best AR. 2009. 

Activity-dependent regulation of synapses by 
 retrograde messengers. Neuron 63:154–170.

143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   178
143–178_Bear_06_revised_final.indd   178

12/20/14   3:46 AM
12/20/14   3:46 AM

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Structure of the 
Nervous System

INTRODUCTION
GROSS ORGANIZATION OF THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS 
SYSTEM

Anatomical References
The Central Nervous System

The Cerebrum
The Cerebellum
The Brain Stem
The Spinal Cord

The Peripheral Nervous System

The Somatic PNS
The Visceral PNS
Afferent and Efferent Axons

The Cranial Nerves
The Meninges
The Ventricular System

 BOX 7.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Water on the Brain

New Views of the Brain

Imaging the Structure of the Living Brain
 BOX 7.2   BRAIN FOOD: Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Functional Brain Imaging
 BOX 7.3   BRAIN FOOD: PET and fMRI

UNDERSTANDING CNS STRUCTURE THROUGH DEVELOPMENT

Formation of the Neural Tube

 BOX 7.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Nutrition and the Neural Tube

Three Primary Brain Vesicles
Differentiation of the Forebrain

Differentiation of the Telencephalon and Diencephalon
Forebrain Structure-Function Relationships

Differentiation of the Midbrain

Midbrain Structure-Function Relationships

Differentiation of the Hindbrain

Hindbrain Structure-Function Relationships

Differentiation of the Spinal Cord

Spinal Cord Structure-Function Relationships

Putting the Pieces Together
Special Features of the Human CNS

A GUIDE TO THE CEREBRAL CORTEX

Types of Cerebral Cortex
Areas of Neocortex

Neocortical Evolution and Structure-Function Relationships
 BOX 7.5   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Connecting with the Connectome, 
by Sebastian Seung

CONCLUDING REMARKS
APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN 
NEUROANATOMY

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   179
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   179

179171711711171717171717171717171717117171717171171717171171717171711171717171117177171717777717777171717777771777717777717177771717771771711 9999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999179

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

180

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCCTION

 In previous chapters, we saw how individual neurons function and com-
municate.  Now  we  are  ready  to  assemble  them  into  a  nervous  system 
that sees, hears, feels, moves, remembers, and dreams. Just as an un-
derstanding of neuronal structure is necessary for understanding neuro-
nal function, we must understand nervous system structure in order to 
understand brain function. 

 Neuroanatomy has challenged generations of students—and for good 
reason: The human brain is extremely complicated. However, our brain is 
merely a variation on a plan that is common to the brains of all mammals 
(Figure 7.1). The human brain appears complicated because it is distorted 
as a result of the selective growth of some parts within the conﬁ nes of the 
skull. But once the basic mammalian plan is understood, these specializa-
tions of the human brain become clear. 

 We begin by introducing the general organization of the mammalian 
brain and the terms used to describe it. Then we take a look at how the 
three-dimensional structure of the brain arises during embryological and 
fetal development. Following the course of development makes it easier 
to understand how the parts of the adult brain ﬁ t together. Finally, we 
explore the cerebral neocortex, a structure that is unique to mammals and 
proportionately the largest in humans. An Illustrated Guide to Human 
Neuroanatomy follows the chapter as an appendix. 

 The neuroanatomy presented in this chapter provides the canvas on 
which  we  will  paint  the  sensory  and  motor  systems  in  Chapters  8–14. 
Because you will encounter a lot of new terms, self-quizzes within this 
chapter provide an opportunity for review. 

GROSS ORGANIZATION OF 
GROSSS ORRGANIZATION OF 
THE MMAMMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM 
THE MAMMALIAN NERVOUS SYSTEM 

 The nervous system of all mammals has two divisions: the central ner-
vous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Here we 
identify some of the important components of the CNS and the PNS. We 
also discuss the membranes that surround the brain and the ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled 
ventricles within the brain. We’ll then explore some new methods of ex-
amining  the  structure  of  the  brain.  But  ﬁ rst,  we  need  to  review  some 
anatomical terminology. 

 Anatomical References 
 Getting to know your way around the brain is like getting to know your 
way around a city. To describe your location in the city, you would use 
points of reference such as north, south, east, and west and up and down. 
The same is true for the brain, except that the terms—called  anatomical 
references —are different. 

 Consider the nervous system of a rat (Figure 7.2a). We begin with the 
rat because it is a simpliﬁ ed version that has all the general features of 
mammalian nervous system organization. In the head lies the brain, and 
the spinal cord runs down inside the backbone toward the tail. The direc-
tion, or anatomical reference, pointing toward the rat’s nose is known as 
anterior  or  rostral  (from the Latin for “beak”). The direction pointing 
toward the rat’s tail is  posterior  or  caudal  (from the Latin for “tail”). 
The direction pointing up is known as  dorsal  (from the Latin for “back”), 
and the direction pointing down is  ventral  (from the Latin for “belly”). 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   180
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   180

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

181

Rabbit

Sheep

Chimpanzee

Rat

Cat

Dolphin

1 cm

Rat

Rabbit

Cat

Sheep

Chimpanzee

Human

Human

Dolphin

▲ FIGURE 7.1
Mammalian brains.  Despite differences in complexity, the brains of all these spe-
cies have many features in common. The brains have been drawn to appear ap-
proximately the same size; their relative sizes are shown in the inset on the left.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   181
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   181

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

182

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Spinal
cord

Dorsal

Brain 

Anterior
or rostral

Posterior
or caudal

Brain 

Spinal
cord

Lateral

Midline

Medial

(b)  

Ventral

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 7.2
Basic anatomical references in the 
nervous system of a rat.  (a) Side view. 
(b) Top view.

Caudal

Rostral

(a)  Midsagittal

(b)  Horizontal

(c)  Coronal

▲ FIGURE 7.3
Anatomical planes of section.

Thus, the rat spinal cord runs anterior to posterior. The top side of the 
spinal cord is the dorsal side, and the bottom side is the ventral side. 

 If we look down on the nervous system, we see that it may be divided 
into two equal halves (Figure 7.2b). The right side of the brain and spinal 
cord is the mirror image of the left side. This characteristic is known as 
bilateral symmetry . With just a few exceptions, most structures within 
the nervous system come in pairs, one on the right side and the other on 
the left. The invisible line running down the middle of the nervous system 
is called the  midline , and this gives us another way to describe anatomi-
cal  references.  Structures  closer  to  the  midline  are   medial ;  structures 
farther away from the midline are  lateral . In other words, the nose is 
medial to the eyes, the eyes are medial to the ears, and so on. In addi-
tion, two structures that are on the same side are said to be  ipsilateral
to each other; for example, the right ear is ipsilateral to the right eye. If 
the structures are on opposite sides of the midline, they are said to be 
contralateral  to each other; the right ear is contralateral to the left ear. 
 To view the internal structure of the brain, it is usually necessary to 
slice it up. In the language of anatomists, a slice is called a  section ; to slice 
is  to section . Although one could imagine an inﬁ nite number of ways we 
might cut into the brain, the standard approach is to make cuts parallel 
to one of the three  anatomical planes of section.  The plane of the section 
resulting from splitting the brain into equal right and left halves is called 
the  midsagittal plane  (Figure 7.3a). Sections parallel to the midsagittal 
plane are in the  sagittal plane . 

 The  two  other  anatomical  planes  are  perpendicular  to  the  sagittal 
plane and to one another. The  horizontal plane  is parallel to the ground 
(Figure 7.3b). A single section in this plane could pass through both the 
eyes and the ears. Thus, horizontal sections split the brain into dorsal and 
ventral parts. The  coronal plane  is perpendicular to the ground and to 
the sagittal plane (Figure 7.3c). A single section in this plane could pass 
through both eyes or both ears but not through all four at the same time. 
Thus, the coronal plane splits the brain into anterior and posterior parts. 

SELF-QUIZ
SELFF-QQUIZ

Take a few moments right now and be sure you understand the meaning 
of these terms:
anterior
rostral
posterior
caudal

lateral
ipsilateral
contralateral
midsagittal plane

sagittal plane
horizontal plane
coronal plane

dorsal 
ventral
midline
medial

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   182
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   182

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

183

 The Central Nervous System 
 The  central nervous system   (CNS)  consists of the parts of the nervous 
system that are encased in bone: the  brain  and the  spinal cord . The 
brain lies entirely within the skull. A side view of the rat brain reveals 
three parts that are common to all mammals: the cerebrum, the cerebel-
lum, and the brain stem (Figure 7.4a). 

 The  Cerebrum.  The  rostral-most  and  largest  part  of  the  brain  is  the 
  cerebrum . Figure 7.4b shows the rat cerebrum as it appears when viewed 
from above. Notice that it is clearly split down the middle into two  cerebral 
hemispheres , separated by the deep  sagittal ﬁ ssure . In general, the  right  
cerebral hemisphere receives sensations from, and controls movements of, 
the  left  side of the body. Similarly, the  left  cerebral hemisphere is concerned 
with sensations and movements on the  right  side of the body. 

 The  Cerebellum.  Lying  behind  the  cerebrum  is  the   cerebellum   (the 
word is derived from the Latin for “little brain”). While the cerebellum is 
in fact dwarfed by the large cerebrum, it actually contains as many neu-
rons as both cerebral hemispheres combined. The cerebellum is primarily 
a movement control center that has extensive connections with the cere-
brum and the spinal cord. In contrast to the cerebral hemispheres, the left 
side of the cerebellum is concerned with movements of the left side of the 
body, and the right side of the cerebellum is concerned with movements 
of the right side. 

 The Brain Stem. The remaining part of the brain is the brain stem, best 
observed in a midsagittal view of the brain (Figure 7.4c). The  brain stem  
forms the stalk from which the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum 
sprout. The brain stem is a complex nexus of ﬁ bers and cells that in part 
serves to relay information from the cerebrum to the spinal cord and cer-
ebellum, and vice versa. However, the brain stem is also the site where 
vital functions are regulated, such as breathing, consciousness, and the 
control of body temperature. Indeed, while the brain stem is considered 
the most primitive part of the mammalian brain, it is also the most im-
portant to life. One can survive damage to the cerebrum and cerebellum, 
but damage to the brain stem is usually fatal. 

 The Spinal Cord. The spinal cord is encased in the bony vertebral column 
and is attached to the brain stem. The spinal cord is the major conduit of 

Side (lateral)
view:

(a)  

Cerebrum

Cerebellum

Spinal
cord

Brain
stem

Right cerebral
hemisphere

Left cerebral
hemisphere

Top (dorsal)
view:

(b)  

Sagittal
fissure

Midsagittal
view:

(c)  

Brain stem

▲ FIGURE 7.4
The brain of a rat.  (a) Side (lateral) view. 
(b) Top (dorsal) view. (c) Midsagittal view.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   183
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   183

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

184

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Dorsal
roots

Dorsal
root
ganglia

Ventral
roots

Spinal
nerves 

▲ FIGURE 7.5
The spinal cord. The spinal cord runs inside the vertebral column. Axons enter 
and exit the spinal cord via the dorsal and ventral roots, respectively. These roots 
come together to form the spinal nerves that course through the body.

information from the skin, joints, and muscles of the body to the brain, 
and vice versa. A transection of the spinal cord results in anesthesia (lack 
of feeling) in the skin and paralysis of the muscles in parts of the body 
caudal to the cut. Paralysis in this case does not mean that the muscles 
cannot function, but they cannot be controlled by the brain. 

 The spinal cord communicates with the body via the  spinal nerves , 
which are part of the peripheral nervous system (discussed below). Spinal 
nerves exit the spinal cord through notches between each vertebra of the 
vertebral column. Each spinal nerve attaches to the spinal cord by means 
of  two  branches,  the   dorsal  root   and  the   ventral  root   (Figure  7.5). 
Recall  from  Chapter  1  that  François  Magendie  showed  that  the  dorsal 
root  contains  axons  bringing  information   into   the  spinal  cord,  such  as 
those that signal the accidental entry of a thumbtack into your foot (see 
Figure 3.1). Charles Bell showed that the ventral root contains axons car-
rying information  away from  the spinal cord—for example, to the muscles 
that jerk your foot away in response to the pain of the thumbtack. 

 The Peripheral Nervous System 
 All the parts of the nervous system other than the brain and spinal cord 
comprise  the   peripheral  nervous  system    (PNS) .  The  PNS  has  two 
parts: the somatic PNS and the visceral PNS. 

 The Somatic PNS. All the spinal nerves that innervate the skin, the joints, 
and the muscles that are under voluntary control are part of the  somatic 
PNS . The somatic motor axons, which command muscle contraction, de-
rive from motor neurons in the ventral spinal cord. The cell bodies of the 
motor neurons lie within the CNS, but their axons are mostly in the PNS. 
 The  somatic  sensory  axons,  which  innervate  and  collect  information 
from  the  skin,  muscles,  and  joints,  enter  the  spinal  cord  via  the  dor-
sal roots. The cell bodies of these neurons lie outside the spinal cord in 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   184
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   184

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

185

clusters called  dorsal root ganglia . There is a dorsal root ganglion for 
each spinal nerve (see Figure 7.5). 

 The Visceral PNS. The  visceral PNS , also called the involuntary, vegeta-
tive, or  autonomic nervous system (ANS) , consists of the neurons that 
innervate the internal organs, blood vessels, and glands. Visceral sensory 
axons bring information about visceral function to the CNS, such as the 
pressure and oxygen content of the blood in the arteries. Visceral motor 
ﬁ bers command the contraction and relaxation of muscles that form the 
walls of the intestines and the blood vessels (called smooth muscles), the 
rate of cardiac muscle contraction, and the secretory function of various 
glands. For example, the visceral PNS controls blood pressure by regulat-
ing the heart rate and the diameter of the blood vessels. 

 We will return to the structure and function of the ANS in Chapter 15. 
For now, remember that when one speaks of an emotional reaction that is 
beyond voluntary control—like “butterﬂ ies in the stomach” or  blushing—
it usually is mediated by the visceral PNS (the ANS). 

 Afferent and Efferent Axons. Our discussion of the PNS is a good place to 
introduce two terms that are used to describe axons in the nervous sys-
tem. Derived from the Latin,  afferent  (“carry to”) and  efferent  (“carry 
from”) indicate whether the axons are transporting information  toward  
or  away from  a particular point. Consider the axons in the PNS relative 
to a point of reference in the CNS. The somatic or visceral sensory axons 
bringing information  into  the CNS are afferents. The axons that emerge 
 from  the CNS to innervate the muscles and glands are efferents. 

 The Cranial Nerves 
 In addition to the nerves that arise from the spinal cord and innervate 
the body, there are 12 pairs of  cranial nerves  that arise from the brain 
stem  and  innervate  (mostly)  the  head.  Each  cranial  nerve  has  a  name 
and a number associated with it (originally numbered by Galen, about 
1800 years ago, from anterior to posterior). Some of the cranial nerves are 
part of the CNS, others are part of the somatic PNS, and still others are 
part of the visceral PNS. Many cranial nerves contain a complex mixture 
of axons that perform different functions. The cranial nerves and their 
various functions are summarized in the chapter appendix. 

 The Meninges 
 The CNS, that part of the nervous system encased in the skull and verte-
bral column, does not come in direct contact with the overlying bone. It is 
protected by three membranes collectively called the  meninges  (singular: 
meninx),  from  the  Greek  for  “covering.”  The  three  membranes  are  the 
dura mater, the arachnoid membrane, and the pia mater (Figure 7.6). 

 The outermost covering is the  dura mater , from the Latin words mean-
ing “hard mother,” an accurate description of the dura’s leatherlike con-
sistency. The dura forms a tough, inelastic bag that surrounds the brain 
and  spinal  cord.  Just  under  the  dura  lies  the   arachnoid  membrane  
(from the Greek for “spider”). This meningeal layer has an appearance 
and a consistency resembling a spider web. While there normally is no 
space between the dura and the arachnoid, if the blood vessels passing 
through the dura are ruptured, blood can collect here and form what is 
called a  subdural hematoma . The buildup of ﬂ uid in this subdural space 
can disrupt brain function by compressing parts of the CNS. The disorder 
is treated by drilling a hole in the skull and draining the blood. 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   185
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   185

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

186

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

(a)

Choroid
plexus

Subarachnoid
space

Rostral

Caudal

Ventricles
in brain

▲ FIGURE 7.7
The ventricular system in a rat brain. 
 CSF is produced in the ventricles of the 
paired cerebral hemispheres and flows 
through a series of central ventricles at 
the core of the brain stem. CSF escapes 
into the subarachnoid space via small 
apertures near the base of the cerebel-
lum. In the subarachnoid space, CSF is 
absorbed into the blood.

Dura mater

Subdural
space

Arachnoid
membrane

Subarachnoid
space

Pia mater

Artery

Brain

(b)

▲ FIGURE 7.6
The meninges. (a) The skull has been removed to show the tough outer menin-
geal membrane, the dura mater. (Source: Gluhbegoric and Williams, 1980.) 
(b) Illustrated in cross section, the three meningeal layers protecting the brain and 
spinal cord are the dura mater, the arachnoid membrane, and the pia mater.

 The  pia mater , the “gentle mother,” is a thin membrane that adheres 
closely to the surface of the brain. Along the pia run many blood vessels 
that ultimately dive into the substance of the underlying brain. The pia 
is separated from the arachnoid by a ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled space. This  subarachnoid 
space  is ﬁ lled with salty clear liquid called  cerebrospinal ﬂ uid   (CSF) . 
Thus, in a sense, the brain ﬂ oats inside the head in this thin layer of CSF. 

 The Ventricular System 
 In Chapter 1, we noted that the brain is hollow. The ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled caverns 
and canals inside the brain constitute the  ventricular system . The ﬂ uid 
that runs in this system is CSF, the same as the ﬂ uid in the subarachnoid 
space. CSF is produced by a special tissue, called the choroid plexus, in 
the  ventricles  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  CSF  ﬂ ows  from  the  paired 
ventricles  of  the  cerebrum  to  a  series  of  connected,  central  cavities  at 
the core of the brain stem (Figure 7.7). CSF exits the ventricular system 
and  enters  the  subarachnoid  space  by  way  of  small  openings,  or  aper-
tures, located near where the cerebellum attaches to the brain stem. In 
the subarachnoid space, CSF is absorbed by the blood vessels at special 
structures called arachnoid villi. If the normal ﬂ ow of CSF is disrupted, 
brain damage can result (Box 7.1). 

 We will return to ﬁ ll in some details about the ventricular system in a 
moment. As we will see, understanding the organization of the ventricu-
lar system holds the key to understanding how the mammalian brain is 
organized. 

 New Views of the Brain 
 For  centuries,  anatomists  have  investigated  the  internal  structure  of 
the brain by removing it from the skull, sectioning it in various planes, 
staining the sections, and examining the stained sections. Much has been 
learned by this approach, but there are some limitations. Among these 
are the challenges of seeing how parts deep in the brain ﬁ t together in 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   186
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   186

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

187

BOX 7.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Water on the Brain

If the ﬂ ow of CSF from the choroid plexus through the ven-

tricular  system  to  the  subarachnoid  space  is  impaired,  the 
ﬂ uid will back up and cause a swelling of the ventricles. This 
condition is called hydrocephalus, a term originally meaning 
“water head.”

Occasionally,  babies  are  born  with  hydrocephalus. 
However,  because  the  skull  is  soft  and  not  completely 
formed, the head will expand in response to the increased 
intracranial ﬂ uid, sparing the brain from damage. Often this 
condition goes unnoticed until the size of the head reaches 
enormous proportions.

In  adults,  hydrocephalus  is  a  much  more  serious  situ-
ation  because  the  skull  cannot  expand,  and  intracranial 
pressure increases as a result. The soft brain tissue is then 
compressed,  impairing  function  and  leading  to  death  if  left 
untreated. Typically, this “obstructive” hydrocephalus is also 
accompanied by severe headache, caused by the distention 
of nerve endings in the meninges. Treatment consists of in-
serting a tube into the swollen ventricle and draining off the 
excess ﬂ uid (Figure A).

Tube inserted into
lateral ventricle
through hole in
skull

Drainage tube,
usually introduced
into peritoneal cavity,
with extra length to 
allow for growth of child 

Figure A

three dimensions. A breakthrough occurred in 2013 when researchers at 
Stanford University introduced a new method, called CLARITY, which 
allows visualization of deep structures without sectioning the brain. The 
trick is to soak the brain in a solution that replaces light-absorbing lip-
ids  with  a  water-soluble  gel  that  turns  the  brain  transparent.  If  such 
a  “ clariﬁ ed”  brain  contains  neurons  that  are  labeled  with  ﬂ uorescent 
 molecules, such as green ﬂ uorescent protein  ( GFP; see Chapter 2), then 
appropriate illumination will reveal the location of these cells deep inside 
the brain (Figure 7.8). 

▲ FIGURE 7.8
A method to turn the brain transpar-
ent and visualize fluorescent neurons 
deep in the brain.  (a) A mouse brain 
viewed from above. (b) The same brain 
rendered transparent by replacing lipids 
with a water-soluble gel. (c) The trans-
parent brain illuminated to evoke fluores-
cence from neurons that express green 
fluorescent protein. (Source: Courtesy of 
Dr. Kwanghun Chung, Massachusetts 
 Institute of Technology. Adapted from 
Chung and Deisseroth. 2013, Figure 2.)

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   187
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   187

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

188

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 Of course, a clariﬁ ed brain is still a dead brain. This, to say the least, 
limits  the  usefulness  of  such  anatomical  methods  for  diagnosing  neu-
rological  disorders  in  living  individuals.  Thus,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to 
say that neuroanatomy was revolutionized by the introduction of several 
methods that enable one to produce images of the living brain. Here we 
brieﬂ y introduce them. 

 Imaging the Structure of the Living Brain.  Some types of electromagnetic 
radiation,  like  X-rays,  penetrate  the  body  and  are  absorbed  by  various 
radiopaque tissues. Thus, using X-ray-sensitive ﬁ lm, one can make two-
dimensional images of the shadows formed by the radiopaque structures 
within the body. This technique works well for the bones of the skull, but 
not  for  the  brain. The  brain  is  a  complex  three-dimensional  volume  of 
slight and varying radiopacity, so little information can be gleaned from a 
single two-dimensional X-ray image. 

 An  ingenious  solution,  called   computed  tomography  (CT),   was  de-
veloped  by  Godfrey  Hounsﬁ elds  and  Allan  Cormack,  who  shared  the 
Nobel Prize in 1979. The goal of CT is to generate an image of a slice 
of  brain.  (The  word   tomography   is  derived  from  the  Greek  for  “cut.”) 
To accomplish this, an X-ray source is rotated around the head within 
the plane of the desired cross section. On the other side of the head, 
in  the  trajectory  of  the  X-ray  beam,  are  sensitive  electronic  sensors 
of  X-irradiation.  The  information  about  relative  radiopacity  obtained 
with  different  viewing  angles  is  fed  to  a  computer  that  executes  a 
mathematical algorithm on the data. The end result is a digital recon-
struction of the position and amount of radiopaque material within the 
plane of the slice. CT scans noninvasively revealed, for the ﬁ rst time, 
the gross organization of gray and white matter, and the position of the 
ventricles, in the living brain. 

 While still used widely, CT is gradually being replaced by a newer 
imaging method, called  magnetic resonance imaging   (MRI) . The advan-
tages of MRI are that it yields a much more detailed map of the brain 
than CT, it does not require X-irradiation, and images of brain slices 
can  be  made  in  any  plane  desired.  MRI  uses  information  about  how 
hydrogen atoms in the brain respond to perturbations of a strong mag-
netic ﬁ eld (Box 7.2). The electromagnetic signals emitted by the atoms 
are detected by an array of sensors around the head and fed to a power-
ful computer that constructs a map of the brain. The information from 
an  MRI  scan  can  be  used  to  build  a  strikingly  detailed  image  of  the 
whole brain. 

 Another  application  of  MRI,  called   diffusion  tensor  imaging   (DTI), 
enables visualization of large bundles of axons in the brain. By compar-
ing the position of the hydrogen atoms in water molecules at discrete time 
intervals, the diffusion of water in the brain can be measured. Water dif-
fuses much more readily alongside axon membranes than across them, 
and this difference can be used to detect axon bundles that connect differ-
ent regions of the brain (Figure 7.9). 

 Functional Brain Imaging.  CT and MRI are extremely valuable for detect-
ing structural changes in the living brain, such as brain swelling after 
a head injury and brain tumors. Nonetheless, much of what goes on in 
the brain—healthy or diseased—is chemical and electrical in nature and 
not  observable  by  simple  inspection  of  the  brain’s  anatomy. Amazingly, 
however, even these secrets are beginning to yield to the newest imaging 
techniques. 

▲ FIGURE 7.9
Diffusion tensor imaging of the human 
brain.  Displayed is a computer recon-
struction of axon bundles in a living hu-
man brain viewed from the side. Anterior 
is to the left. The bundles are pseudo-
colored based on the direction of water 
diffusion. (Source: Courtesy of 
Dr. Satrajit Ghosh, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   188
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   188

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

189

BOX 7.2

B R A I N   F O O D

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a general technique

that can be used for determining the amount of certain atoms 
at different locations in the body. It has become an important 
tool in neuroscience because it can be used noninvasively to 
obtain a detailed picture of the nervous system, particularly 
the brain.

In the most common form of MRI, the hydrogen atoms are 
quantiﬁ ed—for instance, those located in water or fat in the 
brain. An important fact of physics is that when a hydrogen 
atom is put in a magnetic ﬁ eld, its nucleus (which consists of 
a single proton) can exist in either of two states: a high-energy 
state  or  a  low-energy  state.  Because  hydrogen  atoms  are 
abundant in the brain, there are many protons in each state.
The key to MRI is making the protons jump from one state 
to the other. Energy is added to the protons by passing an 
electromagnetic wave (i.e., a radio signal) through the head 
while it is positioned between the poles of a large magnet. 
When the radio signal is set at just the right frequency, the 
protons in the low-energy state will absorb energy from the 
signal  and  hop  to  the  high-energy  state.  The  frequency  at 
which the protons absorb energy is called the resonant fre-
quency  (hence  the  name  magnetic  resonance).  When  the 
radio signal is turned off, some of the protons fall back down 
to  the  low-energy  state,  thereby  emitting  a  radio  signal  of 
their own at a particular frequency. This signal can be picked 
up  by  a  radio  receiver.  The  stronger  the  signal,  the  more 
 hydrogen atoms between the poles of the magnet.

Central sulcus

If  we  used  the  procedure  discussed  earlier,  we  would 
simply get a measurement of the total amount of hydrogen 
in  the  head.  However,  it  is  possible  to  measure  hydrogen 
amounts  at  a  ﬁ ne  spatial  scale  by  taking  advantage  of  the 
fact that the frequency at which protons emit energy is pro-
portional  to  the  size  of  the  magnetic  ﬁ eld.  In  the  MRI  ma-
chines used in hospitals, the magnetic ﬁ elds vary from one 
side  of  the  magnet  to  the  other.  This  gives  a  spatial  code 
to the radio waves emitted by the protons: High-frequency 
signals come from hydrogen atoms near the strong side of 
the magnet, and low-frequency signals come from the weak 
side of the magnet.

The last step in the MRI process is to orient the gradient of 
the magnet at many different angles relative to the head and 
measure the amount of hydrogen. It takes about 15 minutes 
to make all the measurements for a typical brain scan. A so-
phisticated computer program is then used to make a single 
image from the measurements, resulting in a picture of the 
distribution of hydrogen atoms in the head.

Figure A is an MRI image of a lateral view of the brain in 
a living human. In Figure B, another MRI image, a slice has 
been made in the brain. Notice how clearly you can see the 
white and gray matter. This differentiation makes it possible 
to see the effects of demyelinating diseases on white mat-
ter in the brain. MRI images also reveal lesions in the brain 
because  tumors  and  inﬂ ammation  generally  increase  the 
amount of extracellular water.

Cerebellum

Figure A

Figure B

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   189
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   189

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

190

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 7.3

B R A I N   F O O D

PET and fMRI

Until recently, “mind reading” has been beyond the reach 

of science. However, with the introduction of positron emis-
sion  tomography  (PET)  and  functional  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  (fMRI),  it  is  now  possible  to  observe  and  measure 
changes  in  brain  activity  associated  with  the  planning  and 
execution of speciﬁ c tasks.

PET imaging was developed in the 1970s by two groups 
of physicists, one at Washington University led by M. M. Ter-
Pogossian and M. E. Phelps, and a second at UCLA led by 
Z.  H.  Cho.  The  basic  procedure  is  very  simple.  A  radioac-
tive  solution  containing  atoms  that  emit  positrons  (posi-
tively charged electrons) is introduced into the bloodstream. 
Positrons,  emitted  wherever  the  blood  goes,  interact  with 
electrons  to  produce  photons  of  electromagnetic  radiation. 
The locations of the positron-emitting atoms are found by de-
tectors that pick up the photons.

One  powerful  application  of  PET  is  the  measurement  of 
metabolic activity in the brain. In a technique developed by 
Louis  Sokoloff  and  his  colleagues  at  the  National  Institute 
of  Mental  Health,  a  positron-emitting  isotope  of  ﬂ uorine  or 
oxygen is attached to 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). This radioac-
tive 2-DG is injected into the bloodstream and travels to the 
brain. Metabolically active neurons, which normally use glu-
cose, also take up the 2-DG. The 2-DG is phosphorylated by 
enzymes  inside  the  neuron,  and  this  modiﬁ cation  prevents 
the 2-DG from leaving. Thus, the amount of radioactive 2-DG 
accumulated in a neuron and the number of positron emis-
sions indicate the level of neuronal metabolic activity.

In  a  typical  PET  application,  a  person’s  head  is  placed 
in  an  apparatus  surrounded  by  detectors  (Figure  A).  Using 
computer  algorithms,  the  photons  (resulting  from  positron 
emissions) reaching each of the detectors are recorded. With 
this information, levels of activity for populations of neurons at 

various sites in the brain can be calculated. Compiling these 
measurements produces an image of the brain activity pat-
tern. The researcher monitors brain activity while the subject 
performs a task, such as moving a ﬁ nger or reading aloud. 
Different tasks “light up” different brain areas. In order to ob-
tain a picture of the activity induced by a particular behavioral 
or thought task, a subtraction technique is used. Even in the 
absence of any sensory stimulation, the PET image will con-
tain a great deal of brain activity. To create an image of the 
brain activity resulting from a speciﬁ c task, such as a person 
looking  at  a  picture,  this  background  activity  is  subtracted 
out (Figure B).

Although PET imaging has proven to be a valuable tech-
nique, it has signiﬁ cant limitations. Because the spatial resolu-
tion is only 5–10 mm3, the images show the activity of many 
thousands of cells. Also, a single PET brain scan may take one 
to several minutes to obtain. This, along with concerns about 
radiation exposure, limits the number of scans that can be ob-
tained from one person in a reasonable time period. Thus, the 
work of S. Ogawa at Bell Labs, showing that MRI techniques 
could be used to measure local changes in blood oxygen lev-
els that result from brain activity, was an important advance.
The fMRI method takes advantage of the fact that oxyhe-
moglobin (the oxygenated from of hemoglobin in the blood) 
has a magnetic resonance different from that of deoxyhemo-
globin (hemoglobin that has donated its oxygen). More ac-
tive regions of the brain receive more blood, and this blood 
donates more of its oxygen. Functional MRI detects the loca-
tions  of  increased  neural  activity  by  measuring  the  ratio  of 
oxyhemoglobin to deoxyhemoglobin. It has emerged as the 
method  of  choice  for  functional  brain  imaging  because  the 
scans can be made rapidly (50 msec), they have good spatial 
resolution (3 mm3), and they are completely noninvasive.

 The two “functional imaging” techniques now in widespread use are 
positron emission tomography   (PET)  and  functional magnetic resonance 
imaging   (fMRI) . While the technical details differ, both methods detect 
changes in regional blood ﬂ ow and metabolism within the brain (Box 7.3). 
The basic principle is simple. Neurons that are active demand more glu-
cose  and  oxygen.  The  brain  vasculature  responds  to  neural  activity  by 
directing more blood to the active regions. Thus, by detecting changes in 
blood ﬂ ow, PET and fMRI reveal the regions of brain that are most active 
under different circumstances. 

 The advent of imaging techniques has offered neuroscientists the ex-
traordinary opportunity of peering into the living, thinking brain. As you 
can imagine, however, even the most sophisticated brain images are use-
less unless you know what you are looking at. Next, let’s take a closer look 
at how the brain is organized. 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   190
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   190

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

191

Photon
detectors

Photon

Positron 
emission

Figure A
 The PET procedure. (Source: Posner and Raichle, 1994, p. 61.)

Stimulation

Control

Difference

–

=

Figure B
 A PET image. (Source: Posner and Raichle, 1994, p. 65.)

SELF-QUIZ
SELFF-QQUIZ

Take a few moments right now and be sure you understand the meaning 
of these terms:

central nervous 
system (CNS)

brain
spinal cord
cerebrum
cerebral 

hemispheres

cerebellum
brain stem

spinal nerve
dorsal root
ventral root
peripheral 
nervous 
system (PNS)

somatic PNS
dorsal root 

ganglia

visceral PNS
autonomic 
nervous 
system (ANS)

afferent
efferent
cranial nerve
meninges
dura mater

arachnoid 

membrane

pia mater
cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid (CSF)
ventricular 

system

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   191
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   191

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

192

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 UNDERSTANDING CNS STRUCTURE 
UNDEERSTAANDING CNS STRUUCTURE 
THROOUGH DEVELOPMENT
THROUGH DEVELOPMENT 

 The  entire  CNS  is  derived  from  the  walls  of  a  ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled  tube  that  is 
formed  at  an  early  stage  in  embryonic  development.  The  inside  of  the 
tube becomes the adult ventricular system. Thus, by examining how this 
tube changes during the course of fetal development, we can understand 
how the brain is organized and how the different parts ﬁ t together. This 
section  focuses  on  development  as  a  way  to  understand  the  structural 
organization of the brain. Chapter 23 will revisit the topic of development 
to describe how neurons are born, how they ﬁ nd their way to their ﬁ nal 
locations in the CNS, and how they make the appropriate synaptic con-
nections with one another. 

 As you work your way through this section, and through the rest of the 
book, you will encounter many different names used by anatomists to refer 
to groups of related neurons and axons. Some common names for describing 
collections of neurons and axons are given in Tables 7.1 and 7.2. Take a few 
moments to familiarize yourself with these new terms before continuing. 

TABLE 7.1  Collections of Neurons
Name
NaNameme

Description and Example
DeDescscririptptioionn anandd ExExamamplplee

Gray matter

A generic term for a collection of neuronal cell bodies in the CNS. When a freshly dissected brain is cut 

Cortex

Nucleus

Substantia

Locus 

(plural: loci)

Ganglion 

(plural: ganglia)

open, neurons appear gray.

Any collection of neurons that form a thin sheet, usually at the brain’s surface. Cortex is Latin for “bark.” 

Example: cerebral cortex, the sheet of neurons found just under the surface of the cerebrum.

A clearly distinguishable mass of neurons, usually deep in the brain (not to be confused with the nucleus of 

a cell). Nucleus is from the Latin word for “nut.” Example: lateral geniculate nucleus, a cell group in the 
brain stem that relays information from the eye to the cerebral cortex.

A group of related neurons deep within the brain but usually with less distinct borders than those of nuclei. 
Example: substantia nigra (from the Latin for “black substance”), a brain stem cell group involved in the 
control of voluntary movement.

A small, well-deﬁ ned group of cells. Example: locus coeruleus (Latin for “blue spot”), a brain stem cell 

group involved in the control of wakefulness and behavioral arousal.

A collection of neurons in the PNS. Ganglion is from the Greek for “knot.” Example: the dorsal root ganglia, 

which contain the cell bodies of sensory axons entering the spinal cord via the dorsal roots. Only one 
cell group in the CNS goes by this name: the basal ganglia, which are structures lying deep within the 
cerebrum that control movement.

TABLE 7.2  Collections of Axons
Name

Description and Example

Nerve
White matter

A bundle of axons in the PNS. Only one collection of CNS axons is called a nerve: the optic nerve.
A generic term for a collection of CNS axons. When a freshly dissected brain is cut open, axons appear 

white.

Tract

Bundle

Capsule

A collection of CNS axons having a common site of origin and a common destination. Example: corticospinal 

tract, which originates in the cerebral cortex and ends in the spinal cord.

A collection of axons that run together but do not necessarily have the same origin and destination. 

Example: medial forebrain bundle, which connects cells scattered within the cerebrum and brain stem.

A collection of axons that connect the cerebrum with the brain stem. Example: internal capsule, which 

 connects the brain stem with the cerebral cortex.

Commissure
Lemniscus

Any collection of axons that connect one side of the brain with the other side.
A tract that meanders through the brain like a ribbon. Example: medial lemniscus, which brings touch infor-

mation from the spinal cord through the brain stem.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   192
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   192

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

193

 Anatomy by itself can be pretty dry. It really comes alive only after the 
functions of different structures are understood. The remainder of this 
book is devoted to explaining the functional organization of the nervous 
system. However, we include in this section a preview of some structure-
function  relationships  to  provide  you  with  a  general  sense  of  how  the 
different  parts  contribute,  individually  and  collectively,  to  the  function 
of the CNS. 

 Formation of the Neural Tube 
 The embryo begins as a ﬂ at disk with three distinct layers of cells called 
endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. The  endoderm  ultimately gives rise 
to the lining of many of the internal organs (viscera). From the  mesoderm  
arise the bones of the skeleton and the muscles. The nervous system and 
the skin derive entirely from the  ectoderm . 

 Our  focus  is  on  changes  in  the  part  of  the  ectoderm  that  give  rise 
to the nervous system: the  neural plate . At this early stage (about 17 
days from conception in humans), the brain consists only of a ﬂ at sheet 
of cells (Figure 7.10a). The next event of interest is the formation of a 

Rostral

Mesoderm

Neural
plate

Ectoderm

Neural
groove

Caudal

Neural
fold

Neural
tube

Somites

Neural
crest

Neural
tube

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

Endoderm
▲ FIGURE 7.10
Formation of the neural tube and neural crest.  These schematic illustrations follow 
the early development of the nervous system in the embryo. The drawings above are 
dorsal views of the embryo; those below are cross sections. (a) The primitive embryonic 
CNS begins as a thin sheet of ectoderm. (b) The first important step in the develop-
ment of the nervous system is the formation of the neural groove. (c) The walls of the 
groove, called neural folds, come together and fuse, forming the neural tube. (d) The 
bits of neural ectoderm that are pinched off when the tube rolls up is called the neural 
crest, from which the PNS will develop. The somites are mesoderm that will give rise to 
much of the skeletal system and the muscles.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   193
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   193

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

194

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

groove in the neural plate that runs rostral to caudal, called the  neural 
groove  (Figure 7.10b). The walls of the groove are called  neural folds , 
which subsequently move together and fuse dorsally, forming the  neu-
ral  tube   (Figure  7.10c).   The  entire  central  nervous  system  develops 
from  the  walls  of  the  neural  tube .  As  the  neural  folds  come  together, 
some neural ectoderm is pinched off and comes to lie just lateral to the 
neural tube. This tissue is called the  neural crest  (Figure 7.10d).  All 
neurons with cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system derive from 
the neural crest.  

 The neural crest develops in close association with the underlying me-
soderm.  The  mesoderm  at  this  stage  in  development  forms   prominent 
bulges on either side of the neural tube called  somites . From these somites, 
the 33 individual vertebrae of the spinal column and the related skeletal 
muscles will develop. The nerves that innervate these skeletal muscles 
are therefore called  somatic  motor nerves. 

 The  process  by  which  the  neural  plate  becomes  the  neural  tube 
is  called   neurulation .  Neurulation  occurs  very  early  in  embryonic 

BOX 7.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Nutrition and the Neural Tube
Neural tube formation is a crucial event in the development 

of  the  nervous  system.  It  occurs  early—only  3  weeks  after 
conception—when the mother may be unaware she is preg-
nant. Failure of the neural tube to close correctly is a com-
mon birth defect, occurring in approximately 1 out of every 
500 live births. A recent discovery of enormous public health 
importance is that many neural tube defects can be traced 
to a deﬁ ciency of the vitamin folic acid (or folate) in the ma-
ternal diet during the weeks immediately after conception. It 
has been estimated that dietary supplementation of folic acid 
during this period could reduce the incidence of neural tube 
defects by 90%.

Formation  of  the  neural  tube  is  a  complex  process 
(Figure A). It depends on a precise sequence of changes in 
the three-dimensional shape of individual cells as well as on 
changes in the adhesion of each cell to its neighbors. The 
timing of neurulation must also be coordinated with simulta-
neous changes in non-neural ectoderm and the mesoderm. 
At  the  molecular  level,  successful  neurulation  depends  on 
speciﬁ c sequences of gene expression that are controlled, 
in  part,  by  the  position  and  local  chemical  environment  of 
the cell. It is not surprising that this process is highly sensi-
tive to chemicals, or chemical deﬁ ciencies, in the maternal 
circulation.

The  fusion  of  the  neural  folds  to  form  the  neural  tube 
occurs  ﬁ rst  in  the  middle,  then  anteriorly  and  posteriorly 
(Figure B). Failure of the anterior neural tube to close results 

0.180 mm

Figure A
 Scanning electron micrographs of neurulation. 
(Source: Smith and Schoenwolf, 1997.)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   194
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   194

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

195

development,  about  22  days  after  conception  in  humans.  A  common 
birth  defect  is  the  failure  of  appropriate  closure  of  the  neural  tube. 
Fortunately, recent research suggests that most cases of neural tube 
defects can be avoided by ensuring proper maternal nutrition during 
this period (Box 7.4). 

Rostral

 Three Primary Brain Vesicles 
 The  process  by  which  structures  become  more  complex  and  function-
ally specialized during development is called  differentiation . The ﬁ rst 
step  in  the  differentiation  of  the  brain  is  the  development,  at  the  ros-
tral end of the neural tube, of three swellings called the primary vesicles 
(Figure 7.11).  The entire brain derives from the three primary vesicles of 
the neural tube . 

 The rostral-most vesicle is called the  prosencephalon .  Pro  is Greek for 
“before”;  encephalon  is derived from the Greek for “brain.” Thus, the pros-
encephalon is also called the  forebrain . Behind the prosencephalon lies 

Prosencephalon
or forebrain

Mesencephalon
or midbrain

Rhombencephalon
or hindbrain

Caudal
▲ FIGURE 7.11
The three primary brain vesicles.  The 
rostral end of the neural tube differenti-
ates to form the three vesicles that will 
give rise to the entire brain. This view is 
from above, and the vesicles have been 
cut horizontally so that we can see the 
inside of the neural tube.

in  anencephaly,  a  condition  characterized  by  degeneration 
of the forebrain and skull that is always fatal. Failure of the 
posterior  neural  tube  to  close  results  in  a  condition  called 
spina biﬁ da. In its most severe form, spina biﬁ da is charac-
terized by the failure of the posterior spinal cord to form from 
the neural plate (biﬁ da is from the Latin word meaning “cleft in 
two parts”). Less severe forms are characterized by defects 
in the meninges and vertebrae overlying the posterior spinal 
cord. Spina biﬁ da, while usually not fatal, does require exten-
sive and costly medical care.

Folic  acid  plays  an  essential  role  in  a  number  of  meta-
bolic  pathways,  including  the  biosynthesis  of  DNA,  which 
naturally  must  occur  during  development  as  cells  divide. 
Although we do not precisely understand why folic acid de-
ﬁ ciency increases the incidence of neural tube defects, one 
can easily imagine how it could alter the complex choreog-
raphy of neurulation. Its name is derived from the Latin word 
for “leaf,” reﬂ ecting the fact that folic acid was ﬁ rst isolated 
from spinach leaves. Besides green leafy vegetables, good 
dietary  sources  of  folic  acid  are  liver,  yeast,  eggs,  beans, 
and oranges. Many breakfast cereals are now fortiﬁ ed with 
folic acid. Nonetheless, the folic acid intake of the average 
American  is  only  half  of  what  is  recommended  to  prevent 
birth  defects  (0.4  mg/day).  The  U.S.  Centers  for  Disease 
Control and Prevention recommends that women take mul-
tivitamins  containing  0.4  mg  of  folic  acid  before  planning 
pregnancy.

Rostral

22 days

23 days

Caudal 

(a)

Normal

(b)

Anencephaly

Spina bifida

Figure B
 (a) Neural tube closure. (b) Neural tube defects.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   195
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   195

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

196

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

i

n
a
r
b
e
r
o
F

Telencephalic
vesicles

Diencephalon

Optic vesicles

Midbrain

Hindbrain

▲ FIGURE 7.12
The secondary brain vesicles of the 
forebrain.  The forebrain differentiates 
into the paired telencephalic and optic 
vesicles, and the diencephalon. The op-
tic vesicles develop into the eyes.

Cut edge of
optic cup

Optic
stalk

Cut edge of wall
of diencephalon

▲ FIGURE 7.13
Early development of the eye.  The op-
tic vesicle differentiates into the optic 
stalk and the optic cup. The optic stalk 
will become the optic nerve, and the op-
tic cup will become the retina.

Telencephalon
(2 cerebral hemispheres)

Rostral

Caudal

(a)  

Diencephalon

Midbrain

Hindbrain

another vesicle called the  mesencephalon , or  midbrain . Caudal to this 
is  the  third  primary  vesicle,  the   rhombencephalon ,  or   hindbrain .  The 
rhombencephalon connects with the caudal neural tube, which gives rise 
to the spinal cord. 

 Differentiation of the Forebrain 
 The next important developments occur in the forebrain, where second-
ary vesicles sprout off on both sides of the prosencephalon. The secondary 
vesicles are the  optic vesicles  and the  telencephalic vesicles . The central 
structure that remains after the secondary vesicles have sprouted off is 
called  the   diencephalon ,  or  “between  brain”  (Figure  7.12).  Thus,  the 
forebrain at this stage consists of the two optic vesicles, the two telence-
phalic vesicles, and the diencephalon. 

 The optic vesicles grow and invaginate (fold in) to form the optic stalks 
and the optic cups, which will ultimately become the  optic nerves  and the 
two   retinas   in  the  adult  (Figure  7.13).  The  important  point  is  that  the 
retina at the back of the eye, and the optic nerve containing the axons 
that connect the eye to the diencephalon and midbrain, are part of the 
brain, not the PNS. 

 Differentiation  of  the  Telencephalon  and  Diencephalon.  The  telence-
phalic vesicles together form the  telencephalon , or “endbrain,” consist-
ing of the two cerebral hemispheres. The telencephalon continues to de-
velop in four ways. (1) The telencephalic vesicles grow posteriorly so that 
they lie over and lateral to the diencephalon (Figure 7.14a). (2) Another 
pair of vesicles sprout off the ventral surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres, 
giving  rise  to  the   olfactory  bulbs   and  related  structures  that  partici-
pate in the sense of smell (Figure 7.14b). (3) The cells of the walls of the 
telencephalon divide and differentiate into various structures. (4) White 
matter systems develop, carrying axons to and from the neurons of the 
telencephalon. 

Caudal

Dorsal

Ventral

Rostral

Cerebral
hemispheres

Diencephalon

Optic cups

Olfactory
bulbs

Differentiation

(b)

▲ FIGURE 7.14
Differentiation of the telencephalon.  (a) As development proceeds, the cerebral 
hemispheres swell and grow posteriorly and laterally to envelop the diencephalon. 
(b) The olfactory bulbs sprout off the ventral surfaces of each telencephalic vesicle.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   196
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   196

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

197

 Figure 7.15 shows a coronal section through the primitive mammalian 
forebrain, to illustrate how the different parts of the telencephalon and 
diencephalon differentiate and ﬁ t together. Notice that the two cerebral 
hemispheres lie above and on either side of the diencephalon, and that 
the ventral–medial surfaces of the hemispheres have fused with the lat-
eral surfaces of the diencephalon (Figure 7.15a). 

 The ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled spaces within the cerebral hemispheres are called the 
  lateral ventricles , and the space at the center of the diencephalon is 
called the  third ventricle  (Figure 7.15b). The paired lateral ventricles 
are a key landmark in the adult brain: Whenever you see paired ﬂ uid-
ﬁ lled ventricles in a brain section, you know that the tissue surrounding 
them is in the telencephalon. The elongated, slit-like appearance of the 
third ventricle in cross section is also a useful feature for identifying the 
diencephalon. 

 Notice in Figure 7.15 that the walls of the telencephalic vesicles ap-
pear  swollen  due  to  the  proliferation  of  neurons.  These  neurons  form 
two  different  types  of  gray  matter  in  the  telencephalon:  the   cerebral 
cortex  and the  basal telencephalon . Likewise, the diencephalon dif-
ferentiates into two structures: the  thalamus  and the  hypothalamus  
(Figure 7.15c). The thalamus, nestled deep inside the forebrain, gets its 
name from the Greek word for “inner chamber.” 

 The neurons of the developing forebrain extend axons to communicate 
with other parts of the nervous system. These axons bundle together to 
form  three  major  white  matter  systems:  the  cortical  white  matter,  the 
corpus callosum, and the internal capsule (Figure 7.15d). The  cortical 
white matter  contains all the axons that run to and from the neurons in 
the cerebral cortex. The  corpus callosum  is continuous with the cortical 
white matter and forms an axonal bridge that links cortical neurons of 
the two cerebral hemispheres. The cortical white matter is also continu-

Telencephalon 

Cerebral cortex

Thalamus

Hypothalamus

Basal telencephalon

Diencephalon

(a)  Main divisions  

(c)  Gray matter structures  

Lateral ventricles

Third ventricle

Corpus callosum

Cortical white
matter

Internal capsule

(b)  Ventricles  

(d)  White matter structures  

▲ FIGURE 7.15
Structural features of the forebrain.  (a) A coronal section through the primitive 
forebrain, showing the two main divisions: the telencephalon and the diencepha-
lon. (b) Ventricles of the forebrain. (c) Gray matter of the forebrain. (d) White mat-
ter structures of the forebrain.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   197
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   197

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

198

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Cerebral
cortex

ous  with  the   internal  capsule ,  which  links  the  cortex  with  the  brain 
stem, particularly the thalamus. 

Thalamus

Eye

Skin

Ear
▲ FIGURE 7.16
The thalamus: gateway to the cerebral 
cortex. The sensory pathways from the 
eye, ear, and skin all relay in the thala-
mus before terminating in the cerebral 
cortex. The arrows indicate the direction 
of information flow.

 Forebrain  Structure-Function  Relationships.   The  forebrain  is  the  seat 
of perceptions, conscious awareness, cognition, and voluntary action. All 
this depends on extensive interconnections with the sensory and motor 
neurons of the brain stem and spinal cord. 

 Arguably the most important structure in the forebrain is the cerebral 
cortex. As we will see later in this chapter, the cortex is the brain struc-
ture  that  has  expanded  the  most  over  the  course  of  human  evolution. 
Cortical neurons receive sensory information, form perceptions of the out-
side world, and command voluntary movements. 

 Neurons  in  the  olfactory  bulbs  receive  information  from  cells  that 
sense chemicals in the nose (odors), and relay this information caudally 
to a part of the cerebral cortex for further analysis. Information from the 
eyes, ears, and skin is also brought to the cerebral cortex for analysis. 
However,  each  of  the  sensory  pathways  serving  vision,  audition  (hear-
ing),  and  somatic  sensation  relays  (i.e.,  synapses  upon  neurons)  in  the 
thalamus en route to the cortex. Thus, the thalamus is often referred to 
as the gateway to the cerebral cortex (Figure 7.16). 

 Thalamic neurons send axons to the cortex via the internal capsule. 
As a general rule, the axons of each internal capsule carry information 
to  the  cortex  about  the  contralateral  side  of  the  body.  Therefore,  if  a 
thumbtack entered the  right  foot, it would be relayed to the  left  cortex 
by the  left  thalamus via axons in the  left  internal capsule. But how does 
the right foot know what the left foot is doing? One important way is by 
communication  between  the  hemispheres  via  the  axons  in  the  corpus 
callosum. 

 Cortical neurons also send axons through the internal capsule, back 
to the brain stem. Some cortical axons course all the way to the spinal 
cord, forming the corticospinal tract. This is one important way cortex 
can command voluntary movement. Another way is by communicating 
with neurons in the basal ganglia, a collection of cells in the basal tel-
encephalon. The term  basal  is used to describe structures deep in the 
brain, and the basal ganglia lie deep within the cerebrum. The func-
tions of the basal ganglia are poorly understood, but it is known that 
damage  to  these  structures  disrupts  the  ability  to  initiate  voluntary 
movement. Other structures, contributing to other brain functions, are 
also  present  in  the  basal  telencephalon.  For  example,  in  Chapter  18, 
we’ll discuss a structure called the amygdala that is involved in fear 
and emotion. 

 Although  the  hypothalamus  lies  just  under  the  thalamus,  function-
ally it is more closely related to certain telencephalic structures like the 
amygdala.  The  hypothalamus  performs  many  primitive  functions  and 
therefore  has  not  changed  much  over  the  course  of  mammalian  evolu-
tion. “Primitive” does not mean unimportant or uninteresting, however. 
The  hypothalamus  controls  the  visceral  (autonomic)  nervous  system, 
which regulates bodily functions in response to the needs of the organ-
ism. For example, when you are faced with a threatening situation, the 
hypothalamus  orchestrates  the  body’s  visceral  ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight  response. 
Hypothalamic commands to the ANS will lead to (among other things) 
an increase in the heart rate, increased blood ﬂ ow to the muscles for es-
cape, and even the standing of your hair on end. Conversely, when you’re 
relaxing after Sunday brunch, the hypothalamus ensures that the brain is 
well nourished via commands to the ANS, which will increase peristalsis 
(movement of material through the gastrointestinal tract) and redirect 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   198
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   198

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

199

SELF-QUIZ

Listed  below  are  derivatives  of  the  forebrain  that  we  have  discussed. 
Be sure you know what each of these terms means.
Primary 
Vesicle
Forebrain 

Secondary 
Vesicle
Optic vesicle

(prosencephalon)

Thalamus 

(diencephalon)

Telencephalon

Some Adult 
Derivatives
Retina
Optic nerve
Dorsal thalamus
Hypothalamus
Third ventricle
Olfactory bulb
Cerebral cortex
Basal telencephalon
Corpus callosum
Cortical white matter
Internal capsule

blood to your digestive system. The hypothalamus also plays a key role in 
motivating animals to ﬁ nd food, drink, and sex in response to their needs. 
Aside  from  its  connections  to  the  ANS,  the  hypothalamus  also  directs 
bodily responses via connections with the pituitary gland located below 
the diencephalon. This gland communicates with many parts of the body 
by releasing hormones into the bloodstream. 

 Differentiation of the Midbrain 
 Unlike the forebrain, the midbrain differentiates relatively little during 
subsequent brain development (Figure 7.17). The dorsal surface of the mes-
encephalic vesicle becomes a structure called the  tectum  (Latin for “roof”). 

Forebrain

Midbrain

Hindbrain

Differentiation

Tectum

Cerebral
aqueduct

Tegmentum

▲ FIGURE 7.17
Differentiation of the midbrain. The midbrain differentiates into the tectum and 
the tegmentum. The CSF-filled space at the core of the midbrain is the cerebral 
aqueduct. (Drawings are not to scale.)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   199
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   199

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

200

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

The ﬂ oor of the midbrain becomes the  tegmentum . The CSF-ﬁ lled space in 
between constricts into a narrow channel called the  cerebral  aqueduct . 
The aqueduct connects rostrally with the third ventricle of the diencepha-
lon. Because it is small and circular in cross section, the cerebral aqueduct 
is a good landmark for identifying the midbrain. 

 Midbrain Structure-Function Relationships. For such a seemingly sim-
ple  structure,  the  functions  of  the  midbrain  are  remarkably  diverse. 
Besides  serving  as  a  conduit  for  information  passing  from  the  spinal 
cord to the forebrain and vice versa, the midbrain contains neurons that 
contribute  to  sensory  systems,  the  control  of  movement,  and  several 
other functions. 

 The midbrain contains axons descending from the cerebral cortex to 
the brain stem and the spinal cord. For example, the corticospinal tract 
courses through the midbrain en route to the spinal cord. Damage to this 
tract in the midbrain on one side produces a loss of voluntary control of 
movement on the opposite side of the body. 

 The tectum differentiates into two structures: the superior colliculus 
and the inferior colliculus. The  superior colliculus  receives direct input 
from the eye, so it is also called the optic tectum. One function of the optic 
tectum is to control eye movements, which it does via synaptic connec-
tions with the motor neurons that innervate the eye muscles. Some of the 
axons that supply the eye muscles originate in the midbrain, bundling 
together to form cranial nerves III and IV. 

 The  inferior colliculus  also receives sensory information but from the 
ear instead of the eye. The inferior colliculus serves as an important relay 
station for auditory information en route to the thalamus. 

 The tegmentum is one of the most colorful regions of the brain because 
it contains both the substantia nigra (the black substance) and the red 
nucleus. These two cell groups are involved in the control of voluntary 
movement. Other cell groups scattered in the midbrain have axons that 
project widely throughout much of the CNS and function to regulate con-
sciousness, mood, pleasure, and pain. 

 Differentiation of the Hindbrain 
 The  hindbrain  differentiates  into  three  important  structures:  the  cere-
bellum, the  pons , and the  medulla oblongata —also simply called the 
 medulla . The cerebellum and pons develop from the rostral half of the 
hindbrain (called the metencephalon); the medulla develops from the cau-
dal  half  (called  the  myelencephalon).  The  CSF-ﬁ lled  tube  becomes  the 
 fourth ventricle , which is continuous with the cerebral aqueduct of the 
midbrain. 

 At the three-vesicle stage, the rostral hindbrain in cross section is a 
simple  tube.  In  subsequent  weeks,  the  tissue  along  the  dorsal–lateral 
wall of the tube, called the rhombic lip, grows dorsally and medially until 
it fuses with its twin on the other side. The resulting ﬂ ap of brain tissue 
grows into the cerebellum. The ventral wall of the tube differentiates and 
swells to form the pons (Figure 7.18). 

 Less dramatic changes occur during the differentiation of the caudal 
half of the hindbrain into the medulla. The ventral and lateral walls of 
this region swell, leaving the roof covered only with a thin layer of non-
neuronal  ependymal  cells  (Figure  7.19).  Along  the  ventral  surface  of 
each side of the medulla runs a major white matter system. Cut in cross 
section,  these  bundles  of  axons  appear  somewhat  triangular  in  shape, 
explaining why they are called the  medullary pyramids . 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   200
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   200

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

201

Forebrain

Midbrain

Hindbrain

Differentiation

Cerebellum

Rhombic lips

Fourth
ventricle

Pons

▲ FIGURE 7.18
Differentiation of the rostral hindbrain. The rostral hindbrain differentiates into 
the cerebellum and pons. The cerebellum is formed by the growth and fusion of 
the rhombic lips. The CSF-filled space at the core of the hindbrain is the fourth 
ventricle. (Drawings are not to scale.)

Forebrain

Midbrain

Hindbrain

Differentiation

Fourth
ventricle

Medulla

Medullary
pyramids 

▲ FIGURE 7.19
Differentiation of the caudal hindbrain. The caudal hindbrain differentiates into 
the medulla. The medullary pyramids are bundles of axons coursing caudally to-
ward the spinal cord. The CSF-filled space at the core of the medulla is the fourth 
ventricle. (Drawings are not to scale.)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   201
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   201

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

202

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Neuron in
motor cortex

Pyramidal
decussation

Medulla

Spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 7.20
The pyramidal decussation.  The corti-
cospinal tract crosses from one side to 
the other in the medulla.

 Hindbrain  Structure-Function  Relationships.   Like  the  midbrain,  the 
hindbrain is an important conduit for information passing from the fore-
brain to the spinal cord, and vice versa. In addition, neurons of the hind-
brain contribute to the processing of sensory information, the control of 
voluntary movement, and regulation of the autonomic nervous system. 

 The cerebellum, the “little brain,” is an important movement control 
center.  It  receives  massive  axonal  inputs  from  the  spinal  cord  and  the 
pons. The spinal cord inputs provide information about the body’s position 
in space. The inputs from the pons relay information from the cerebral 
cortex, specifying the goals of intended movements. The cerebellum com-
pares these types of information and calculates the sequences of muscle 
contractions that are required to achieve the movement goals. Damage to 
the cerebellum results in uncoordinated and inaccurate movements. 

 Of  the  descending  axons  passing  through  the  midbrain,  over  90%—
about 20 million axons in the human—synapse on neurons in the pons. 
The pontine cells relay all this information to the cerebellum on the oppo-
site site. Thus, the pons serves as a massive switchboard connecting the 
cerebral cortex to the cerebellum. (The word  pons  is from the Latin word 
for “bridge.”) The pons bulges out from the ventral surface of the brain 
stem to accommodate all this circuitry. 

 The  axons  that  do  not  terminate  in  the  pons  continue  caudally  and 
enter the medullary pyramids. Most of these axons originate in the ce-
rebral  cortex  and  are  part  of  the  corticospinal  tract.  Thus,  “pyramidal 
tract” is often used as a synonym for corticospinal tract. Near where the 
medulla joins with the spinal cord, each pyramidal tract crosses from one 
side of the midline to the other. A crossing of axons from one side to the 
other  is  known  as  a   decussation ,  and  this  one  is  called  the   pyramidal 
decussation . The crossing of axons in the medulla explains why the cortex 
of one side of the brain controls movements on the opposite side of the 
body (Figure 7.20). 

 In addition to the white matter systems passing through, the medulla 
contains neurons that perform many different sensory and motor func-
tions. For example, the axons of the auditory nerves, bringing auditory 
information from the ears, synapse on cells in the cochlear nuclei of the 
medulla. The cochlear nuclei project axons to a number of different struc-
tures, including the tectum of the midbrain (the inferior colliculus, dis-
cussed above). Damage to the cochlear nuclei leads to deafness. 

 Other sensory functions of the medulla include touch and taste. The 
medulla  contains  neurons  that  relay  somatic  sensory  information  from 

SELF-QUIZ
SELFF-QQUIZ

Listed below are derivatives of the midbrain and hindbrain that we have 
discussed. Be sure you know what each of these terms means.
Primary Vesicle
Midbrain (mesencephalon)

Hindbrain (rhombencephalon)

Some Adult Derivatives
Tectum
Tegmentum
Cerebral aqueduct
Cerebellum
Pons
Fourth ventricle
Medulla

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   202
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   202

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

203

the spinal cord to the thalamus. Destruction of the cells leads to anes-
thesia (loss of feeling). Other neurons relay gustatory (taste) information 
from the tongue to the thalamus. And among the motor neurons in the 
medulla are cells that control the tongue muscles via cranial nerve XII. 
(So think of the medulla next time you stick out your tongue!) 

 Differentiation of the Spinal Cord 
 As shown in Figure 7.21, the transformation of the caudal neural tube 
into the spinal cord is straightforward compared to the differentiation of 
the brain. With the expansion of the tissue in the walls, the cavity of the 
tube constricts to form the tiny CSF-ﬁ lled  spinal canal . 

 Cut  in  cross  section,  the  gray  matter  of  the  spinal  cord  (where  the 
neurons  are)  has  the  appearance  of  a  butterﬂ y.  The  upper  part  of  the 
butterﬂ y’s wing is the  dorsal horn , and the lower part is the  ventral 
horn .  The  gray  matter  between  the  dorsal  and  ventral  horns  is  called 
the  intermediate zone . Everything else is white matter, consisting of col-
umns of axons that run up and down the spinal cord. Thus, the bundles 
of axons running along the dorsal surface of the cord are called the  dorsal 
columns , the bundles of axons lateral to the spinal gray matter on each 
side are called the  lateral columns , and the bundles on the ventral surface 
are called the  ventral columns.  

 Spinal  Cord  Structure-Function  Relationships.   As  a  general  rule,  dor-
sal horn cells receive sensory inputs from the dorsal root ﬁ bers, ventral 
horn  cells  project  axons  into  the  ventral  roots  that  innervate  muscles, 

Forebrain

Midbrain

Hindbrain

Differentiation

White matter
columns

Spinal
canal

Dorsal horn

Intermediate
zone

Ventral horn

Spinal
gray
matter

▲ FIGURE 7.21
Differentiation of the spinal cord. The butterfly-shaped core of the spinal cord is 
gray matter, divisible into dorsal and ventral horns, and an intermediate zone. 
Surrounding the gray matter are white matter columns running rostrocaudally, up 
and down the cord. The narrow CSF-filled channel is the spinal canal. 
(Drawings are not to scale.)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   203
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   203

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

204

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

and intermediate zone cells are interneurons that shape motor outputs 
in response to sensory inputs and descending commands from the brain. 
 The  large  dorsal  column  contains  axons  that  carry  somatic  sensory 
(touch) information up the spinal cord toward the brain. It’s like a super-
highway that speeds information from the ipsilateral side of the body up 
to nuclei in the medulla. The postsynaptic neurons in the medulla give 
rise to axons that decussate and ascend to the thalamus on the contralat-
eral side. This crossing of axons in the medulla explains why touching the 
left side of the body is sensed by the right side of the brain. 

 The lateral column contains the axons of the descending corticospinal 
tract, which also cross from one side to the other in the medulla. These 
axons innervate the neurons of the intermediate zone and ventral horn 
and communicate the signals that control voluntary movement. 

 There are at least a half-dozen tracts that run in the columns of each 
side of the spinal cord. Most are one-way and bring information to or from 
the brain. Thus, the spinal cord is the major conduit of information from 
the skin, joints, and muscles to the brain, and vice versa. However, the 
spinal cord is also much more than that. The neurons of the spinal gray 
matter begin the analysis of sensory information, play a critical role in 
coordinating movements, and orchestrate simple reﬂ exes (such as jerking 
away your foot from a thumbtack). 

 Putting the Pieces Together 
 We have discussed the development of different parts of the CNS: the telen-
cephalon, diencephalon, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Now let’s put 
all the individual pieces together to make a whole central nervous system. 
 Figure 7.22 is a highly schematic illustration that captures the basic 
organizational plan of the CNS of all mammals, including humans. The 
paired hemispheres of the telencephalon surround the lateral ventricles. 

Rostral

Mesencephalon
(midbrain)

Caudal

Spinal
cord

Basal
telencephalon

Cortex

Thalamus

Tectum

Cerebellum

Spinal
cord

Telencephalon

Diencephalon
(thalamus)

Rhombencephalon
(hindbrain)

Olfactory
bulb

(b)  

Hypothalamus

Pons

Tegmentum

Medulla

(a)  

Forebrain

Lateral ventricle

Cerebral
aqueduct

Spinal
canal

(c)  

Third ventricle

Fourth  ventricle

▲ FIGURE 7.22
The “brainship Enterprise.” (a) The basic plan of the 
mammalian brain, with the major subdivisions indicated. 
(b) Major structures within each division of the brain. Note 
that the telencephalon consists of two hemispheres, 
 although only one is illustrated. (c) The ventricular system.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   204
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   204

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

205

TABLE 7.3  The Ventricular System of the Brain
Component

Related Brain Structures

Lateral ventricles

Third ventricle

Cerebral aqueduct

Fourth ventricle

Cerebral cortex
Basal telencephalon
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Tectum
Midbrain tegmentum
Cerebellum
Pons
Medulla

Dorsal to the lateral ventricles, at the surface of the brain, lies the cortex. 
Ventral and lateral to the lateral ventricles lies the basal telencephalon. 
The lateral ventricles are continuous with the third ventricle of the di-
encephalon. Surrounding this ventricle are the thalamus and the hypo-
thalamus. The third ventricle is continuous with the cerebral aqueduct. 
Dorsal to the aqueduct is the tectum. Ventral to the aqueduct is the mid-
brain tegmentum. The aqueduct connects with the fourth ventricle that 
lies at the core of the hindbrain. Dorsal to the fourth ventricle sprouts the 
cerebellum. Ventral to the fourth ventricle lie the pons and the medulla. 
 You should see by now that ﬁ nding your way around the brain is easy 
if you can identify which parts of the ventricular system are in the neigh-
borhood (Table 7.3). Even in the complicated human brain, the ventricu-
lar system holds the key to understanding brain structure. 

 Special Features of the Human CNS 
 So far, we’ve explored the basic plan of the CNS as it applies to all mam-
mals. Figure 7.23 compares the brains of the rat and the human. You can 
see immediately that there are indeed many similarities but also some 
obvious differences. 

 Let’s start by reviewing the similarities. The dorsal view of both brains 
reveals  the  paired  hemispheres  of  the  telencephalon  (Figure  7.23a). 
A  midsagittal view of the two brains shows the telencephalon extending 
rostrally  from  the  diencephalon  (Figure  7.23b).  The  diencephalon  sur-
rounds the third ventricle, the midbrain surrounds the cerebral aqueduct, 
and  the  cerebellum,  pons,  and  medulla  surround  the  fourth  ventricle. 
Notice how the pons swells below the cerebellum, and how structurally 
elaborate the cerebellum is. 

 Now let’s consider some of the structural differences between the rat 
and human brains. Figure 7.23a reveals a striking one: the many convo-
lutions on the surface of the human cerebrum. The grooves in the surface 
of the cerebrum are called  sulci  (singular:  sulcus ), and the bumps are 
called  gyri  (singular:  gyrus ). Remember, the thin sheet of neurons that 
lies just under the surface of the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex. Sulci 
and gyri result from the tremendous expansion of the surface area of the 
cerebral cortex during human fetal development. The adult human cor-
tex, measuring about 1100 cm 2 , must fold and wrinkle to ﬁ t within the 
conﬁ nes of the skull. This increase in cortical surface area is one of the 
“distortions” of the human brain. Clinical and experimental evidence in-
dicates that the cortex is the seat of uniquely human reasoning and cogni-
tion. Without cerebral cortex, a person would be blind, deaf, dumb, and 
unable to initiate voluntary movement. We will take a closer look at the 
structure of the cerebral cortex in a moment. 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   205
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   205

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

206

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Rat

Cerebral
hemispheres

Relative
size:

Cerebellum

Human

Cerebral
hemispheres

(a)  

Third
ventricle

Cerebral
aqueduct

Telencephalon

Third
ventricle

Cerebral
aqueduct

Telencephalon

Fourth
ventricle

Fourth
ventricle

Cerebellum

Medulla

Diencephalon

(b)  

Midbrain

Pons

Diencephalon

Midbrain

Pons

Medulla

Cerebellum

Olfactory
bulb

(c)  

Olfactory
bulb

▲ FIGURE 7.23
The rat brain and human brain com-
pared. (a) Dorsal view. (b) Midsagittal 
view. (c) Lateral view. (Brains are not 
drawn to the same scale.)

 The  side  views  of  the  rat  and  human  brains  in  Figure  7.23c  reveal 
further differences in the forebrain. One is the small size of the olfactory 
bulb in the human relative to the rat. On the other hand, notice again 
the growth of the cerebral hemisphere in the human. See how the cere-
bral hemisphere of the human brain arcs posteriorly, ventrolaterally, and 
then anteriorly to resemble a ram’s horn. The tip of the “horn” lies right 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   206
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   206

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

207

Central
sulcus

Parietal
lobe

Frontal
lobe

Temporal lobe

▲ FIGURE 7.24
The lobes of the human cerebrum.

Occipital
lobe

under the temporal bone (temple) of the skull, so this portion of the brain 
is called the   temporal lobe  (Figure 7.24). Three other lobes (named after 
skull bones) also describe the parts of human cerebrum. The portion of 
the cerebrum lying just under the frontal bone of the forehead is called 
the  frontal lobe . The deep  central sulcus  marks the posterior border of 
the frontal lobe, caudal to which lies the  parietal lobe , under the pari-
etal bone. Caudal to that, at the back of the cerebrum under the occipital 
bone, lies the  occipital lobe . 

 It is important to realize that, despite the disproportionate growth of 
the cerebrum, the human brain still follows the basic mammalian brain 
plan  laid  out  during  embryonic  development.  Again,  the  ventricles  are 
key.  Although  the  ventricular  system  is  distorted,  particularly  by  the 
growth of the temporal lobes, the relationships that relate the brain to 
the different ventricles still hold (Figure 7.25). 

Lateral
ventricles

Third
ventricle

Fourth
ventricle

▲ FIGURE 7.25
The human ventricular system. Although the ventricles are 
distorted by the growth of the brain, the basic relationships of 
the ventricles to the surrounding brain are the same as those 
illustrated in Figure 7.22c.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   207
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   207

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

208

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 A GUIDE TO THE CEREBRAL CORTEX 
A GUUIDE TOO THE CEREBRAL CORTEX 

 Considering  its  prominence  in  the  human  brain,  the  cerebral  cortex 
 deserves  further  description.  As  we  will  see  repeatedly  in  subsequent 
chapters, the systems in the brain that govern the processing of sensa-
tions, perceptions, voluntary movement, learning, speech, and cognition 
all converge in this remarkable organ. 

 Types of Cerebral Cortex 
 Cerebral cortex in the brain of all vertebrate animals has several com-
mon features, as shown in Figure 7.26. First, the cell bodies of cortical 
neurons are always arranged in layers, or sheets, that usually lie paral-
lel to the surface of the brain. Second, the layer of neurons closest to the 

Alligator

Rat

Pia mater

Molecular

layer

Apical
dendrite

Pyramidal

cell

Layer

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

▲ FIGURE 7.26
General features of the cerebral cortex. On the left is the structure of cortex in 
an alligator; on the right, a rat. In both species, the cortex lies just under the pia 
mater of the cerebral hemisphere, contains a molecular layer, and has pyramidal 
cells arranged in layers.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   208
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   208

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

209

surface (the most superﬁ cial cell layer) is separated from the pia mater 
by a zone that lacks neurons; it is called the molecular layer, or simply 
 layer I . Third, at least one cell layer contains pyramidal cells that emit 
large dendrites, called  apical dendrites , that extend up to layer I, where 
they form multiple branches. Thus, we can say that the cerebral cortex 
has a characteristic cytoarchitecture that distinguishes it, for example, 
from the nuclei of the basal telencephalon or the thalamus. 

 Figure 7.27 shows a Nissl-stained coronal section through the caudal 
telencephalon of a rat brain. You don’t need to be Cajal to see that dif-
ferent  types  of  cortex  can  also  be  discerned  based  on  cytoarchitecture. 
Medial to the lateral ventricle is a piece of cortex that is folded onto itself 
in a peculiar shape. This structure is called the  hippocampus , which, 
despite its bends, has only a single cell layer. (The term is from the Greek 
word for “seahorse.”) Connected to the hippocampus ventrally and later-
ally is another type of cortex that has only two cell layers. It is called the 
 olfactory cortex  because it is continuous with the olfactory bulb, which 
sits further anterior. The olfactory cortex is separated by a sulcus, called 
the  rhinal ﬁ ssure , from another more elaborate type of cortex that has 
many cell layers. This remaining cortex is called  neocortex . Unlike the 
hippocampus and olfactory cortex,  neocortex is found only in mammals . 

Rhinal fissure

Olfactory
bulb

Neocortex

Hippocampus

Lateral
ventricle

Brain stem

Rhinal
fissure

Olfactory
cortex

▲ FIGURE 7.27
Three types of cortex in a mammal.  In this section of a rat brain, the lateral 
ventricles lie between the neocortex and the hippocampus on each side. The 
ventricles are not obvious because they are very long and thin in this region. 
Below the telencephalon lies the brain stem. What region of brain stem is this, 
based on the appearance of the fluid-filled space at its core?

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   209
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   209

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

210

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Thus,  when  we  said  previously  that  the  cerebral  cortex  has  expanded 
over the course of human evolution, we really meant that the neocortex 
has expanded. Similarly, when we said that the thalamus is the gateway 
to the cortex, we meant that it is the gateway to the neocortex. Most neu-
roscientists are such neocortical chauvinists (ourselves included) that the 
term cortex, if left unqualiﬁ ed, is usually intended to refer to the cerebral 
neocortex. 

 In  Chapter  8,  we  will  discuss  the  olfactory  cortex  in  the  context  of 
the  sense  of  smell.  Further  discussion  of  the  hippocampus  is  reserved 
until  later  in  this  book,  when  we  explore  its  role  in  the  limbic  system 
(Chapter 18) and in memory and learning (Chapters 24 and 25). The neo-
cortex will ﬁ gure prominently in our discussions of vision, audition, so-
matic sensation, and the control of voluntary movement in Part II, so let’s 
examine its structure in more detail. 

 Areas of Neocortex 
 Just  as  cytoarchitecture  can  be  used  to  distinguish  the  cerebral  cor-
tex  from  the  basal  telencephalon,  and  the  neocortex  from  the  olfactory 
cortex,  it  can  be  used  to  divide  the  neocortex  up  into  different  zones. 
This  is  precisely  what  the  famous  German  neuroanatomist  Korbinian 
Brodmann did at the beginning of the twentieth century. He constructed 
a   cytoarchitectural map  of the neocortex (Figure 7.28). In this map, 
each area of cortex having a common cytoarchitecture is given a number. 
Thus, we have “area 17” at the tip of the occipital lobe, “area 4” just ante-
rior to the central sulcus in the frontal lobe, and so on. 

 What Brodmann guessed, but could not show, was that cortical areas 
that look different perform different functions. We now have evidence 
that  this  is  true.  For  instance,  we  can  say  that  area  17  is  visual  cor-
tex, because it receives signals from a nucleus of the thalamus that is 
connected to the retina at the back of the eye. Indeed, without area 17, 
a human is blind. Similarly, we can say that area 4 is motor cortex be-
cause neurons in this area project axons directly to the motor neurons 
of the ventral horn that command muscles to contract. Notice that the 
different  functions  of  these  two  areas  are  speciﬁ ed  by  their  different 
connections. 

1 2

3

4

5

7

8

6

9

10

46

44

45

38

11

21

20

41

42

22

19

18

17

37

▲ FIGURE 7.28
Brodmann’s cytoarchitectural map of the human cerebral cortex.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   210
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   210

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

211

 Neocortical Evolution and Structure-Function Relationships.  A problem 
that has fascinated neuroscientists since the time of Brodmann is how 
the neocortex has changed over the course of mammalian evolution. The 
brain is a soft tissue, so there is not a fossil record of the cortex of our 
early  mammalian  ancestors.  Nonetheless,  considerable  insight  can  be 
gained by comparing the cortex of different living species (see Figure 7.1). 
The  surface  area  of  the  cortex  varies  tremendously  among  species;  for 
example, a comparison of mouse, monkey, and human cortex reveals dif-
ferences in size on the order of 1:100:1000. On the other hand, there is 
little difference in the thickness of the neocortex in different mammals, 
varying by no more than a factor of two. Thus, we can conclude that the 
amount  of  cortex  has  changed  over  the  course  of  evolution,  but  not  its 
basic structure. 

 The famous Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramon y Cajal, intro-
duced in Chapter 2, wrote in 1899 that “while there are very remarkable 
differences of organization of certain cortical areas, these points of dif-
ference do not go so far as to make impossible the reduction of the corti-
cal structure to a general plan.” A challenge that has preoccupied many 
scientists  since  then  has  been  to  ﬁ gure  out  exactly  what  this  plan  is. 
As we will discuss in later chapters, modern thinking is that the smallest 
functional unit of the neocortex is a cylinder of neurons 2 mm high—the 
distance from the white matter to the cortical surface—and 0.5 mm in 
diameter. This cylinder, usually described as a neocortical column, con-
tains on the order of 10,000 neurons and 100 million synapses (approxi-
mately 10,000 synapses per neuron). We wish to understand the detailed 
wiring diagram of how these neurons connect with one another: the  con-
nectome  of the neocortex. This is a tall order because synapses can be 
identiﬁ ed with conﬁ dence only using electron microscopy, which requires 
very thin (⬃50 nm) sections of tissue. To give an idea of the magnitude 
of  the  challenge,  consider  the  project  that  South  African  Nobel  laure-
ate Sidney Brenner and his collaborators conducted in the Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology at the National Institute for Medical Research at 
Mill  Hill,  in  North  London,  England.  Brenner  was  convinced  that  un-
derstanding  the  neural  basis  of  behavior  required  a  circuit  diagram, 
and to tackle this, he chose a simple organism, the 1 mm long ﬂ atworm, 
 Caenorhabditis elegans  (usually abbreviated  C. elegans )—a far cry from 
the neocortex, granted, but possibly a tractable problem to solve because 
the worm has only 302 neurons and about 7000 synapses. Despite this 
relative simplicity, the “mind of the worm,” as they called their project, 
took over a dozen years to complete. Since the publication of this work in 
1986, many of the obstacles to reconstructing a synaptic wiring diagram 
have begun to yield to advances in technology, including automated sec-
tioning of brain tissue for electron microscopy and computer-aided recon-
struction of volumes of tissue from very thin sections (Box 7.5). Although 
we are not there yet, such advances have spawned optimism that Cajal’s 
dream might soon be realized and not just for the cortex but for the en-
tire brain. 

 Brodmann proposed that neocortex expanded by the insertion of new 
areas. Detailed comparisons of cortical structure and function in living 
species with diverse evolutionary histories suggest that the primordial 
neocortex of our common mammalian ancestor consisted mainly of three 
types of cortex. The ﬁ rst type consists of  primary sensory areas , which 
are the ﬁ rst to receive signals from the ascending sensory pathways. For 
example, area 17 is designated as primary visual cortex, or V1, because 
it receives input from the eyes via a direct path: retina to thalamus to 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   211
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   211

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

212

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

BOX 7.5

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Connecting with the Connectome
by Sebastian Seung

My  career  path  has  been  full  of  zigs  and  zags.  When  I 

was  close  to  completing  my  Ph.D.  in  theoretical  physics, 
my  advisor  sent  me  to  Bell  Laboratories  in  New  Jersey  for 
a  summer  job.  As  the  famous  research  and  development 
arm of the telecommunication company AT&T, Bell Labs had 
produced  Nobel  Prize–winning  discoveries  and  seminal  in-
ventions like the transistor. During my summer there, I was 
supposed to theorize about superconductivity. Instead, I met 
Haim Sompolinsky, who had just arrived from Israel for a sab-
batical  year.  Haim  had  previously  developed  mathematical 
models  of  interacting  particles  in  a  magnetic  ﬁ eld  and  was 
now enthusiastically moving on to interacting neurons. I was 
hooked by this theory of neural networks, so I followed Haim 
to  Jerusalem  for  post-doctoral  training.  We  applied  ideas 
from  statistical  physics  to  understand  when  artiﬁ cial  neural 
networks—that is, networks of computational units modeled 
loosely after neurons—learn not gradually but suddenly, as if 
with an “aha!” moment. When not engaged in lengthy math-
ematical  calculations,  I  also  learned  to  speak  Hebrew  and 
how to make hummus.

After two years in Jerusalem, I returned to Bell Labs. In 
the organizational chart, all company departments had a ﬁ ve-
digit number. I belonged to Theoretical Physics, Department 
11111. That meant we were the smartest of the smart, right? 
But Bell Labs was under pressure to be useful—to produce 
not  Nobel  Prizes  but  more  revenue  for  AT&T—and  some 
quipped,  “The  more  1’s  in  your  department  number,  the 
more useless you are.”

Still,  Bell  Labs  was  like  Disneyland  for  the  mind,  jam-
packed with researchers working on a dizzying variety of inter-
esting topics. Many left their ofﬁ ce doors open, so you could 
pop in and ask questions any time. Experimental physicists in 
the Biological Computation Department were pioneering the 

use of functional MRI and advanced microscopy to observe 
neural activity. At the other end of the building were computer 
scientists working in the ﬁ eld of machine learning—a process 
by which a computer can “learn” from experience rather than 
being explicitly programmed.

Soon I was inventing algorithms that enabled artiﬁ cial neu-
ral networks to learn, and I developed a mathematical theory 
of  a  hindbrain  neural  circuit  called  the  oculomotor  integra-
tor. I continued this work after moving to the Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology  as  an  assistant  professor.  In  2004, 
I  was  tenured  and  promoted  to  the  rank  of  full  professor. 
I should have been happy, but instead, I felt depressed. My 
theory of the oculomotor integrator was interesting and even 
plausible, judging from experimental tests by my collaborator 
David Tank at Princeton. But others were continuing to pro-
pose alternative theories, and the ﬁ eld showed no sign of con-
verging on a consensus. My theory assumed the existence of 
recurrent connections between integrator neurons. Yet after 
a decade of study, I didn’t even know for sure whether inte-
grator neurons were connected to each other at all!

When I complained to David, he suggested that I change 
my research focus. In the 1990s, we had both worked at Bell 
Labs with Winfried Denk, who had since moved to the Max 
Planck Institute of Biomedical Research in Heidelberg. There 
Winfried had built an ingenious automated device that could 
image  the  face  of  a  block  of  brain  tissue,  and  then  shave 
off a thin slice to expose a new face. By repeatedly cutting 
deeper and deeper into the block, the device could acquire 
a  three-dimensional  (3D)  image  of  brain  tissue.  Because 
Winfried’s device used an electron microscope, the image 
was sharp enough to reveal all synapses, as well as all neu-
rons  in  the  tissue.  (Recall  that  Cajal  could  visualize  only  a 
small number of neurons with his light microscope and the 

cortex. The second type of neocortex consists of  secondary sensory areas , 
so designated because of their heavy interconnections with the primary 
sensory areas. The third type of cortex consists of  motor areas,  which 
are intimately involved with the control of voluntary movement. These 
cortical areas receive inputs from thalamic nuclei that relay informa-
tion  from  the  basal  telencephalon  and  the  cerebellum,  and  they  send 
outputs to motor control neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord. For 
example, because cortical area 4 sends outputs directly to motor neurons 
in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, it is designated the primary motor 
cortex, or M1. It is believed that the common mammalian ancestor had 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   212
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   212

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

213

Golgi stain, and could not see synapses at all.) In principle, 
from such an image it would be possible to reconstruct the 
“wiring  diagram”  of  a  piece  of  brain  tissue  by  tracing  the 
paths of neural branches, the “wires” of the brain, and locat-
ing the synapses.

The catch was the huge amount of image data that had to 
be analyzed. Winfried’s device had the potential to generate 
a petabyte of data from a cubic millimeter volume, the equiva-
lent of a billion pictures in your digital photo album. Manual 
reconstruction  of  the  wiring  diagram  would  be  prohibitively 
time-consuming. I decided to work on the problem of speed-
ing up image analysis by computer automation. In 2006, my 
laboratory began collaborating with Winfried’s laboratory to 
apply the methods of machine learning to his images. This 
computational  method  signiﬁ cantly  improved  the  speed 
and  accuracy  of  3D  reconstruction  of  neurons.  However, 
the method still made errors, so it could not completely re-
place human intelligence. In 2008, we started creating soft-
ware that would enable humans to work with the machines 

to reconstruct neural circuits. This eventually turned into the 
“citizen  science”  project  called  EyeWire,  which  has  regis-
tered over 150,000 players from 100 countries since its 2012 
launch  (http://blog.eyewire.org/about).  “EyeWirers”  analyze 
images by playing a game resembling a 3D coloring book. By 
coloring, they reconstruct the branches of neurons, which are 
like the “wires” of the brain (Figure A).

In 2014, Nature published the ﬁ rst EyeWire-assisted dis-
covery: a new wiring diagram for a neural circuit in the retina. 
The discovery suggests a new solution to a problem that has 
eluded  neuroscientists  for  50  years:  How  does  the  retina 
detect  moving  visual  stimuli?  Researchers  are  conducting 
experiments  to  test  our  new  theory,  and  only  time  will  tell 
whether it’s correct. But it’s already clear that our computa-
tional technologies for reconstructing connectivity are accel-
erating progress towards understanding how neural circuits 
function.  I'm  now  at  the  Princeton  Neuroscience  Institute, 
where I am continuing to work towards my dream of recon-
structing a connectome, a wiring diagram of an entire brain.

Figure A 
 Seven neurons in a small volume of retina with their dendrites reconstructed from electron micro-
scopic images. The neurites belonging to each neuron are colored differently. (Source: Courtesy 
of Dr. Sebastian Seung, Princeton University, and Kris Krug, Pop Tech.)

on the order of about 20 different areas that could be assigned to these 
three categories. 

 Figure  7.29  shows  views  of  the  brain  of  a  rat,  a  cat,  and  a  human, 
with the primary sensory and motor areas identiﬁ ed. It is plain to see 
that when we speak of the expansion of the cortex in mammalian evolu-
tion, what has expanded is the region that lies in between these areas. 
Much of the “in-between” cortex reﬂ ects expansion of the number of sec-
ondary sensory areas devoted to the analysis of sensory information. For 
example, in primates that depend heavily on vision, such as humans, the 
number of secondary visual areas has been estimated to be between 20 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   213
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   213

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

214

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Motor

Somatic
sensory

Sensorimotor

Visual

Visual

Sensorimotor

Visual

Auditory

Human

Olfactory
bulb

Auditory

Cat

Olfactory
bulb

Auditory

Rat

▲ FIGURE 7.29
A lateral view of the cerebral cortex in three species. Notice the expansion of 
the human cortex that is neither strictly primary sensory nor strictly motor.

and 40. However, even after we have assigned primary sensory, motor, 
and secondary sensory functions to large regions of cortex, a considerable 
amount of area remains in the human brain, particularly in the frontal 
and temporal lobes. These are the  association areas  of cortex. Association 
cortex is a more recent evolutionary development, a noteworthy charac-
teristic of the primate brain. The emergence of the “mind”—our unique 
ability  to  interpret  behavior  (our  own  and  that  of  others)  in  terms  of 
unobservable  mental  states,  such  as  desires,  intentions,  and  beliefs—
correlates best with the expansion of the frontal cortex. Indeed, as we will 
see in Chapter 18, lesions of the frontal cortex can profoundly alter an 
individual’s personality. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 Although we have covered a lot of new ground in this chapter, we have 
only scratched the surface of neuroanatomy. Clearly, the brain deserves 
its status as the most complex piece of matter in the universe. What we 
have presented here is a shell, or scaffold, of the nervous system and some 
of its contents. 

 Understanding neuroanatomy is necessary for understanding how the 
brain works. This statement is just as true for an undergraduate ﬁ rst-
time  neuroscience  student  as  it  is  for  a  neurologist  or  a  neurosurgeon. 
In fact, neuroanatomy has taken on a new relevance with the advent of 
methods of imaging the living brain (Figure 7.30). 

 An Illustrated Guide to Human Neuroanatomy appears as an appen-
dix to this chapter. Use the guide as an atlas to locate various struc-
tures of interest. Labeling exercises are also provided to help you learn 
the  names  of  the  parts  of  the  nervous  system  you  will  encounter  in 
this book. 

 In Part II, Sensory and Motor Systems, the anatomy presented in this 
chapter and its appendix will come alive, as we explore how the brain 
goes  about  the  tasks  of  smelling,  seeing,  hearing,  sensing  touch,  and 
moving. 

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   214
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   214

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

215

▲ FIGURE 7.30
MRI scans of the authors.  How many structures can you label?

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   215
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   215

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

216

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

K E Y   T E R M S

Gross Organization of the 
Mammalian Nervous System
anterior (p. 180)
rostral (p. 180)
posterior (p. 180)
caudal (p. 180)
dorsal (p. 180)
ventral (p. 180)
midline (p. 182)
medial (p. 182)
lateral (p. 182)
ipsilateral (p. 182)
contralateral (p. 182)
midsagittal plane (p. 182)
sagittal plane (p. 182)
horizontal plane (p. 182)
coronal plane (p. 182)
central nervous system 

(CNS) (p. 183)

brain (p. 183)
spinal cord (p. 183)
cerebrum (p. 183)
cerebral hemispheres (p. 183)
cerebellum (p. 183)
brain stem (p. 183)
spinal nerve (p. 184)
dorsal root (p. 184)
ventral root (p. 184)
peripheral nervous system 

(PNS) (p. 184)

somatic PNS (p. 184)
dorsal root ganglion (p. 185)
visceral PNS (p. 185)
autonomic nervous system 

(ANS) (p. 185)

afferent (p. 185)
efferent (p. 185)
cranial nerve (p. 185)
meninges (p. 185)
dura mater (p. 185)
arachnoid membrane (p. 185)
pia mater (p. 186)
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid 

(CSF) (p. 186)

ventricular system (p. 186)

Understanding CNS Structure 
Through Development
gray matter (p. 192)
cortex (p. 192)
nucleus (p. 192)
substantia (p. 192)
locus (p. 192)
ganglion (p. 192)
nerve (p. 192)
white matter (p. 192)
tract (p. 192)
bundle (p. 192)
capsule (p. 192)
commissure (p. 192)
lemniscus (p. 192)
neural tube (p. 194)
neural crest (p. 194)
neurulation (p. 194)
differentiation (p. 195)
forebrain (p. 195)
midbrain (p. 196)
hindbrain (p. 196)
diencephalon (p. 196)
telencephalon (p. 196)

olfactory bulb (p. 196)
lateral ventricle (p. 197)
third ventricle (p. 197)
cerebral cortex (p. 197)
basal telencephalon (p. 197)
thalamus (p. 197)
hypothalamus (p. 197)
cortical white matter (p. 197)
corpus callosum (p. 197)
internal capsule (p. 198)
tectum (p. 199)
tegmentum (p. 200)
cerebral aqueduct (p. 200)
pons (p. 200)
medulla oblongata 
(medulla) (p. 200)

fourth ventricle (p. 200)
spinal canal (p. 203)
dorsal horn (p. 203)
ventral horn (p. 203)
sulcus (p. 205)
gyrus (p. 205)
temporal lobe (p. 207)
frontal lobe (p. 207)
central sulcus (p. 207)
parietal lobe (p. 207)
occipital lobe (p. 207)

A Guide to the 
Cerebral Cortex
hippocampus (p. 209)
olfactory cortex (p. 209)
neocortex (p. 209)
cytoarchitectural map (p. 210)
connectome (p. 211)

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   216
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   216

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7    THE STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

217

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Are the dorsal root ganglia in the central or peripheral nervous system?
2.  Is the myelin sheath of optic nerve axons provided by Schwann cells or oligodendroglia? Why?
3.  Imagine that you are a neurosurgeon, about to remove a tumor lodged deep inside the brain. 
The top of the skull has been removed. What now lies between you and the brain? Which layer(s) 
must be cut before you reach the CSF?

4.  What is the fate of tissue derived from the embryonic neural tube? Neural crest?
5.  Name the three main parts of the hindbrain. Which of these is also part of the brain stem?
6.  Where  is  CSF  produced?  What  path  does  it  take  before  it  is  absorbed  into  the  bloodstream? 

Name the parts of the CNS it will pass through in its voyage from brain to blood.

7.  What are three features that characterize the structure of cerebral cortex?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Creslin E. 1974. Development of the nervous 

system: a logical approach to neuroanatomy. 
CIBA Clinical Symposium 26:1–32.

Johnson KA, Becker JA. The whole brain atlas. 
http://www.med.harvard.edu/AANLIB/home.
html.

Krubitzer L. 1995. The organization of neocortex 

in mammals: are species really so different? 
Trends in Neurosciences 18:408–418.

Nauta W, Feirtag M. 1986. Fundamental 

Neuroanatomy. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Seung S. 2012. Connectome: How the Brain’s 

Wiring Makes Us Who We Are. Boston: 
Houghton Mifﬂ in Harcourt.

Watson C. 1995. Basic Human Neuroanatomy: 

an Introductory Atlas, 5th ed. New York: 
Little, Brown & Co.

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   217
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   217

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   218
179–218_Bear_07_revised_final.indd   218

12/20/14   4:05 AM
12/20/14   4:05 AM

CHAPTER 7 APPENDIX

An Illustrated Guide to 
Human Neuroanatomy

INTRODUCTION
SURFACE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN

The Lateral Surface of the Brain

(a)  Gross Features
(b)  Selected Gyri, Sulci, and Fissures
(c)  Cerebral Lobes and the Insula
(d)  Major Sensory, Motor, and Association Areas of Cortex

The Medial Surface of the Brain

(a)  Brain Stem Structures
(b)  Forebrain Structures
(c)  Ventricles

The Ventral Surface of the Brain
The Dorsal Surface of the Brain

(a)  Cerebrum
(b)  Cerebrum Removed
(c)  Cerebrum and Cerebellum Removed

CROSS-SECTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN

Cross Section 1: Forebrain at Thalamus–Telencephalon Junction

(a)  Gross Features
(b)  Selected Cell and Fiber Groups

Cross Section 2: Forebrain at Mid-Thalamus

(a)  Gross Features
(b)  Selected Cell and Fiber Groups

Cross Section 3: Forebrain at Thalamus–Midbrain Junction

(a)  Gross Features
(b)  Selected Cell and Fiber Groups

Cross Section 4: Rostral Midbrain
Cross Section 5: Caudal Midbrain
Cross Section 6: Pons and Cerebellum
Cross Section 7: Rostral Medulla
Cross Section 8: Mid-Medulla
Cross Section 9: Medulla–Spinal Cord Junction

THE SPINAL CORD

The Dorsal Surface of the Spinal Cord and Spinal Nerves
Ventral–Lateral Surface
Cross-Sectional Anatomy

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
THE CRANIAL NERVES
THE BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE BRAIN

Ventral View
Lateral View
Medial View (Brain Stem Removed)

SELF-QUIZ

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   219
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   219

219

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

220

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION

 As  we  will  see  in  the  remainder  of  the  book,  a  fruitful  way  to  explore 
the nervous system is to divide it up into functional systems. Thus, the 
olfactory system  consists of those parts of the brain that are devoted to the 
sense of smell, the  visual system  includes those parts that are devoted to 
vision, and so on. While this functional approach to investigating nervous 
system structure has many merits, it can make the “big picture”—how 
all these systems ﬁ t together inside the box we call the brain—difﬁ cult 
to see. The goal of this Illustrated Guide is to help you learn, in advance, 
about some of the anatomy that will be discussed in the subsequent chap-
ters. Here, we concentrate on naming the structures and seeing how they 
are  related  physically;  their  functional  signiﬁ cance  is  discussed  in  the 
remainder of the book. 

 The Guide is organized into six main parts. The ﬁ rst part covers the 
surface anatomy of the brain—the structures that can been seen by in-
spection of the whole brain, as well as those parts that are visible when 
the two cerebral hemispheres are separated by a cut in the midsagittal 
plane. Next, we explore the cross-sectional anatomy of the brain, using 
a series of slabs that contain structures of interest. The brief third and 
fourth  parts  cover  the  spinal  cord  and  the  autonomic  nervous  system. 
The ﬁ fth part of the Guide illustrates the cranial nerves and summarizes 
their diverse functions. The last part illustrates the blood supply of the 
brain. 

 The nervous system has an astonishing number of bits and pieces. In 
this Guide, we focus on those structures that will appear later in the book 
when we discuss the various functional systems. Nonetheless, even this 
abbreviated atlas of neuroanatomy yields a formidable list of new vocabu-
lary. Therefore, to help you learn the terminology, an extensive self-quiz 
review is provided at the end, in the form of a workbook with labeling 
exercises. 

 SURFACE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN 
 SURFFACE AANATOMY OF THE BRAIN 

 Imagine that you hold in your hands a human brain that has been dis-
sected from the skull. It is wet and spongy, and weighs about 1.4  kilograms 
(3 pounds). Looking down on the brain’s dorsal surface reveals the convo-
luted surface of the cerebrum. Flipping the brain over shows the complex 
ventral surface that normally rests on the ﬂ oor of the skull. Holding the 
brain up and looking at its side—the lateral view—shows the “ram’s horn” 
shape of the cerebrum coming off the stalk of the brain stem. The brain 
stem is shown more clearly if we slice the brain right down the middle 
and view its medial surface. In the part of the guide that follows, we will 
name the important structures that are revealed by such an inspection of 
the brain. Notice the magniﬁ cation of the drawings: 1 ⫻  is life-size, 2 ⫻  is 
twice life-size, 0.6 ⫻  is 60% of life-size, and so on. 

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   220
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   220

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

221

Dorsal view

Anterior

Ventral view

Anterior

Posterior

Posterior

(0.5X)

(0.5X)

Lateral view

Medial view

Anterior

Posterior

(0.5X)

Anterior

Posterior

(0.5X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   221
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   221

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

222

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 The Lateral Surface of the Brain 
 (a)  Gross  Features.  This  is  a  life-size  drawing  of  the 
brain.  Gross  inspection  reveals  the  three  major  parts: 
the large cerebrum, the brain stem that forms its stalk, 
and  the  rippled  cerebellum.  The  diminutive  olfactory 
bulb of the cerebrum can also be seen in this lateral view. 

Cerebrum

Olfactory bulb

Brain stem 

(1X)

Cerebellum

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   222
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   222

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

223

 (b)  Selected  Gyri,  Sulci,  and  Fissures.  The  cerebrum 
is noteworthy for its convoluted surface. The bumps are 
called gyri, and the grooves are called sulci or, if they are 
especially deep, ﬁ ssures. The precise pattern of gyri and 
sulci can vary considerably from individual to individual, 
but many features are common to all human brains. Some 
of the important landmarks are labeled here. Notice that 

the  postcentral  gyrus  lies  immediately  posterior  to  the 
central sulcus, and that the precentral gyrus lies immedi-
ately anterior to it. The neurons of the postcentral gyrus 
are  involved  in  somatic  sensation  (touch;  Chapter  12), 
and  those  of  the  precentral  gyrus  control  voluntary 
movement (Chapter 14). Neurons in the superior tempo-
ral gyrus are involved in audition (hearing; Chapter 11). 

Central sulcus

Precentral gyrus

Postcentral gyrus

Lateral (Sylvian)
fissure

Superior temporal
gyrus

(0.5X)

 (c)  Cerebral  Lobes  and  the  Insula.  By  convention, 
the cerebrum is subdivided into lobes named after the 
bones of the skull that lie over them. The central sulcus 
divides the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe. The tem-
poral lobe lies immediately ventral to the deep lateral 
(Sylvian) ﬁ ssure. The occipital lobe lies at the very back 

of the cerebrum, bordering both parietal and temporal 
lobes. A buried piece of the cerebral cortex, called the 
insula (Latin for “island”), is revealed if the margins of 
the lateral ﬁ ssure are gently pulled apart (inset). The 
insula borders and separates the temporal and frontal 
lobes. 

Frontal lobe

Parietal lobe

Insula

Occipital lobe

Temporal lobe

(0.6X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   223
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   223

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

224

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 (d)  Major  Sensory,  Motor,  and  Association  Areas 
of  Cortex.  The  cerebral  cortex  is  organized  like  a 
patchwork quilt. The various areas, ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed by 
Brodmann, differ from one another in terms of micro-
scopic  structure  and  function.  Notice  that  the  visual 

3 1 2
5

4

8

6

9

7

10

46

45

38

11

21

20

41 42
22

37

19

17

18

(0.4X)

Brodmann's map

areas (Chapter 10) are found in the occipital lobe, the 
somatic sensory areas (Chapter 12) are in the parietal 
lobe,  and  the  auditory  areas  (Chapter  11)  are  in  the 
temporal  lobe.  On  the  inferior  surface  of  the  parietal 
lobe (the operculum) and buried in the insula is the gus-
tatory cortex, devoted to the sense of taste (Chapter 8). 
 In  addition  to  the  analysis  of  sensory  information, 
the cerebral cortex plays an important role in the con-
trol  of  voluntary,  willful  movement.  The  major  motor 
control  areas  lie  in  the  frontal  lobe,  anterior  to  the 
central sulcus (Chapter 14). In the human brain, large 
 expanses of cortex cannot be simply assigned to sensory 
or  motor  functions.  These  constitute  the  association 
areas of cortex. Some of the more important areas are 
the prefrontal cortex (Chapters 21 and 24), the poste-
rior parietal cortex (Chapters 12, 21, and 24), and the 
inferotemporal cortex (Chapters 24 and 25). 

Primary motor cortex
(area 4)

Supplementary motor area
(area 6)

Somatosensory cortex
(areas 3, 1, 2)

Posterior parietal cortex
(areas 5, 7)

Premotor area
(area 6)

Visual cortex
(areas 17, 18, 19)

Prefrontal cortex

Inferotemporal cortex
(areas 20, 21, 37)

Motor areas
Sensory areas
Association areas

Auditory cortex
(areas 41, 42)

(0.7X)

Gustatory cortex
(area 43)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   224
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   224

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

225

 The Medial Surface of the Brain 
 (a)  Brain  Stem  Structures.  Splitting  the  brain  down 
the middle exposes the medial surface of the cerebrum, 
shown in this life-size illustration. This view also shows 
the midsagittal, cut surface of the brain stem,  consisting 
of the diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), the 
midbrain  (tectum  and  tegmentum),  the  pons,  and  the 
medulla. (It should be noted that some anatomists de-
ﬁ ne the brain stem as consisting only of the midbrain, 
pons, and medulla.) 

Thalamus

Pineal body

Cerebellum

Hypothalamus

Tegmentum

Midbrain

Tectum

Pons

Medulla

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   225
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   225

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

226

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 (b)  Forebrain Structures. Shown here are the important 
forebrain structures that can be observed by viewing the 
medial surface of the brain. Notice the cut surface of the 
corpus  callosum,  a  huge  bundle  of  axons  that  connects 
the two sides of the cerebrum. The unique contributions 
of  the  two  cerebral  hemispheres  to  human  brain  func-
tion can be studied in patients in which the callosum has 
been sectioned (Chapter 20). The fornix (Latin for “arch) is 
another prominent ﬁ ber bundle that connects the hippo-
campus on each side with the hypothalamus. Some of the 
axons in the fornix regulate memory storage (Chapter 24). 

 In  the  lower  illustration,  the  brain  has  been  tilted 
slightly to show the positions of the amygdala and hip-
pocampus. These are “phantom views” of these struc-
tures since they cannot be observed directly from the 
surface. Both lie deep to the overlying cortex. We will 
see them again in cross section later in the Guide. The 
amygdala  (from  the  Latin  word  for  “almond”)  is  an 
important  structure  for  regulating  emotional  states 
(Chapter  18),  and  the  hippocampus  is  important  for 
memory (Chapters 24 and 25). 

Cingulate gyrus

Fornix

Olfactory bulb

Optic chiasm

Corpus callosum
(cut edge)

Calcarine fissure

(0.7X)

Amygdala
(beneath overlying cortex)

Hippocampus
(beneath overlying cortex)

(0.7X)

Brain stem and cerebellum 
removed and brain
rotated slightly

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   226
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   226

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

227

 (c)  Ventricles. The lateral walls of the unpaired parts 
of the ventricular system—the third ventricle, the ce-
rebral  aqueduct,  the  fourth  ventricle,  and  the  spinal 
canal—can be observed in the medial view of the brain. 
These are handy landmarks because the thalamus and 
hypothalamus lie next to the third ventricle; the mid-
brain lies next to the aqueduct; the pons, cerebellum, 
and  medulla  lie  next  to  the  fourth  ventricle;  and  the 
spinal cord forms the walls of the spinal canal. 

 The  lateral  ventricles  are  paired  structures  that 
sprout  like  antlers  from  the  third  ventricle.  A  phan-
tom view of the right lateral ventricle, which lies un-
derneath  the  overlying  cortex,  is  shown  in  the  lower 
 illustration.  The  two  cerebral  hemispheres  surround 
the  two  lateral  ventricles.  Notice  how  a  cross  section 
of the brain at the thalamus–midbrain junction will in-
tersect the “horns” of the lateral ventricle of each hemi-
sphere twice. 

Third ventricle

Cerebral aqueduct

Fourth ventricle

Spinal canal

(0.7X)

Lateral ventricle
(beneath overlying cortex)

(0.7X)

Brain stem and cerebellum 
removed and brain
rotated slightly

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   227
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   227

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

228

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 The Ventral Surface of the Brain 
 The  underside  of  the  brain  has  a  lot  of  distinct  ana-
tomical  features.  Notice  the  nerves  emerging  from 
the  brain  stem;  these  are  the  cranial  nerves,  which 
are illustrated in more detail later in the Guide. Also 
notice the X-shaped optic chiasm, just anterior to the 
hypothalamus.  The  chiasm  is  the  place  where  many 
axons  from  the  eyes  decussate  (cross)  from  one  side 
to  another.  The  bundles  of  axons  anterior  to  the  chi-
asm, which emerge from the backs of the eyes, are the 

optic  nerves.  The  bundles  lying  posterior  to  the  chi-
asm, which disappear into the thalamus, are called the 
optic tracts (Chapter 10). The paired mammillary bod-
ies (Latin for “nipple”) are a prominent feature of the 
ventral surface of the brain. These nuclei of the hypo-
thalamus are part of the circuitry that stores memory 
(Chapter  24)  and  are  a  major  target  of  the  axons  of 
the  fornix  (seen  in  the  medial  view).  Notice  also  the 
 olfactory  bulbs  (Chapter  8)  and  the  midbrain,  pons, 
and medulla. 

Olfactory bulb

Optic chiasm

Optic nerve

Cranial nerves

Optic tract

Hypothalamus

Mammillary
body

Midbrain

Pons

Medulla

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   228
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   228

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

229

 The Dorsal Surface of the Brain 
 (a)  Cerebrum.  The  dorsal  view  of  the  brain  is  domi-
nated by the large cerebrum. Notice the paired cerebral 
hemispheres. These are connected by the axons of the 
corpus callosum (Chapter 20), which can be seen if the 
hemispheres are retracted slightly. The medial view of 
the brain, illustrated previously, showed the callosum 
in cross section. 

Corpus callosum

Left hemisphere

Right hemisphere

Central sulcus

Longitudinal cerebral
fissure

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   229
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   229

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

230

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 (b)  Cerebrum  Removed.  The  cerebellum  dominates 
the dorsal view of the brain if the cerebrum is removed 
and the brain is tilted slightly forward. The cerebellum 
is an important motor control structure (Chapter 14), 
and is divided into two hemispheres and a midline re-
gion called the vermis (Latin for “worm”). 

Vermis

Left cerebellar
hemisphere

Right cerebellar
hemisphere

(0.95X)

Spinal cord

 (c)  Cerebrum  and  Cerebellum  Removed.  The  top  sur-
face of the brain stem is exposed when both the cerebrum 
and the cerebellum are removed. The major divisions of 
the brain stem are labeled on the left side, and some spe-
ciﬁ c structures are labeled on the right side. The pineal 
body, lying atop the thalamus, secretes melatonin and is 
involved  in  the  regulation  of  sleep  and  sexual  behavior 

(Chapters 17 and 19). The superior colliculus receives di-
rect input from the eyes (Chapter 10) and is involved in 
the control of eye movements (Chapter 14), while the infe-
rior colliculus is an important component of the auditory 
system (Chapter 11). ( Colliculus  is Latin for “mound.”) The 
cerebellar peduncles are the large bundles of axons that 
connect the cerebellum and the brain stem (Chapter 14). 

Thalamus

Midbrain

Pons

Pineal body

Superior colliculus

Inferior colliculus

Cerebellar peduncle
(cut surface)

Fourth ventricle (floor)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   230
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   230

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

(1X)

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

231

CROSS-SECTIONAL ANATOMY OF 
CROOSS--SECTIONAL AANATOMY OF 
THEE BRAAIN 
THE BRAIN 

 Understanding the brain requires that we peer inside 
it, and this is accomplished by making cross sections. 
Cross sections can be made physically with a knife or, 
in the case of noninvasive imaging of the living brain, 
digitally with a magnetic resonance imaging or a com-
puted  tomography  scan.  For  learning  the  internal 
 organization of the brain, the best approach is to make 
cross  sections  that  are  perpendicular  to  the  axis  de-
ﬁ ned by the embryonic neural tube, called the   neuraxis . 

The neuraxis bends as the human fetus grows, partic-
ularly  at  the  junction  of  the  midbrain  and  thalamus. 
Consequently,  the  best  plane  of  section  depends  on 
 exactly where we are along the neuraxis. 

 In  this  part  of  the  Guide,  we  take  a  look  at  draw-
ings  of  a  series  of  cross-sectional  slabs  of  the  brain, 
showing the internal structure of the forebrain (cross 
sections  1–3),  the  midbrain  (cross  sections  4  and  5), 
the pons and cerebellum (cross section 6), and the me-
dulla (cross sections 7–9). The  drawings are schematic, 
meaning that structures within the slab are sometimes 
projected onto the slab’s visible surface. 

Forebrain Sections

3

2

1

(0.6X)

Brain Stem Sections

4

5

6

7

8

9

(0.6X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   231
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   231

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

232

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

1

Frontal lobe

Insula

Lateral (Sylvian)
fissure

Temporal lobe

 Cross Section 1: Forebrain at 
Thalamus–Telencephalon Junction 
 (a)  Gross Features. The telencephalon surrounds the 
lateral  ventricles,  and  the  thalamus  surrounds  the 
third ventricle. Notice that in this section, the lateral 
ventricles can be seen sprouting from the slit-like third 
ventricle. The  hypothalamus,  forming  the  ﬂ oor  of  the 
third ventricle, is a vital control center for many basic 
bodily functions (Chapters 15–17). Notice that the in-
sula (Chapter 8) lies at the base of the lateral (Sylvian) 
ﬁ ssure, here separating the frontal lobe from the tem-
poral lobe. The heterogeneous region lying deep within 
the telencephalon, medial to the insula and lateral to 
the thalamus, is called the basal forebrain. 

Lateral ventricle

Thalamus

Third ventricle

Basal forebrain

Hypothalamus

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   232
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   232

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

1

Fiber groups:

Corpus callosum

Fornix

Cortical
white matter

Internal capsule

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

233

 (b)  Selected  Cell  and  Fiber  Groups.  Here,  we  take  a 
more  detailed  look  at  the  structures  of  the  forebrain. 
Notice that the internal capsule is the large collection 
of axons connecting the cortical white matter with the 
brain stem, and that the corpus callosum is the enor-
mous  sling  of  axons  connecting  the  cerebral  cortex  of 
the two hemispheres. The fornix, shown earlier in the 
medial view of the brain, is shown here in cross section 
where it loops around the stalk of the lateral ventricle. 
The neurons of the closely associated septal area (from 
 saeptum , Latin for “partition”) contribute axons to the 
fornix and are involved in memory storage (Chapter 24). 
Three important collections of neurons in the basal tel-
encephalon  are  also  shown:  the  caudate  nucleus,  the 
putamen,  and  the  globus  pallidus.  Collectively,  these 
structures are called the basal ganglia and are an im-
portant  part  of  the  brain  systems  that  control  move-
ment (Chapter 14). 

Cell groups:

Cerebral cortex

Septal area

Caudate nucleus

Putamen

Globus pallidus

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   233
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   233

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

234

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

2
2

Parietal lobe

Thalamus

Insula

 Cross Section 2: Forebrain at 
 Mid-Thalamus 
 (a)  Gross Features. As we move slightly caudal in the 
neuraxis, we see the heart-shaped thalamus (Greek for 
“inner chamber”) surrounding the small third ventricle 
at the brain’s core. Just ventral to the thalamus lies the 
hypothalamus.  The  telencephalon  is  organized  much 
like  what  we  saw  in  cross  section  1.  Because  we  are 
slightly posterior, the lateral ﬁ ssure here separates the 
parietal lobe from the temporal lobe. 

Lateral ventricle

Lateral (Sylvian)
fissure

Temporal lobe

Basal forebrain

Hypothalamus

(1X)

Third ventricle

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   234
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   234

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

235

 (b)  Selected Cell and Fiber Groups. Many important 
cell and ﬁ ber groups appear at this level of the neur-
axis. One new structure apparent in the telencephalon 
is the amygdala, involved in the regulation of emotion 
(Chapter 18) and memory (Chapter 24). We can also see 
that  the  thalamus  is  divided  into  separate  nuclei,  of 
which two, the ventral posterior nucleus and the ven-
tral lateral nucleus, are labeled. The thalamus provides 

2

much of the input to the cerebral cortex, with different 
thalamic  nuclei  projecting  axons  to  different  areas  of 
cortex. The  ventral  posterior  nucleus  is  a  part  of  the 
somatic  sensory  system  (Chapter  12)  and  projects  to 
the cortex of the postcentral gyrus. The ventral lateral 
nucleus  and  closely  related  ventral  anterior  nucleus 
(not shown) are parts of the motor system (Chapter 14) 
and project to the motor cortex of the precentral gyrus. 
Visible  below  the  thalamus  are  the  subthalamus  and 
the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. The sub-
thalamus is a part of the motor system (Chapter 14), 
while the mammillary bodies receive information from 
the fornix and contribute to the regulation of memory 
(Chapter 24). Because this section also encroaches on 
the midbrain, a little bit of the substantia nigra (“black 
substance”) can be seen near the base of the brain stem. 
The substantia nigra is also a part of the motor system 
(Chapter 14). Parkinson’s disease results from the de-
generation of this structure. 

Corpus callosum

Cerebral cortex

Fornix

Ventral lateral
nucleus

Ventral posterior
nucleus

Putamen

Globus pallidus

Caudate nucleus

Internal capsule

Cortical white
matter

Amygdala

Substantia nigra

Subthalamus

Mammillary body

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   235
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   235

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

 Cross Section 3: Forebrain at 
Thalamus–Midbrain Junction 
 (a)  Gross  Features.  The  neuraxis  bends  sharply  at 
the  junction  of  the  thalamus  and  the  midbrain.  This 
cross  section  is  taken  at  a  level  where  the  teardrop-
shaped  third  ventricle  communicates  with  the  cere-
bral   aqueduct.  Notice  that  the  brain  surrounding  the 
third ventricle is  thalamus, and the brain around the 
cerebral aqueduct is midbrain. The lateral ventricles of 
each hemisphere appear twice in this section. You can 
see why by reviewing the phantom view of the ventri-
cle, shown earlier. 

Lateral ventricle

236

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

3

Parietal lobe

Third ventricle

Thalamus

Temporal lobe

Midbrain

Cerebral aqueduct

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   236
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   236

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

3

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

237

 (b)  Selected  Cell  and  Fiber  Groups.  Notice  that  this 
section  contains  three  more  important  nuclei  of  the 
thalamus:  the  pulvinar  nucleus  and  the  medial  and 
lateral geniculate nuclei. The pulvinar nucleus is con-
nected  to  much  of  the  association  cortex  and  plays  a 
role in guiding attention (Chapter 21). The lateral ge-
niculate nucleus relays information to the visual cortex 
(Chapter 10), and the medial geniculate nucleus relays 
information  to  the  auditory  cortex  (Chapter  11). Also 
notice  the  location  of  the  hippocampus,  a  relatively 
simple  form  of  cerebral  cortex  bordering  the  lateral 
ventricle of the temporal lobe. The hippocampus (Greek 
for “sea horse”) plays an important role in learning and 
memory (Chapters 24 and 25). 

Corpus callosum

Cerebral cortex

Pulvinar nucleus

Lateral geniculate
nucleus

Hippocampus

Cortical white
matter

Medial geniculate nucleus

(1X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   237
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   237

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

238

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 Cross Section 4: Rostral Midbrain 
 We are now at the midbrain, a part of the brain stem. 
Notice that the plane of section has been angled rela-
tive  to  the  forebrain  sections,  so  that  it  remains  per-
pendicular to the neuraxis. The core of the midbrain is 
the small cerebral aqueduct. Here, the roof of the mid-
brain, also called the tectum (Latin for “roof”), consists 

of  the  paired  superior  colliculi.  As  discussed  earlier, 
the  superior  colliculus  is  a  part  of  the  visual  system 
(Chapter 10) and the substantia nigra is a part of the 
motor system (Chapter 14). The red nucleus is also a 
motor control structure (Chapter 14), while the periaq-
ueductal gray is important in the control of the somatic 
pain sensations (Chapter 12). 

Superior colliculus

Cerebral aqueduct

4

Periaqueductal gray

Substantia nigra

Red nucleus

(2X)

 Cross Section 5: Caudal Midbrain 
 The caudal midbrain appears very similar to the ros-
tral midbrain. However, at this level, the roof is formed 
by  the  inferior  colliculi  (part  of  the  auditory  system; 
Chapter 11) instead of the superior colliculi. Review the 
dorsal view of the brain stem to see how the superior 
and inferior colliculi are situated relative to each other. 

Inferior colliculus

Cerebral aqueduct

Periaqueductal gray

4
5

Substantia nigra

(2X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   238
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   238

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

239

 Cross Section 6: Pons and Cerebellum 
 This  section  shows  the  pons  and  cerebellum,  parts  of 
the rostral hindbrain that border the fourth ventricle. 
As discussed earlier, the cerebellum is important in the 
control of movement. Much of the input to the cerebellar 
cortex derives from the pontine nuclei, while the output 
of the cerebellum is from neurons of the deep cerebellar 

nuclei (Chapter 14). The reticular formation ( reticulum  
is Latin for “net”) runs from the midbrain to the me-
dulla at its core, just under the cerebral aqueduct and 
fourth  ventricle.  One  function  of  the  reticular  forma-
tion is to regulate sleep and wakefulness (Chapter 19). 
In addition, a function of the pontine reticular forma-
tion is to control body posture (Chapter 14). 

Fourth ventricle

Cerebellar cortex

Deep cerebellar
nuclei

6

Pontine reticular
formation

Pontine nuclei

(0.8X)

 Cross Section 7: Rostral Medulla 
 As we move further caudally along the neuraxis, the 
brain  surrounding  the  fourth  ventricle  becomes  the 
medulla. The medulla is a complex region of the brain. 
Here,  we  focus  only  on  those  structures  whose  func-
tions are discussed later in the book. At the very ﬂ oor 
of the medulla lie the medullary pyramids, huge bun-
dles of axons descending from the forebrain toward the 
spinal  cord.  The  pyramids  contain  the   corticospinal 

tracts, which are involved in the control of voluntary 
 movement (Chapter  14). Several nuclei that are im-
portant for hearing are also found in the rostral me-
dulla: the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei, and the 
superior olive (Chapter 11). Also shown are the infe-
rior  olive,  important  for  motor  control  (Chapter  14), 
and  the  raphe  nucleus,  important  for  the  modula-
tion of pain, mood, and wakefulness (Chapters 12, 19, 
and 22). 

Dorsal cochlear nucleus

Fourth ventricle

Ventral cochlear
nucleus

Raphe nucleus

Superior olive

Inferior olive

7

Medullary pyramid

(2X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   239
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   239

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

240

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 Cross Section 8: Mid-Medulla 
 The mid-medulla contains some of the same structures 
labeled in cross section 7. Notice, in addition, the me-
dial lemniscus (Latin for “ribbon”). The medial lemnis-
cus contains axons bringing information about somatic 

sensation to the thalamus (Chapter 12). The gustatory 
nucleus, a part of the larger solitary nucleus, serves the 
sense of taste (Chapter 8). The vestibular nuclei serve 
the sense of balance (Chapter 11). 

Vestibular nucleus

Fourth ventricle

Nucleus of the
solitary tract
(gustatory nucleus)

Medullary reticular
formation

Inferior olive

Medial lemniscus

(2X)

8

Medullary pyramid

 Cross Section 9: Medulla–Spinal Cord 
Junction 
 As  the  medulla  disappears,  so  does  the  fourth  ven-
tricle,  now  replaced  by  the  beginning  of  the  spinal 
canal. Notice the dorsal column nuclei, which receive 

somatic  sensory  information  from  the  spinal  cord 
(Chapter 12). Axons arising from the neurons in each 
dorsal  column  nucleus  cross  to  the  other  side  of  the 
brain (decussate) and ascend to the thalamus via the 
medial lemniscus. 

Dorsal column nuclei

Spinal canal

Medial lemniscus

9

Medullary pyramid

(2.5X)

 THE SPINAL CORD 
THE SPINNAL CORD 

 The Dorsal Surface of the Spinal Cord 
and Spinal Nerves 
 The  spinal  cord  is  situated  within  the  vertebral  col-
umn. The spinal nerves, a part of the somatic periph-
eral nervous system (PNS), communicate with the cord 
via notches between the vertebrae. The vertebrae are 
described based on where they are found. In the neck, 
they  are  called  cervical  vertebrae  and  are  numbered 
from 1 to 7. The vertebrae attached to ribs are called 
thoracic  vertebrae  and  are  numbered  from  1  to  12. 

The ﬁ ve vertebrae of the lower back are called lumbar, 
and those within the pelvic area are called sacral. 

 Notice how the spinal nerves and the associated seg-
ments of the spinal cord adopt the names of the verte-
brae (see how eight cervical nerves are associated with 
seven  cervical  vertebrae).  Also  notice  that  the  spinal 
cord in the adult human ends at about the level of the 
third  lumbar  vertebra.  This  disparity  arises  because 
the  spinal  cord  does  not  grow  after  birth,  whereas 
the  spinal  column  does.  The  bundles  of  spinal  nerves 
streaming  down  within  the  lumbar  and  sacral  ver-
tebral  column  are  called  the  cauda  equina  (Latin  for 
“horse’s tail”). 

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   240
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   240

12/20/14   4:07 AM
12/20/14   4:07 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

241

1st cervical nerve
1st cervical vertebra (C1)

7th cervical vertebra (C7)

8th cervical nerve 

1st thoracic vertebra (T1)

1st thoracic nerve

12th thoracic vertebra (T12)

12th thoracic nerve

1st lumbar vertebra (L1)

1st lumbar nerve

Cauda equina

5th lumbar vertebra (L5)

5th lumbar nerve

1st sacral vertebra (S1)

1st sacral nerve 

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   241
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   241

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

242

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 The Ventral–Lateral Surface 
 This  view  shows  how  the  spinal  nerves  attach  to  the 
spinal cord and how the spinal meninges are organized. 
As the nerve passes into the vertebral notch, it splits 
into  two  roots.  The  dorsal  root  carries  sensory  axons 
whose cell bodies lie in the dorsal root ganglia. The ven-
tral root carries motor axons arising from the gray mat-
ter of the ventral spinal cord. The butterﬂ y-shaped core 
of the spinal cord is gray matter, consisting of neuronal 

cell bodies. The gray matter is divided into the dorsal, 
lateral, and ventral horns. Notice how the organization 
of gray and white matter in the spinal cord differs from 
that of the forebrain. In the forebrain, the gray matter 
surrounds the white matter; in the spinal cord, it is the 
other way around. The thick shell of white matter, con-
taining the long axons that run up and down the cord, 
is divided into three columns: the dorsal columns, the 
lateral columns, and the ventral columns. 

Lateral column

Ventral horn

Ventral column

Spinal pia mater

Subarachnoid
space

Spinal arachnoid

Spinal dura mater

Dorsal horn

Dorsal columns

Spinal canal

DORSAL

Lateral horn

Dorsal root filaments

Dorsal root

Dorsal root ganglion

Spinal nerve

Ventral root 

Ventral root
filaments

VENTRAL

(6X)

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   242
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   242

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

243

 Cross-Sectional Anatomy 
 Illustrated  in  this  view  are  some  of  the  important 
tracts of axons running up and down the spinal cord. 
On  the  left  side,  the  major  ascending  sensory  path-
ways are indicated. Notice that the entire dorsal col-
umn consists of sensory axons ascending to the brain. 
This pathway is important for the conscious apprecia-
tion  of  touch.  The  spinothalamic  tract  carries  infor-
mation  about  painful  stimuli  and  temperature.  The 
somatic  sensory  system  is  discussed  in  Chapter  12. 
On  the  right  side  are  some  of  the  descending  tracts 

 important for the control of movement (Chapter 14). 
The names of the tracts accurately describe their ori-
gins and terminations (e.g., the vestibulospinal tract 
originates in the vestibular nuclei of the medulla and 
terminates  in  the  spinal  cord).  Notice  that  the  de-
scending  tracts  contribute  to  two  pathways:  the  lat-
eral and ventromedial pathways. The lateral pathway 
carries the commands for voluntary movements, espe-
cially  of  the  extremities.  The  ventromedial  pathway 
participates mainly in the maintenance of posture and 
certain reﬂ ex  movements. 

Ascending Sensory Pathways

Descending Motor Pathways

Dorsal column

Spinothalamic tract

Corticospinal tract

Rubrospinal tract

Lateral
pathway

(9X)

Medullary reticulospinal
tract

Tectospinal tract

Pontine reticulospinal tract

Vestibulospinal tract

Ventromedial
pathway

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   243
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   243

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

244

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 
THE AUTTONOMIC NERVVOUS SYSTEM

 In addition to the somatic PNS, which is devoted largely 
to  the  voluntary  control  of  movement  and  conscious 
skin sensations, there is visceral PNS, devoted to the 
regulation  of  the  internal  organs,  glands,  and  vascu-
lature.  Because  this  regulation  occurs  automatically 
and is not under direct conscious control, this system 
is  called  the  autonomic  nervous  system,  or  ANS.  The 
two most important divisions of the ANS are called the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. 

 The  illustration  shows  the  cavity  of  the  body  as  it 
appears  when  it  has  been  sectioned  sagittally  at  the 
level of the eye. Notice the vertebral column, which is 
encased in a thick wall of connective tissue. The spinal 
nerves can be seen emerging from the column. Notice 
that the sympathetic division of the ANS consists of a 
chain of ganglia that runs along the side of the verte-
bral column. These ganglia communicate with the spi-
nal nerves, with one another, and with a large number 
of internal organs. The parasympathetic division of the 
ANS is organized quite differently. Much of the para-
sympathetic innervation of the viscera arises from the 
vagus nerve, one of the cranial nerves emerging from 
the  medulla.  The  other  major  source  of  parasympa-
thetic ﬁ bers is the sacral spinal nerves. (The functional 
organization of the ANS is discussed in Chapter 15.) 

Plane of 
section

Heart

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   244
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   244

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

245

Vagus nerve
VV

Spinal nerves

Vertebral column

Ribs of the 
right side (cut)

Kidney

Sympathetic ganglia

Heart

Stomach

Small intestine

Urinary bladder

Prostate gland

Sympathetic fibers

Parasympathetic fibers

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   245
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   245

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

246

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 THE CRANIAL NERVES 
THE CRAANIAL NERVESS 

 Twelve  pairs  of  cranial  nerves  emerge  from  the  base 
of the brain. The ﬁ rst two “nerves” are actually parts 
of the CNS, serving olfaction and vision. The rest are 
like the spinal nerves, in the sense that they contain 
axons of the PNS. However, as the illustration shows, a 
single nerve often has ﬁ bers performing many different 
functions.  Knowledge  of  the  nerves  and  their  diverse 

 functions is a valuable aid in the diagnosis of a number 
of  neurological  disorders.  It  is  important  to  recognize 
that  the  cranial  nerves  have  associated  cranial  nerve 
nuclei  in  the  midbrain,  pons,  and  medulla.  Examples 
are  the  cochlear  and  vestibular  nuclei,  which  receive 
information from cranial nerve VIII. Most of the cranial 
nerve nuclei were not illustrated or labeled in the brain 
stem  cross  sections,  however,  because  their  functions 
are not discussed explicitly in this book. 

I. Olfactory 

II. Optic

III. Oculomotor

IV. Trochlear

V. Trigeminal

VI. Abducens

VII. Facial

VIII. Auditory-vestibular

IX. Glossopharyngeal

X. Vagus

XI. Spinal accessory

(1X)

XII. Hypoglossal

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   246
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   246

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

247

NERVE NUMBER AND NAME

TYPES OF AXONS

IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS

I. Olfactory

II. Optic

III. Oculomotor

IV. Trochlear

V. Trigeminal

VI. Abducens

VII. Facial

Special sensory

Sensation of smell

Special sensory

Sensation of vision

Somatic motor
Visceral motor

Somatic motor

Somatic sensory
Somatic motor

Movements of the eye and eyelid
Parasympathetic control of pupil size

Movements of the eye

Sensation of touch to the face
Movement of muscles of mastication (chewing)

Somatic motor

Movements of the eye

Somatic sensory
Special sensory

Movement of muscles of facial expression
Sensation of taste in anterior two-thirds of the tongue

VIII. Auditory-vestibular

Special sensory

Sensation of hearing and balance

IX. Glossopharyngeal

Somatic motor
Visceral motor
Special sensory
Visceral sensory

Movement of muscles in the throat (oropharynx)
Parasympathetic control of the salivary glands
Sensation of taste in posterior one-third of the tongue
Detection of blood pressure changes in the aorta

X. Vagus

Visceral motor

Parasympathetic control of the heart, lungs, and abdominal 

XI. Spinal accessory

XII. Hypoglossal

Visceral sensory
Somatic motor

Somatic motor

Somatic motor

organs

Sensation of pain associated with viscera
Movement of muscles in the throat (oropharynx)

Movement of muscles in the throat and neck

Movement of the tongue

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   247
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   247

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

248

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 THE BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE BRAIN 
THEE BLOOOD SUPPLY OOF THE BRAIN 

 Ventral View 
 Two pairs of arteries supply blood to the brain: the ver-
tebral  arteries  and  the  internal  carotid  arteries.  The 
vertebral  arteries  converge  near  the  base  of  the  pons 
to form the unpaired basilar artery. At the level of the 
midbrain,  the  basilar  artery  splits  into  the  right  and 
left superior cerebellar arteries and the posterior cere-
bral arteries. Notice that the posterior cerebral  arteries 

send branches, called posterior communicating arteries, 
that connect them to the internal carotids. The inter-
nal carotids branch to form the middle cerebral arteries 
and  the  anterior  cerebral  arteries.  The  anterior  cere-
bral arteries of each side are connected by the anterior 
communicating  artery.  Thus,  there  is  a  ring  of  con-
nected arteries at the brain’s base, formed by the poste-
rior cerebral and communicating arteries, the internal 
carotids, and the anterior cerebral and communicating 
arteries. This ring is called the  circle of Willis . 

Anterior cerebral artery

Anterior communicating
artery

Middle cerebral
artery

Internal carotid
artery

Posterior 
communicating
artery

Basilar artery

Posterior cerebral
artery

Superior cerebellar
artery

(1X)

Vertebral arteries

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   248
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   248

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

249

 Lateral view 
 Notice that most of the lateral surface of the cerebrum 
is supplied by the middle cerebral artery. This artery 
also feeds the deep structures of the basal forebrain. 

Terminal cortical 
branches of anterior
cerebral artery

Middle cerebral artery

(0.7X)

Terminal cortical
branches of posterior
cerebral artery

 Medial View (Brain Stem Removed) 
 Most of the medial wall of the cerebral hemisphere is 
supplied by the anterior cerebral artery. The posterior 
cerebral  artery  feeds  the  medial  wall  of  the  occipital 
lobe and the inferior part of the temporal lobe. 

Anterior cerebral artery

(0.7X)

Posterior
cerebral artery

Posterior
communicating artery

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   249
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   249

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

250

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

 SELF-QUIZ 
 This review workbook is designed to help you learn the neuroanatomy 
that has been presented. Here, we have reproduced the images from the 
Guide; however, instead of labels, numbered leader lines (arranged in a 
clockwise fashion) point to the structures of interest. Test your knowledge 
by  ﬁ lling  in  the  appropriate  names  in  the  spaces  provided.  To  review 
what  you  have  learned,  quiz  yourself  by  putting  your  hand  over  the 
names. Experience has shown that this technique greatly facilitates the 
learning and retention of anatomical terms. Mastery of the vocabulary 
of  neuroanatomy  will  serve  you  well  as  you  learn  about  the  functional 
organization of the brain in the remainder of the book. 

The Lateral Surface of the Brain
(a) Gross Features

2

1

4

3

(b) Selected Gyri, Sulci, and Fissures

7

8

6

5

9

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   250
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   250

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

251

The Lateral Surface of the Brain
(c) Cerebral Lobes and the Insula

2

3

4

5

1

(d) Major Sensory, Motor, and Association Areas of Cortex

10

9

11

12

13

14

15

8

7

6

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   251
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   251

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

252

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

The Medial Surface of the Brain

(a) Brain Stem Structures

7

6

4
5

3

2

1

(b) Forebrain Structures

13

12

11

10

8

9

14

15

17

16

Brain stem and cerebellum 
removed and brain
rotated slightly

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   252
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   252

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

253

The Medial Surface of the Brain
(a) Ventricles

4

3

2

1

5

Brain stem and cerebellum 
removed and brain
rotated slightly

The Ventral Surface of the Brain

9

10

8

7

6

11

12

13

14

15

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   253
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   253

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

254

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

The Dorsal Surface of the Brain
(a) Cerebrum

3

4

2

1

(b) Cerebrum Removed

7

6

5

8

9

(c) Cerebrum and Cerebellum Removed

12

11

10

13
14
15

16

17

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   254
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   254

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

255

Forebrain at Thalamus–Telecephalon Junction
(a) Gross Features

6

5

4

3

2

1

(b) Selected Cell and Fiber Groups

13

14

12

11

10

7

8

9

15

16

17

18

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

18.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   255
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   255

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

256

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Forebrain at Mid-Thalamus

(a) Gross Features

6

5

4

3

9

2

1

(b) Selected Cell and Fiber Groups

17

18

19

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

23

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

18.  

19.  

20.  

21.  

22.  

23.  

7

8

20

21

22

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   256
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   256

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

257

Forebrain at Thalamus-Midbrain Junction
(a) Gross Features

5

3

4

2

1

7

(b) Selected Cell and Fiber Groups   

9

8

14

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

6

11

12

10

13

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   257
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   257

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

258

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Rostral Midbrain

4

5

3

2

1

Caudal Midbrain

8

9

7

6

Pons and Cerebellum

14

13

12

11

10

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   258
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   258

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

259

Rostral Medulla 

6

7

5

4

3

2

1

Mid Medulla

13

14

12

11

10

9

8

Medulla-Spinal Cord Junction

17

18

16

15

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

18.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   259
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   259

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

260

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

Spinal Cord, Ventral–Lateral Surface

8

9

10

DORSAL

7

6
5

4

3

2

1

VENTRAL

Spinal Cord, Cross-Sectional Anatomy

20

19

18

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

21

24

 22

 23

25

26

29

27

28

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   260
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   260

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

CHAPTER 7    APPENDIX: AN ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO HUMAN NEUROANATOMY

261

The Cranial Nerves

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
8

9

10

11

12

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   261
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   261

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

262

PART ONE    FOUNDATIONS

The Blood Supply of the Brain

6

5

4

3

2

1

11

9

10

7

8

12

13

14

15

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   262
219-262_Bear_07A_revised_final.indd   262

12/20/14   4:08 AM
12/20/14   4:08 AM

PART TWO

Sensory and 
Motor Systems

C H A P T E R   8
The Chemical Senses 

  265

C H A P T E R   9
The Eye 

  293

C H A P T E R   1 0
The Central Visual System 

  331

C H A P T E R   1 1
The Auditory and Vestibular Systems 

  369

C H A P T E R   1 2
The Somatic Sensory System 

  415

C H A P T E R   1 3
Spinal Control of Movement 

  453

C H A P T E R   1 4
Brain Control of Movement 

  483

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   263
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   263

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   264
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   264

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Chemical Senses

INTRODUCTION
TASTE

The Basic Tastes
The Organs of Taste

BOX 8.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Strange Tastes: Fat, Starch, Carbonation, 
Calcium, Water?

Taste Receptor Cells
Mechanisms of Taste Transduction

Saltiness
Sourness
Bitterness
Sweetness
Umami (Amino Acids)
Central Taste Pathways

 BOX 8.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Memories of a Very Bad Meal

The Neural Coding of Taste

SMELL

The Organs of Smell

BOX 8.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Human Pheromones?

Olfactory Receptor Neurons

Olfactory Transduction
Olfactory Receptor Proteins
cAMP-Gated Channels
 BOX 8.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Channels of Vision and Smell, by Geoffrey Gold

Central Olfactory Pathways
Spatial and Temporal Representations of Olfactory Information

Olfactory Population Coding
Olfactory Maps
Temporal Coding in the Olfactory System

CONCLUDING REMARKS

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   265
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   265

265
2262626266262222 5555555555265

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

266

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Life evolved in a sea of chemicals. From the beginning, organisms have 
ﬂ oated or swum in water containing chemical substances that signal food, 
poison,  or  sex.  In  this  respect,  things  have  not  changed  much  in  three 
 billion years. Animals, including humans, depend on the chemical senses 
to help identify nourishment (the sweetness of honey, the aroma of pizza), 
noxious substances (the bitterness of plant poisons), or the suitability of 
a potential mate. Of all the sensory systems, chemical sensation is the 
 oldest  and  most  pervasive  across  species.  Even  brainless  bacteria  can 
 detect, and tumble toward, a favorable food source. 

 Multicellular organisms must detect chemicals in both their internal 
and their external environments. The variety of chemical detection sys-
tems  has  expanded  considerably  over  the  course  of  evolution.  Humans 
live in a sea of air, full of volatile chemicals; we put chemicals into our 
mouth for a variety of reasons; and we carry a complex sea within us in 
the form of blood and the other ﬂ uids that bathe our cells. We have spe-
cialized  detection  systems  for  the  chemicals  in  each  environment.  The 
mechanisms of chemical sensation that originally evolved to detect envi-
ronmental substances now serve as the basis for chemical communication 
between cells and organs, using hormones and neurotransmitters. Every 
cell in every organism is responsive to many chemicals. 

 This chapter considers the most familiar of our chemical senses: taste, 
or  gustation , and smell, or  olfaction . Although taste and smell reach 
our  awareness  most  often,  they  are  not  our  only  important  chemical 
senses. Many types of chemically sensitive cells, called  chemoreceptors,  
are distributed throughout the body. For example, some nerve endings 
in skin and mucous membranes warn us of irritating chemicals. A wide 
range of chemoreceptors report subconsciously and consciously about our 
internal state: Nerve endings in the digestive organs detect many types 
of ingested substances, receptors in arteries of the neck measure carbon 
dioxide and oxygen levels in our blood, and sensory endings in muscles 
respond to acidity, giving us the burning feeling that comes with exertion 
and oxygen debt. 

 Gustation and olfaction have a similar task: the detection of environ-
mental  chemicals.  In  fact,  only  by  using  both  senses  together  can  the 
nervous system perceive ﬂ avor. Gustation and olfaction have unusually 
strong and direct connections with our most basic internal needs, includ-
ing thirst, hunger, emotion, sex, and certain forms of memory. However, 
the systems of gustation and olfaction are separate and different, from 
the  structures  and  mechanisms  of  their  chemoreceptors,  to  the  gross 
organization  of  their  central  connections,  to  their  effects  on  behavior. 
The neural information from each system is processed in parallel and is 
merged at rather high levels in the cerebral cortex. 

 TASTE 
TASTTE 

 Humans evolved as omnivores (from the Latin  omnis , “all,” and  vorare , “to 
eat”), opportunistically eating the plants and animals they could gather, 
scavenge,  or  kill.  A  sensitive  and  versatile  system  of  taste  was  neces-
sary  to  distinguish  between  new  sources  of  food  and  potential   toxins. 
Some of our taste preferences are inborn. We have an innate fondness 
for  sweetness, satisﬁ ed by mother’s milk. Bitter substances are instinc-
tively rejected, and indeed, many kinds of poisons are bitter. However, 
experience can strongly modify our instincts, and we can learn to tolerate 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   266
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   266

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

and even enjoy the bitterness of such substances as coffee and quinine. 
The  body  also  has  the  capacity  to  recognize  a  deﬁ ciency  of  certain  key 
nutrients and develop an appetite for them. For example, when deprived 
of essential salt, we may crave salty foods. 

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

267

 The Basic Tastes 
 Although the number of different chemicals is practically endless and the 
variety of ﬂ avors seems immeasurable, it is likely that we can recognize 
only a few basic tastes. Most neuroscientists put the number at ﬁ ve. The 
four obvious taste qualities are saltiness, sourness, sweetness, and bitter-
ness. A ﬁ fth taste quality is umami, meaning “delicious” in Japanese; it is 
deﬁ ned by the savory taste of the amino acid glutamate; monosodium glu-
tamate, or MSG, is the familiar culinary form. The ﬁ ve major categories 
of taste qualities seem to be common across human cultures, but there 
may be additional types of taste qualities (Box 8.1). 

 The correspondence between chemistry and taste is obvious in some 
cases. Most acids taste sour, and most salts taste salty. But the chemistry 
of substances can vary considerably while their basic taste remains the 
same.  Many  substances  are  sweet,  from  familiar  sugars  (like  fructose, 
present in fruits and honey, and sucrose, which is white table sugar) to 
certain proteins (monellin, from the African serendipity berry) to artiﬁ -
cial sweeteners (saccharin and aspartame, the second of which is made 
from two amino acids). Surprisingly, sugars are the least sweet of all of 
these; gram for gram, the artiﬁ cial sweeteners and proteins are 10,000–
100,000 times sweeter than sucrose. Bitter substances range from simple 
ions like K ⫹  (KCl actually evokes both bitter and salty tastes) and Mg 2  ⫹  
to complex organic molecules such as quinine and caffeine. Many bitter 
organic compounds can be tasted even at very low concentrations, down 
to the nanomolar range. There is an obvious advantage to this, as poison-
ous substances are often bitter. 

 With only a handful of basic taste types, how do we perceive the count-
less ﬂ avors of food, such as chocolate, strawberries, and barbecue sauce? 
First,  each  food  activates  a  different  combination  of  the  basic  tastes, 
helping make it unique. Second, most foods have a distinctive ﬂ avor as 
a result of their combined taste  and  smell occurring simultaneously. For 
example, without the sense of smell (and sight), a bite of onion can be 
easily mistaken for the bite of an apple. Third, other sensory modalities 
contribute to a unique food-tasting experience. Texture and temperature 
are important, and pain sensations are essential to the hot, spicy ﬂ avor of 
foods laced with capsaicin, the key ingredient in hot peppers. Therefore, 
to  distinguish  the  unique  ﬂ avor  of  a  food,  our  brain  actually  combines 
sensory information about its taste, its smell, and its feel. 

 The Organs of Taste 
 Experience tells us that we taste with our tongue; but other areas of the 
mouth,  such  as  the  palate,  pharynx,  and  epiglottis,  are  also  involved 
(Figure  8.1).  Odors  from  the  food  we  are  eating  can  also  pass,  via  the 
pharynx, into the nasal cavity, where they can be detected by olfactory 
receptors. The tip of the tongue is most sensitive to sweetness, the back 
to bitterness, and the sides to saltiness and sourness. This does not mean, 
however, that we taste sweetness only with the tip of our tongue. Most of 
the tongue is sensitive to all basic tastes. 

 Scattered about the surface of the tongue are small projections called 
 papillae   (Latin  for  “bumps”).  Papillae  are  shaped  like  ridges  ( foliate 
papillae ), pimples ( vallate papillae ), or mushrooms ( fungiform  papillae ) 

Nasal cavity

Palate

Tongue

Pharynx

Epiglottis

▲ FIGURE 8.1
Anatomy of the mouth, throat, and 
 nasal passages.  Taste is primarily a 
function of the tongue, but regions of 
the pharynx, palate, and epiglottis also 
have some sensitivity. Notice how the 
nasal passages are located so that 
odors from ingested food can enter 
through the nose or the pharynx, thereby 
easily contributing to perceptions of 
 flavor through olfaction.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   267
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   267

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

268

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 8.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Strange Tastes: Fat, Starch, Carbonation, Calcium, Water?

Are there speciﬁ c taste receptors beyond the classic ﬁ ve: 

salt, sour, bitter, sweet, umami? The answer is yes, probably. 
New types of taste receptors have been difﬁ cult to identify, 
but evidence is slowly accumulating.

People love fatty foods and for a good reason. Fat is a 
concentrated  source  of  calories  and  essential  nutrients. 
Keen  observers  as  far  back  as  Aristotle  have  suggested 
that a taste for fat is basic. But fat stimulates other sensory 
systems,  and  this  complicates  the  question  of  its  essential 
taste.  Triglycerides,  the  fundamental  fat  molecules,  impart 
a  distinct  texture  to  food  in  the  mouth:  they  feel  oily,  slip-
pery, creamy. These properties are detected by the somatic 
sensory system, not taste receptors. Fat also includes many 
volatile chemicals we can detect with our olfactory system. 
These odors may be pleasant or foul. Free fatty acids, which 
are  breakdown  products  of  triglycerides,  sometimes  smell 
putrid; think of rancid fats. They can also be irritants, sensed 
again  by  receptors  of  the  somatic  sensory  system.  But  do 
we also taste fats? Yes, probably. Mice prefer water when 
it is spiked with some types of fatty acids. Mice also have a 
type of taste cell that is sensitive to fatty acids and expresses 
a presumed fatty acid receptor protein. A similar receptor is 
found in some human taste cells, which may be dedicated 
fat detectors.

People  also  love  starchy  foods,  such  as  pasta,  bread, 
and  potatoes.  Starch  is  a  complex  carbohydrate,  speciﬁ -
cally a polymer of glucose, the essential sugar in our bodies. 
Perhaps we like starch because we taste the glucose in it? 
Experiments on rodents suggest this is not the case; a rat’s 
preferences for sugars and glucose polymers seem quite dis-
tinct. In a recent study, mice were tested for their ability to de-
tect sugar and starchy molecules after the T1R3 protein—a 
key subunit of sweet and umami receptors (see Figure 8.6)—
was genetically knocked out. The knockout mice seemed to 
be  indifferent  to  sugar,  as  expected,  but  they  continued  to 
seek out starchy foods. Perhaps mice, at least, have dedi-
cated starch detectors.

Many  people  also  love  carbonated  drinks  such  as  soft 
drinks, club soda, or beer. Water becomes carbonated when 
substantial amounts of the gas CO2 are dissolved in it. As with 
fats, we can often feel carbonation as the ﬁ zziness vibrates 
the skin of the mouth and tongue. Mice, and to a lesser extent 
people, can also smell CO2. We may even hear the bubbles 
bursting. The CO2 level of blood is a critical measure of respi-
ration, and cells in special arterial detectors sense it. But can 
we  also  taste  carbonation?  Yes,  probably.  Mice  have  taste 
cells with an enzyme called carbonic anhydrase that catalyzes 
the combination of CO2 and H2O to form protons (H⫹) and bi-
⫺). High levels of protons (i.e., a low pH) taste 
carbonate (HCO3
sour,  implying  that  sour  taste  cells  can  detect  carbonation. 
That is at least part of the answer, but how do we discriminate 
between simple sourness and carbonation? The answer still is 
not clear. Carbonation sensation may require the proper com-
bination of sour taste and tingling somatic sensation.

People  may  not  love  calcium,  but  they  certainly  need  it 
for healthy bones, brains, and all other organs. Many animals 
seem to ﬁ nd calcium salts very tasty when they have been 
deprived of calcium but reject them when they are sated with 
calcium. One hypothesis is that Ca2⫹ is sensed as a combi-
nation of bitter and sour tastes. Recent experiments suggest 
a more interesting possibility. Oddly, an aversion to the taste 
of Ca2⫹ in mice requires the T1R3 protein, and the taste of 
Ca2⫹ in humans is attenuated by a substance that binds to 
T1R3. It is possible, although far from proven, that T1R3 is 
part of a dedicated calcium taste receptor.

Finally, water. Water is crucial for life, and its consump-
tion is regulated by thirst. Wetness, like fattiness and carbon-
ation, can be felt with the somatic sensory system. But can 
we  taste  water?  Distilled  water  given  to  humans  has  been 
variously described as sweet, salty, or bitter, depending on 
the test conditions. A speciﬁ c taste receptor for water would 
seem to be a useful adaptation, and there is strong evidence 
for such receptors in insects. But water receptors in mam-
malian taste cells have not been identiﬁ ed so far.

(Figure 8.2a). Facing a mirror, stick your tongue out and shine a ﬂ ashlight 
on it, and you will see your papillae easily—small, rounded ones at the 
front and sides, and large ones in the back. Each papilla has from one to 
several hundred  taste buds , visible only with a microscope (Figure 8.2b). 
Each  taste  bud  has  50–150   taste  receptor  cells,   or  taste  cells,  ar-
ranged  within  the  bud  like  the  sections  of  an  orange.  Taste  cells  com-
prise only about 1% of the tongue epithelium. Taste buds also have basal 
cells that surround the taste cells, plus a set of gustatory afferent axons 
(Figure 8.2c). A person typically has 2000–5000 taste buds,  although in 
exceptional cases, there are as few as 500 or as many as 20,000. 

 Using tiny droplets, it is possible to expose a single papilla on a person’s 
tongue  to  low  concentrations  of  various  basic  taste  stimuli  ( something 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   268
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   268

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

269

Basal cells

Taste cells

Taste pore

▲ FIGURE 8.2
The tongue, its papillae, and its taste 
buds.  (a) Papillae are the taste-sensitive 
structures. The largest and most poste-
rior are the vallate papillae. Foliate papil-
lae are elongated. Fungiform papillae are 
relatively large toward the back of the 
tongue and much smaller along the 
sides and tip. (b) A cross-sectional view 
of a vallate papilla, showing the loca-
tions of taste buds. (c) A taste bud is a 
cluster of taste cells (the receptor cells), 
gustatory afferent axons and their syn-
apses with taste cells and basal cells. 
Microvilli at the apical end of the taste 
cells extend into the taste pore, the site 
where chemicals dissolved in saliva can 
interact directly with taste cells.

Vallate
papillae 

Foliate
papillae 

Gustatory
afferent
axons

(c)  

Synapse

Microvilli

Papilla

Fungiform
papillae

(a)  

Tongue

(b)  

Taste buds 

almost purely sour, like vinegar, or almost purely sweet, like a sucrose 
solution). Concentrations too low will not be tasted, but at some critical 
concentration, the stimulus will evoke a perception of taste; this is the 
 threshold  concentration. At concentrations just above threshold, most pa-
pillae tend to be sensitive to only one basic taste; there are sour-sensitive 
papillae and sweet-sensitive papillae, for example. When the concentra-
tions of the taste stimuli are increased, however, most papillae become 
less  selective.  Whereas  a  papilla  might  have  responded  only  to  sweet 
when all stimuli were weak, it may also respond to sour and salt if they 
are made stronger. We now know that each papilla has multiple types of 
taste receptor cells and that each receptor type is specialized for a differ-
ent category of taste. 

 Taste Receptor Cells 
 The chemically sensitive part of a taste receptor cell is its small mem-
brane region, called the  apical end,  near the surface of the tongue. The 
apical  ends  have  thin  extensions  called   microvilli   that  project  into  the 
 taste pore , a small opening on the surface of the tongue where the taste 
cell is exposed to the contents of the mouth (see Figure 8.2c). Taste re-
ceptor cells are not neurons according to standard histological criteria. 
However,  they  do  form  synapses  with  the  endings  of  the  gustatory  af-
ferent axons near the bottom of the taste bud. Taste receptor cells also 
make both electrical and chemical synapses onto some of the basal cells; 
some basal cells synapse onto the sensory axons, and these may form a 
simple information-processing circuit within each taste bud. Cells of the 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   269
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   269

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

270

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Taste bud

Cell

1

Cell

2

Cell

3

▲ FIGURE 8.3
Taste responsiveness of taste cells 
and gustatory axons.  (a) Three different 
cells were sequentially exposed to salt 
(NaCl), bitter (quinine), sour (HCl), and 
sweet (sucrose) stimuli, and their mem-
brane potential was recorded with elec-
trodes. Notice the different sensitivities 
of the three cells. (b) In this case, the 
action potential discharge of the sensory 
axons was recorded. This is an example 
of extracellular recording of action po-
tentials. Each vertical deflection in the 
record is a single action potential.

NaCl Quinine

HCl Sucrose

Vm

Vm

Vm

(a)  

NaCl Quinine

HCl Sucrose

(b)  

Cell 1

Cell 2

Cell 3

Axon 1

Axon 2

Axon 3

Gustatory
afferent
axons

taste bud undergo a constant cycle of growth, death, and regeneration; 
the lifespan of one taste cell is about 2 weeks. This process depends on an 
inﬂ uence of the sensory nerve, because if the nerve is cut, the taste buds 
will degenerate. 

 When an appropriate chemical activates a taste receptor cell, its mem-
brane  potential  changes,  usually  by  depolarizing.  This  voltage  shift  is 
called the  receptor potential  (Figure 8.3a). If the receptor potential is 
depolarizing  and  large  enough,  some  taste  receptor  cells,  like  neurons, 
may  ﬁ re  action  potentials.  In  any  case,  depolarization  of  the  receptor 
membrane  causes  voltage-gated  calcium  channels  to  open;  Ca 2  ⫹   enters 
the  cytoplasm,  triggering  the  release  of  transmitter  molecules.  This  is 
basic synaptic transmission, from taste cell to sensory axon. The trans-
mitter released depends on the taste receptor cell type. Sour and salty 
taste  cells  release  serotonin  onto  gustatory  axons,  whereas  sweet,  bit-
ter, and umami taste cells release adenosine triphosphate (ATP) as their 
primary transmitter. In both cases, the taste receptor’s transmitter ex-
cites the postsynaptic sensory axon and causes it to ﬁ re action potentials 
(Figure 8.3b), which communicate the taste signal into the brain stem. 
Taste  cells  may  also  use  other  transmitters,  including  acetylcholine, 
GABA, and glutamate, but their functions are unknown. 

 Evidence from recent studies of mice suggests that most taste receptor 
cells respond primarily or even exclusively to just one of the ﬁ ve basic 
tastes. Examples are cells 1 and 3 in Figure 8.3a, which give strong depo-
larizing responses to salt (NaCl) and sweet (sucrose) stimuli, respectively. 
Some taste cells and many gustatory axons show multiple response pref-
erences, however. Each of the gustatory axons in Figure 8.3b is inﬂ uenced 
by several of the basic tastes, but each has a clearly different bias. 

 Figure 8.4 shows the results of similar recordings from four gustatory 
axons in a rat. One responds strongly only to salt, one only to sweet, and 

c
e
s
 
5

/
s
a

l

i
t

n
e

t

 

o
p
n
o

i
t
c
A

100

50

0

Sucrose

NaCl

HCl

Quinine

▲ FIGURE 8.4
Action potential firing rates of four 
 different primary gustatory nerve 
 axons in a rat. The taste stimuli were 
sweet (sucrose), salt (NaCl), sour (HCl), 
and bitter (quinine). Each colored line 
represents measurements from a single 
axon. Notice the differences in selectivity 
between axons. (Source: Adapted from 
Sato, 1980, p. 23.)

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   270
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   270

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

271

two to all but sweet. Why will one cell respond only to a single  chemical 
type while another responds to three or four categories of chemicals? The 
answer is that the responses depend on the particular transduction mech-
anisms present in each cell. 

 Mechanisms of Taste Transduction 
 The process by which an environmental stimulus causes an electrical re-
sponse in a sensory receptor cell is called  transduction  (from the Latin 
 transducere , “to lead across”). The nervous system has myriad transduc-
tion mechanisms that make it sensitive to chemicals, pressures, sounds, 
and  light.  The  nature  of  the  transduction  mechanism  determines  the 
speciﬁ c  sensitivity  of  a  sensory  system.  We  see  because  our  eyes  have 
photoreceptors. If our tongue had photoreceptors, we might see with our 
mouth. 

 Some  sensory  systems  have  a  single  basic  type  of  receptor  cell  that 
uses one transduction mechanism (e.g., the auditory system). However, 
taste  transduction  involves  several  different  processes,  and  each  basic 
taste uses one or more of these mechanisms. Taste stimuli, or  tastants , 
may (1) directly pass through ion channels (salt and sour), (2) bind to and 
block ion channels (sour), or (3) bind to G-protein-coupled receptors in the 
membrane  that  activate  second  messenger  systems  that,  in  turn,  open 
ion  channels  (bitter,  sweet,  and  umami).  These  are  familiar  processes, 
very similar to the basic signaling mechanisms present in all neurons and 
synapses, which were described in Chapters 4, 5, and 6. 

 Saltiness.  The  prototypical  salty  chemical  is  table  salt  (NaCl),  which, 
apart from water, is the major component of blood, the ocean, and chicken 
soup. Salt is unusual in that relatively low concentrations (10–150 mM) 
taste  good,  whereas  higher  concentrations  tend  to  be  disagreeable  and 
repellent. The taste of salt is mostly the taste of the cation Na ⫹ , but taste 
receptors use very different mechanisms to detect low and high concen-
trations of it. To detect low concentrations, salt-sensitive taste cells use a 
special Na ⫹ -selective channel that is common in other epithelial cells and 
which is blocked by the drug amiloride (Figure 8.5a). Amiloride is a di-
uretic (a drug that promotes urine production) used to treat some types of 
hypertension and heart disease. The amiloride-sensitive sodium channel 
is quite different from the voltage-gated sodium channel that generates 
action potentials; the taste channel is insensitive to voltage and gener-
ally stays open. When you sip chicken soup, the Na ⫹  concentration rises 
outside the receptor cell, and the gradient for Na ⫹  across the membrane 
is made steeper. Na ⫹  then diffuses down its concentration gradient, which 
means it ﬂ ows into the cell, and the resulting inward current causes the 
membrane to depolarize. This depolarization—the receptor potential—in 
turn causes voltage-gated sodium and calcium channels to open near the 
synaptic  vesicles,  triggering  the  release  of  neurotransmitter  molecules 
onto the gustatory afferent axon. 

 Animals avoid very high concentrations of NaCl and other salts, and 
humans  usually  report  that  they  taste  bad.  It  appears  that  high  salt 
 levels activate bitter and sour taste cells, which normally trigger avoid-
ance  behaviors. How very salty substances stimulate bitter and sour taste 
cells is still a mystery. 

 The anions of salts affect the taste of the cations. For example, NaCl 
tastes saltier than Na acetate, apparently because the larger anion, ac-
etate,  inhibits  the salty taste of the cation. The mechanisms of anion in-
hibition are poorly understood. Another complication is that as the anions 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   271
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   271

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

272

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Na+

M
e
m
b
r
a
n
e
 
d
e
p
o
l
a
r
i
z
a
t
i
o
n

Voltage-gated
sodium
channel

 

Na+

Ca2+

Voltage-gated
calcium
channel

▲ FIGURE 8.5
Transduction mechanisms of (a) salt 
and (b) sour tastants. Tastants can in-
teract directly with ion channels either 
by passing through them (Na⫹ and H⫹) 
or by blocking them (H⫹ blocking the 
potassium channel). The membrane volt-
age then influences calcium channels on 
the basal membrane, which in turn influ-
ence the intracellular [Ca2⫹] and trans-
mitter release.

Amiloride-
sensitive
sodium
channel

Taste
cell

Potassium
channel

Proton
channel

Taste
cell

H+

M
e
m
b
r
a
n
e
 
d
e
p
o
l
a
r
i
z
a
t
i
o
n

 

Na+

Ca2+

Serotonin-
filled
synaptic
vesicles

Gustatory
afferent
axon

Serotonin-
filled
synaptic
vesicles

Gustatory
afferent
axon

(a)  

(b)  

become larger, they tend to take on tastes of their own. Sodium saccharin 
tastes sweet because the Na ⫹  concentrations are far too low for us to taste 
the saltiness, and the saccharin potently activates sweetness receptors. 

 Sourness.  Foods  taste  sour  because  of  their  high  acidity  (otherwise 
known  as  low  pH). Acids,  such  as  HCl,  dissolve  in  water  and  generate 
hydrogen ions (protons or H ⫹ ). Thus, protons are the causative agents of 
acidity and sourness. Protons may affect sensitive taste receptors in sev-
eral ways, from either inside or outside the taste cell membrane, although 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   272
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   272

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

273

these processes are poorly understood (Figure 8.5b). It is likely that H ⫹  
can bind to and  block  special K ⫹ -selective channels. When the K ⫹  perme-
ability of a membrane is decreased, it depolarizes. H ⫹  may also activate or 
permeate a special type of ion channel from the superfamily of transient 
receptor potential (TRP) channels, which are common in many kinds of 
sensory receptor cells. The cation current through the TRP channels can 
also depolarize sour receptor cells. pH can affect virtually all cellular pro-
cesses, and there may be other mechanisms of sour taste transduction. It 
is possible that a constellation of effects evokes the sour taste. 

Bitter receptors: the T2Rs

 Bitterness.  The  transduction  processes  underlying  bitter,  sweet,  and 
umami tastes rely on two families of related taste receptor proteins called 
T1R and T2R. The various subtypes of T1R and T2R are all G-protein-
coupled  taste  receptors  that  are  very  similar  to  the  G-protein-coupled 
 receptors that detect neurotransmitters. There is good evidence that the 
protein receptors for bitter, sweet, and umami tastes are  dimers;  dimers 
are two proteins afﬁ xed to one another (Figure 8.6). Tightly associated 
proteins  are  common  in  cells  (see  Figure  3.6);  most  ion  channels  (see 
Figure 3.7) and transmitter-gated channels (see Figure 5.14) consist of 
several different bound proteins, for example. 

 Bitter substances are detected by the 25 or so different types of T2R 
receptors in humans. Bitter receptors are poison detectors, and because 
we have so many, we can detect a vast array of different poisonous sub-
stances.  Animals  are  not  very  good  at  telling  different  bitter  tastants 
apart, however, probably because each bitter taste cell expresses many, 
and  perhaps  most,  of  the  25  bitter  receptor  proteins.  Since  each  taste 
cell can send only one type of signal to its afferent nerve, a chemical that 
can bind to one of its 25 bitter receptors will trigger essentially the same 
response as a different chemical that binds to another of its bitter recep-
tors. The important message the brain receives from its taste receptors is 
simply that a bitter chemical is “Bad! Not to be trusted!” And the nervous 
system apparently does not distinguish one type of bitter substance from 
another. 

 Bitter  receptors  use  a  second  messenger  pathway  to  carry  their  sig-
nal to the gustatory afferent axon. In fact, the bitter, sweet, and umami 
receptors all seem to use the same second messenger pathway to carry 
their signals to the afferent axons. The general pathway is illustrated in 
Figure 8.7. When a tastant binds to a bitter (or sweet or umami) receptor, 
it activates its G-proteins, which stimulate the enzyme phospholipase C, 
thereby  increasing  the  production  of  the  intracellular  messenger  inosi-
tol triphosphate (IP 3 ). IP 3  pathways are ubiquitous signaling systems in 
cells throughout the body (see Chapter 6). In taste cells, IP 3  activates a 
special type of ion channel that is unique to taste cells, causing it to open 
and allow Na ⫹  to enter, thus depolarizing the taste cell. IP 3  also triggers 
the  release  of  Ca 2  ⫹   from  intracellular  storage  sites.  This  Ca 2  ⫹   in  turn 
triggers neurotransmitter  release in an unusual way. The taste cells for 
bitter, sweet, and umami lack conventional transmitter-ﬁ lled presynaptic 
vesicles. Instead, increases of intracellular Ca 2  ⫹  activate a special mem-
brane channel that allows ATP to ﬂ ow out of the cell. The ATP serves as 
a synaptic transmitter and activates purinergic receptors on postsynaptic 
gustatory axons. 

(a)  

Sweet receptor: T1R2 + T1R3

(b)  

Umami receptor: T1R1 + T1R3

(c)  
▲ FIGURE 8.6
Taste receptor proteins. (a) There are 
about 25 types of bitter receptors, com-
prising a family of T2R proteins. Bitter 
receptors are probably dimers consisting 
of two different T2R proteins. (b) There is 
only one type of sweet receptor, formed 
from the combination of a T1R2 and a 
T1R3 protein. (c) There is only one type 
of umami receptor, formed from the 
combination of a T1R1 and a T1R3 
 protein.

 Sweetness. There are many different sweet tastants, some natural and 
some artiﬁ cial. Surprisingly, all of them seem to be detected by the same 
taste receptor protein. Sweet receptors resemble bitter receptors, in that 
they are all dimers of G-protein-coupled receptors. A functioning sweet 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   273
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   273

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

274

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

G-protein-coupled
taste receptor (for
bitter, sweet, or
umami)

Phospholipase C

Taste
cell

PIP2

IP3

Ca2+

Ca2+
Ca2+
stores
Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Na+

Taste cell
ion channel

ATP-permeable
channel

ATP

Gustatory
afferent
axon

▲ FIGURE 8.7
Transduction mechanisms for bitter, 
sweet, and umami tastants. Tastants 
bind directly to G-protein-coupled mem-
brane receptors, which activate 
 phospholipase C, which increases the 
synthesis of IP3. IP3 then triggers the 
 release of Ca2⫹ from internal storage 
sites, and Ca2⫹ opens a taste-specific 
ion channel, leading to depolarization 
and transmitter release. The main trans-
mitter is ATP, which is released from the 
taste cell by diffusing through ATP- 
permeable channels.

receptor requires two very particular members of the T1R receptor fam-
ily: T1R2 and T1R3 (see Figure 8.6). If either one of them is missing or 
mutated, an animal may not perceive sweetness at all. In fact, all species 
of cats and some other carnivores lack the genes encoding T1R2 and are 
indifferent to the taste of most molecules that we consider sweet. 

 Chemicals binding to the T1R2  ⫹  T1R3 receptor (i.e., the sweet recep-
tor) activate exactly the same second messenger system that the bitter 
receptors activate (Figure 8.7). So, why don’t we confuse bitter chemicals 
with sweet ones? The reason is that bitter receptor proteins and sweet 
receptor proteins are expressed in different taste cells. Bitter taste cells 
and sweet taste cells, in turn, connect to different gustatory axons. The 
activity of different gustatory axons reﬂ ects the chemical sensitivities of 
the taste cells that drive them, so the messages about sweetness and bit-
terness are delivered to the central nervous system along different trans-
mission lines. 

 Umami (Amino Acids). “Amino acids” may not be the answer at the tip of 
your tongue when asked to list your favorite tastes, but recall that pro-
teins are made from amino acids and that they are also excellent energy 
sources. In short, amino acids are the foods your mother would want you 
to eat. Most amino acids also taste good, although some taste bitter. 

 The transduction process for umami is identical to that for sweetness, 
with one exception. The umami receptor, like the sweet receptor, is com-
posed of two members of the T1R protein family, but in this case, it is 
T1R1  ⫹  T1R3 (see Figure 8.6). The sweet and umami receptors share the 
T1R3 protein, so it is the other T1R that determines whether the receptor 
is sensitive to amino acids or sweet tastants. When the gene encoding for 
the T1R1 protein is removed from mice, they are unable to taste gluta-
mate and other amino acids, although they still demonstrate a sense for 
sweet chemicals and other tastants. 

 Similar to other types of taste receptors, the genetics of different mam-
malian  species  lead  to  interesting  taste  preferences  and  deﬁ cits.  Most 
bats, for example, do not have a functioning T1R1 receptor and presum-
ably  cannot  taste  amino  acids.  Vampire  bats  lack  functional  genes  for 
both umami  and  sweet taste. The ancestors of bats presumably did have 
umami and sweet receptors; why they were lost is unknown. 

 Considering how similar the umami receptor is to the sweet and bit-
ter receptors, it will not surprise you that all three use exactly the same 
second messenger pathways (Figure 8.7). Then why don’t we confuse the 
taste of amino acids with sweet or bitter chemicals? Once again, the taste 
cells  selectively  express  only  one  class  of  taste  receptor  protein.  There 
are umami-speciﬁ c taste cells, just as there are sweet-speciﬁ c taste cells 
and  bitter-speciﬁ c  taste  cells.  The  gustatory  axons  they  stimulate  are, 
in turn, delivering messages of umami, sweetness, or bitterness to the 
brain. 

 Central Taste Pathways 
 The main ﬂ ow of taste information is from the taste buds to the primary 
gustatory axons, into the brain stem, up to the thalamus, and to the ce-
rebral cortex (Figure 8.8). Three cranial nerves carry primary gustatory 
axons and bring taste information to the brain. The anterior two-thirds 
of the tongue and the palate send axons into a branch of cranial nerve 
VII, the  facial nerve . The posterior third of the tongue is innervated by 
a  branch  of  cranial  nerve  IX,  the   glossopharyngeal  nerve.   The  regions 
around  the  throat,  including  the  glottis,  epiglottis,  and  pharynx,  send 
taste axons to a branch of cranial nerve X, the  vagus nerve . These nerves 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   274
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   274

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

275

Primary gustatory
cortex

Cranial nerve VII

IX

X

Tongue

Cranial nerves

VII

IX

X

Lateral
ventricles

(a)

Epiglottis

2

1

Primary
gustatory
cortex

Afferents from
tongue and 
epiglottis

Left
gustatory
nucleus

1

(b)

Anterior tongue

Posterior tongue

Third

ventricle

2

Fourth ventricle

Medulla

Pyramidal 
tract

Left ventral posterior
medial (VPM) nucleus
of thalamus

Gustatory
nucleus

VPM

Gustatory

cortex

Epiglottis

(c)
▲ FIGURE 8.8
Central taste pathways. (a) Taste information from the tongue and mouth cavity 
is carried by three cranial nerves (VII, IX, and X ) to the medulla. (b) Gustatory 
 axons enter the gustatory nucleus within the medulla. Gustatory nucleus axons 
synapse on neurons of the thalamus, which project to primary gustatory cortex in 
regions of the postcentral gyrus and insular cortex. The enlargements show 
planes of section through ① the medulla and ② the forebrain. (c) The central taste 
pathways summarized.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   275
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   275

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

276

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

are involved in a variety of other sensory and motor functions, but their 
taste axons all enter the brain stem, bundle together, and synapse within 
the  slender   gustatory  nucleus ,  a  part  of  the   solitary  nucleus   in  the 
 medulla. 

 From  the  gustatory  nucleus,  taste  pathways  diverge.  The  conscious 
experience of taste is presumably mediated by the cerebral cortex. The 
path to the neocortex via the thalamus is a common one for sensory in-
formation. Neurons of the gustatory nucleus synapse on a subset of small 
neurons  in  the   ventral  posterior  medial  (VPM)  nucleus ,  a  portion 
of the thalamus that deals with sensory information from the head. The 
VPM taste neurons then send axons to the  primary gustatory cortex
( located in Brodmann’s area 36 and the insula-operculum regions of cor-
tex). The taste pathways to the thalamus and cortex are primarily ipsi-
lateral to the cranial nerves that supply them. Lesions within the VPM 
thalamus or the gustatory cortex—as a result of a stroke, for example—
can cause  ageusia , the loss of taste perception. 

 Gustation is important to basic behaviors such as the control of feeding 
and digestion, both of which involve additional taste pathways. Gustatory 
nucleus  cells  project  to  a  variety  of  brain  stem  regions,  largely  in  the 
medulla, that are involved in swallowing, salivation, gagging, vomiting, 
and  basic  physiological  functions  such  as  digestion  and  respiration.  In 
addition, gustatory information is distributed to the hypothalamus and 
related parts of the basal telencephalon (structures of the limbic system; 
see Chapter 18). These structures seem to be involved in the palatability 
of foods and the forces that motivate us to eat (Box 8.2). Localized lesions 
of the hypothalamus or amygdala, a nucleus of the basal telencephalon, 
can cause an animal to either chronically overeat or ignore food, or alter 
its preferences for food types. 

BOX 8.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Memories of a Very Bad Meal
When one of us was 14 years old, he ended an entertaining 

day at an amusement park by snacking on one of his favorite 
New  England  foods,  fried  clams.  Within  an  hour  he  became 
nauseated,  vomited,  and  had  a  most  unpleasant  bus  ride 
home. Presumably, the clams had been spoiled. Sadly, for years 
afterward, he could not even imagine eating another fried clam, 
and the smell of them alone was repulsive. The fried clam aver-
sion was quite speciﬁ c. It did not affect his enjoyment of other 
foods, and he felt no prejudice against amusement park rides, 
buses, or the friends he had been with the day he got sick.

By the time the author reached his thirties, he could happily 
dine on fried clams again. He also read about research that John 
Garcia, working at Harvard Medical School, had done just about 
the same time as the original bad-clam experience. Garcia fed 
rats a sweet liquid, and, in some cases, he then gave them a 
drug that made them brieﬂ y feel ill. After even one such trial, rats 
that had received the drug avoided the sweet stimulus forever. 
The rats’ aversion was speciﬁ c for the taste stimulus; they did 
not avoid sound or light stimuli under the same conditions.

Extensive research has shown that ﬂ avor aversion learning 
results in a particularly robust form of associative memory. It 
is most effective for food stimuli (taste and smell both con-
tribute); it requires remarkably little experience (as little as one 
trial); and it can last a very long time—more than 50 years in 
some people! And learning occurs even when there is a very 
long delay between the food (the conditioned stimulus) and 
the  nausea  (the  unconditioned  stimulus).  This  is  obviously 
a useful form of learning in the wild. An animal can’t afford 
to be a slow learner when new foods might be poisonous. 
For modern humans, this memory mechanism can backﬁ re; 
many  perfectly  good  fried  clams  have  remained  uneaten. 
Food  aversion  can  be  a  more  serious  problem  for  patients 
undergoing radiation or chemotherapy for cancer, when the 
nausea induced by their treatments makes many foods un-
palatable. On the other hand, taste aversion learning has also 
been used to prevent coyotes from stealing domestic sheep 
and to help people reduce their dependence on alcohol and 
cigarettes.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   276
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   276

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

277

 The Neural Coding of Taste 
 If you were going to design a system for coding tastes, you might begin 
with  many  speciﬁ c  taste  receptors  for  many  basic  tastes  (sweet,  sour, 
salty, bitter, chocolate, banana, mango, beef, Swiss cheese, etc.). Then you 
might connect each receptor type, by separate sets of axons, to neurons in 
the brain that also respond to only one speciﬁ c taste. All the way up to the 
cortex, you would expect to ﬁ nd speciﬁ c neurons responding to “sweet” and 
“chocolate,” and the ﬂ avor of chocolate ice cream would involve the rapid 
ﬁ ring of these cells and very few of the “salty,” “sour,” and “banana” cells. 
 This concept is the  labeled line hypothesis , and at ﬁ rst it seems simple 
and  rational.  At  the  start  of  the  gustatory  system—the  taste  receptor 
cells—something like labeled lines are used. As we have seen, individual 
taste  receptor  cells  are  often  selectively  sensitive  to  particular  classes 
of  stimuli:  sweet,  bitter,  or  umami.  Some  of  them,  however,  are  more 
 broadly tuned  to stimuli; that is, they are less speciﬁ c in their responses. 
They may be excited to some extent by both salt and sour, for example 
(see Figure 8.3). Primary taste axons are even less speciﬁ c than receptor 
cells, and most central taste neurons continue to be broadly responsive 
all the way into the cortex. In other words, the response of a single taste 
cell is often ambiguous about the food being tasted; the labels on the taste 
lines are uncertain rather than distinct. 

 Cells  in  the  taste  system  are  broadly  tuned  for  several  reasons.  If 
one  taste  receptor  cell  has  two  different  transduction  mechanisms,  it 
will respond to two types of tastants (although it may still respond most 
strongly to one of them). In addition, there is convergence of receptor cell 
input  onto  afferent  axons.  Each  receptor  cell  synapses  onto  a  primary 
taste  axon  that  also  receives  input  from  several  other  receptor  cells  in 
that papilla as well as its neighbors. This means that one axon may com-
bine the taste information from numerous taste cells. If one of those cells 
is mostly sensitive to sour stimuli and another to salt stimuli, then the 
axon will respond to salt  and  sour. This pattern continues into the brain: 
Neurons of the gustatory nucleus receive synapses from many axons of 
different taste speciﬁ cities, and they may become less selective for tastes 
than the primary taste axons. 

 All of this mixing of taste information might seem like an inefﬁ cient 
way  to  design  a  coding  system.  Why  not  use  many  taste  cells  that  are 
highly speciﬁ c? In part, the answer might be that we would need an enor-
mous variety of receptor types, and even then we could not respond to 
new tastes. So, when you taste chocolate ice cream, how does the brain 
sort  through  its  apparently  ambiguous  information  about  the  ﬂ avor  to 
make  clear  distinctions  between  chocolate  and  thousands  of  other  pos-
sibilities? The likely answer is a scheme that includes features of roughly 
labeled lines and  population coding , in which the responses of a large 
number  of  broadly  tuned  neurons,  rather  than  a  small  number  of  pre-
cisely tuned neurons, are used to specify the properties of a particular 
stimulus, such as a taste. 

 Population  coding  schemes  seem  to  be  used  throughout  the  sensory 
and  motor  systems  of  the  brain,  as  we  shall  see  in  later  chapters.  In 
the case of taste, receptor cells are sensitive to a small number of taste 
types, often only one; gustatory axons and the neurons they activate in 
the brain tend to respond more broadly—for example, strongly to bitter, 
moderately to sour and salt, and not at all to sweet (see Figure 8.4). Only 
with a large population of taste cells, with different response patterns, 
can  the  brain  distinguish  between  speciﬁ c  alternative  tastes.  One  food 
 activates a certain subset of neurons, some of them ﬁ ring very strongly, 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   277
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   277

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

278

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

some moderately, some not at all, others perhaps even inhibited below 
their spontaneous ﬁ ring rates (i.e., their nonstimulated rates); a second 
food excites some of the cells activated by the ﬁ rst food, but also others; 
and the overall patterns of discharge rates are distinctly different. The 
relevant population may even include neurons activated by the olfactory, 
temperature, and textural features of a food; certainly, the coldness and 
creaminess of chocolate ice cream contribute to our ability to distinguish 
it from chocolate cake. 

SMELL 
SMELLL 

 Olfaction brings both good news and bad news. It combines with taste to 
help us identify foods, and it increases our enjoyment of many of them. 
But it can also warn of potentially harmful substances (spoiled meat) or 
places  (smoke-ﬁ lled  rooms).  In  olfaction,  the  warnings  from  bad  smells 
may outweigh the beneﬁ ts of good smells; by some estimates, we can smell 
several hundred thousand substances, but only about 20% of them smell 
pleasant. Practice helps in olfaction, and professional perfumers and whis-
key blenders can actually distinguish among thousands of different odors. 
 Smell  is  also  a  mode  of  communication.  Chemicals  released  by  the 
body, called  pheromones , are important signals for reproductive behav-
iors,  and  they  may  also  be  used  to  mark  territories,  identify  individu-
als, and indicate aggression or submission. (The term is from the Greek 
pherein , “to carry,” and  horman , “to urge or excite.”) Although systems of 
pheromones are well developed in many other animals, their importance 
to humans is not clear (Box 8.3). 

 The Organs of Smell 
 We do not smell with our nose. Rather, we smell with a small, thin sheet 
of  cells  high  up  in  the  nasal  cavity  called  the   olfactory  epithelium
(Figure 8.9). The olfactory epithelium has three main cell types.  Olfactory 

Brain

Olfactory
bulb

Cribriform
plate

Olfactory
epithelium

Inhaled
air

Palate

Olfactory nerve

Cribriform plate

Basal cell

Olfactory
receptor cell

Supporting cell

Cilia of
olfactory cells

Mucus layer

▲ FIGURE 8.9
The location and structure of the olfactory epithelium. The olfactory epithelium 
consists of a layer of olfactory receptor cells, supporting cells, and basal cells. 
Odorants dissolve in the mucus layer and contact the cilia of the olfactory cells. 
Axons of the olfactory cells penetrate the bony cribriform plate on their way to 
the CNS.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   278
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   278

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

279

BOX 8.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Human Pheromones?

Smells  are  surer  than  sounds  and  sights  to  make  your 

heart strings crack.

—Rudyard Kipling

Odors can certainly sway emotions and arouse memories, 

but just how important are they to human behavior? Each of 
us has a distinctive set of odors that marks our identity as 
surely  as  our  ﬁ ngerprints  or  genes  do.  In  fact,  variations  in 
body odor are probably genetically determined. Bloodhounds 
have  great  difﬁ culty  distinguishing  between  the  smells  of 
identical  twins,  but  not  between  those  of  fraternal  siblings. 
For some animals, odor identity is essential: When her lamb is 
born, the ewe establishes a long-term memory of its speciﬁ c 
smell and develops an enduring bond based largely on olfac-
tory cues. In a newly inseminated female mouse, the smell of 
a strange male (but not the smell of her recent mate, which 
she remembers) will trigger an abortion of the pregnancy.

Humans have the ability to recognize the scents of other 
humans. Infants as young as 6 days old show a clear prefer-
ence for the smell of their own mother’s breast over that of 
other nursing mothers. The mothers, in turn, can usually iden-
tify the odor of their own infant from among several choices.
About  30  years  ago,  researcher  Martha  McClintock  re-
ported that women who spend a lot of time together (e.g., 
college roommates) often ﬁ nd that their menstrual cycles syn-
chronize.  This  effect  is  probably  mediated  by  pheromones. 
In  1998,  McClintock  and  Kathleen  Stern,  working  at  the 
University of Chicago, found that odorless compounds from 
one group of women (the “donors”) could inﬂ uence the tim-
ing of the menstrual cycles of other women (the “recipients”). 
Body chemicals were collected by placing cotton pads under 
the arms of the donors for at least 8 hours. The pads were 

then  wiped  under  the  noses  of  the  recipients,  who  agreed 
not to wash their faces for 6 hours. The recipients were not 
told  the  source  of  the  chemicals  on  the  pads  and  did  not 
consciously  perceive  any  odor  from  them  except  the  alco-
hol  used  as  a  carrier.  Nevertheless,  depending  on  the  do-
nor’s time in her menstrual cycle, the recipient’s cycle was 
either  shortened  or  lengthened.  These  dramatic  results  are 
the  best  evidence  yet  that  humans  can  communicate  with 
pheromones.

Many animals use the accessory olfactory system to de-
tect  pheromones  and  mediate  a  variety  of  social  behaviors 
involving mother, mating, territory, and food. The accessory 
system runs parallel to the primary olfactory system. It con-
sists  of  separate  chemically  sensitive  regions  in  the  nasal 
cavity, in particular the vomeronasal organ, which projects to 
the accessory olfactory bulb and from there provides input to 
the hypothalamus. Alas, it seems likely that the vomeronasal 
organ is absent or vestigial in most mature people, and even 
when it is identiﬁ able, it does not appear to have functional 
receptor proteins or direct connections to the brain. This by 
itself does not mean humans lack pheromonal signals, since 
these could pass through the main olfactory organs.

Napoleon  Bonaparte  once  wrote  to  his  love  Josephine, 
asking her not to bathe for the 2 weeks until they would next 
meet, so he could enjoy her natural aromas. The scent of a 
woman may indeed be a source of arousal for sexually expe-
rienced males, presumably because of learned associations. 
But there is still no hard evidence for human pheromones that 
might mediate sexual attraction (for members of either sex) via 
innate mechanisms. Considering the commercial implications 
of such a substance, we can be sure the search will continue.

receptor  cells   are  the  sites  of  transduction.  Unlike  taste  receptor  cells, 
olfactory  receptors  are  genuine  neurons,  with  axons  of  their  own  that 
penetrate into the central nervous system.  Supporting cells  are similar 
to glia; among other things, they help produce mucus.  Basal cells  are the 
source of new receptor cells. Olfactory receptors (similar to taste recep-
tors) continually grow, die, and regenerate, in a cycle that lasts about 4–8 
weeks. In fact, olfactory receptor cells are one of the very few types of neu-
rons in the nervous system that are regularly replaced throughout life. 

 Snifﬁ ng  brings  air  through  the  convoluted  nasal  passages,  but  only 
a small percentage of that air passes over the olfactory epithelium. The 
epithelium exudes a thin coating of mucus, which ﬂ ows constantly and is 
replaced about every 10 minutes. Chemical stimuli in the air, called  odor-
ants , dissolve in the mucus layer before they reach receptor cells. Mucus 
consists of a water base with dissolved mucopolysaccharides (long chains 
of sugars); a variety of proteins, including antibodies, enzymes, and odor-
ant binding proteins; and salts. The antibodies are critical because olfac-
tory cells can be a direct route by which some viruses (such as the rabies 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   279
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   279

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

280

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

virus) and bacteria enter the brain. Also important are odorant binding 
proteins, which are small and soluble and which may help concentrate 
odorants in the mucus. 

 The  size  of  the  olfactory  epithelium  is  one  indicator  of  an  animal’s 
 olfactory acuity. Humans are relatively weak smellers (although even we 
can detect some odorants at concentrations as low as a few parts per tril-
lion). The surface area of the human olfactory epithelium is only about 
10 cm 2 . The olfactory epithelium of certain dogs may be over 170 cm 2 , and 
dogs have over 100 times more receptors in each square centimeter than 
humans. By snifﬁ ng the aromatic air above the ground, dogs can detect 
the few molecules left by someone walking there hours before. Humans 
may be able to smell the dog, however, only when it licks our face. 

 Olfactory Receptor Neurons 
 Olfactory receptor neurons have a single, thin dendrite that ends with a 
small knob at the surface of the epithelium (see Figure 8.9). Waving from 
the knob, within the mucus layer, are several long, thin cilia. Odorants 
dissolved in the mucus bind to the surface of the cilia and activate the 
transduction process. On the opposite side of the olfactory receptor cell 
is a very thin, unmyelinated axon. Collectively, the olfactory axons con-
stitute the  olfactory nerve  (cranial nerve I). The olfactory axons do not 
all  come  together  as  a  single  nerve  bundle,  as  in  other  cranial  nerves. 
Instead,  after  leaving  the  epithelium,  small  clusters  of  the  axons  pen-
etrate a thin sheet of bone called the  cribriform plate,  then course into 
the  olfactory bulb  (see Figure 8.9). The olfactory axons are fragile, and 
in a traumatic injury, such as a blow to the head, the forces between the 
cribriform  plate  and  surrounding  tissue  can  sever  the  olfactory  axons. 
After this type of injury, the axons cannot regrow, resulting in  anosmia , 
the inability to smell. 

  Olfactory  Transduction.   Although  taste  receptor  cells  use  several  dif-
ferent molecular signaling systems for transduction, olfactory receptors 
probably use only one (Figure 8.10). All of the transduction molecules are 
located  in  the  thin  cilia. The  olfactory  pathway  can  be  summarized  as 
follows: 
 Odorants → 

 Bind to membrane odorant receptor proteins → 

 Stimulate G-protein (G olf ) → 

 Activate adenylyl cyclase → 

 Form cAMP → 

 Bind cAMP to a cyclic nucleotide-gated cation channel → 

 Open cation channels and allow inﬂ ux of Na ⫹  and Ca 2  ⫹  → 

 Open Ca 2  ⫹ -activated Cl ⫺  channels → 

 Cause  current  ﬂ ow  and  membrane  depolarization 
(receptor potential). 

 Once the cation-selective cAMP-gated channels open, current ﬂ ows in-
ward, and the membrane of the olfactory neuron depolarizes (Figures 8.10 
and 8.11). In addition to Na ⫹ , the cAMP-gated channel allows substantial 
amounts of Ca 2  ⫹  to enter the cilia. In turn, the intracellular Ca 2  ⫹  trig-
gers a Ca 2  ⫹ -activated Cl ⫺  current that may amplify the olfactory receptor 
potential. (This is a switch from the usual effect of Cl ⫺  currents, which 
inhibit  neurons;  in  olfactory  cells,  the  internal  Cl ⫺   concentration  must 
be unusually high so that a Cl ⫺  current tends to depolarize rather than 
hyperpolarize the membrane.) If the resulting receptor potential is large 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   280
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   280

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

281

To olfactory
bulb

Olfactory
receptor
cell

Mucus

Receptor cilia

Membrane

depolarization

Cl–

Ca2+

Dendrite of
olfactory cell

Cl–

Ca2+  Na+

Ca2+  Na+

Adenylyl
cyclase

Cilium of
olfactory cell

Golf-protein

Odorant
receptor
protein

Odorant molecules

▲ FIGURE 8.10
Transduction mechanisms of vertebrate olfactory receptor cells. The drawing 
at right shows a single cilium of an olfactory receptor cell and the signaling mole-
cules of olfactory transduction that it contains. Golf is a special form of G-protein 
found only in olfactory receptor cells.

Olfactory
nerve

Olfactory
receptor
cell

Dendrite

Cilia

50 mV

Action
potentials

50 mV

Receptor
potential

50 mV

Odorant

1 sec

▲ FIGURE 8.11
Voltage recordings from an olfactory receptor cell during stimulation. Odor-
ants generate a slow receptor potential in the cilia; the receptor potential propa-
gates along the dendrite and triggers a series of action potentials within the soma 
of the olfactory receptor cell. Finally, the action potentials (but not the receptor 
potential) propagate continuously along the olfactory nerve axon.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   281
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   281

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

282

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

enough, it will exceed the threshold for action potentials in the cell body, 
and  spikes  will  propagate  out  along  the  axon  into  the  central  nervous 
system (CNS) (Figure 8.11). 

 The olfactory response may terminate for several reasons. Odorants dif-
fuse away, scavenger enzymes in the mucus layer often break them down, 
and cAMP in the receptor cell may activate other signaling pathways that 
end the transduction process. Even in the continuing presence of an odorant, 
the strength of a smell usually fades because the response of the receptor 
cell itself adapts to an odorant within about a minute. Decreased response 
despite the continuing presence of a stimulus is called  adaptation , and we 
will see that it is a common feature of receptors in all the senses. 

 This signaling pathway has two unusual features: the receptor binding 

proteins at the beginning and the cAMP-gated channels near the end. 

 Olfactory  Receptor  Proteins.  Receptor  proteins  have  odorant  binding 
sites on their extracellular surface. Because of your ability to discriminate 
among thousands of different odorants, you might guess that there are 
many different types of odorant receptor proteins. You would be right, and 
the number is very large indeed. Researchers Linda Buck and Richard 
Axel, working at Columbia University in 1991, found that there are more 
than 1000 different odorant receptor genes in rodents, making this by far 
the  largest  family  of  mammalian  genes  yet  discovered. This  important 
and surprising discovery earned Buck and Axel the Nobel Prize in 2004. 
 Humans have fewer odorant receptor genes than rodents—about 350 
that code for functional receptor proteins—but this is still an enormous 
number. Odorant receptor genes comprise about 3–5% of the entire mam-
malian genome. The receptor genes are scattered about on the genome, 
and nearly every chromosome has at least a few of them. Each receptor 
gene has a unique structure, allowing the receptor proteins encoded by 
these genes to bind different odorants. It is also surprising that each ol-
factory receptor cell seems to express very few of the many types of recep-
tor genes, in most cases just one. Thus, in mice, there are more than 1000 
different types of receptor cells, each identiﬁ ed by the particular receptor 
gene it expresses. The olfactory epithelium is organized into a few large 
zones, and each zone contains receptor cells that express a different sub-
set of receptor genes (Figure 8.12). Within each zone, individual receptor 
types are scattered randomly (Figure 8.13a). 

 The receptor neurons in the vomeronasal organ of mice, dogs, cats, and 
many  other  mammals  express  their  own  sets  of  receptor  proteins.  The 
structures  of  odorant  receptor  proteins  and  vomeronasal  receptor  pro-
teins are surprisingly different. There are many fewer functional vomero-
nasal receptor proteins (about 180 in mice and perhaps none in humans) 
than odorant receptor proteins. The types of chemicals vomeronasal re-
ceptors detect are only partially known, but it is likely that some of them 
are pheromones (see Box 8.3). 

 Olfactory receptor proteins belong to the large family of proteins called 
G-protein-coupled  receptors,  all  of  which  have  seven  transmembrane 
alpha helices. The G-protein-coupled receptors also include a variety of 
neurotransmitter receptors, which were described in Chapter 6, and the 
bitter, sweet, and umami receptors described earlier in this chapter. All 
of these receptors are coupled to G-proteins, which in turn relay a sig-
nal to other second messenger systems within the cell (olfactory receptor 
cells use a particular type of G-protein, called G olf ). Increasing evidence 
indicates that the only second messenger mediating olfactory transduc-
tion in vertebrates is cAMP. Some of the most compelling studies have 
used genetic engineering to produce mice in which critical proteins of the 

Medial surface of nasal passage

Gene group 1
Gene group 2
Gene group 3

▲ FIGURE 8.12
Maps of the expression of different 
 olfactory receptor proteins on the 
 olfactory epithelium of a mouse. Three 
different groups of genes were mapped 
in this case, and each had a different, 
nonoverlapping zone of distribution. 
(Source: Adapted from Ressler et al., 
1993, p. 602.)

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   282
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   282

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

283

Olfactory
epithelium

(a)

Citrus

Floral

Peppermint

Almond

(b)

Receptor 1

Receptor 2

Receptor 3

▲ FIGURE 8.13
Broad tuning of single olfactory receptor cells. (a) Each receptor cell ex-
presses a single olfactory receptor protein (here coded by cell color), and different 
cells are randomly scattered within a region of the epithelium. (b) Microelectrode 
recordings from three different cells show that each one responds to many differ-
ent odors, but with differing preferences. By measuring responses from all three 
cells, each of the four odors can be clearly distinguished.

olfactory cAMP pathway have been knocked out (e.g., G olf ); these mice are 
inevitably anosmic for a wide variety of odors. 

 cAMP-Gated Channels. In neurons, cAMP is a common second messen-
ger, but the way it acts in olfactory transduction is quite unusual. Tadashi 
Nakamura and Geoffrey Gold, working at Yale University in 1987, showed 
that a population of channels in the cilia of olfactory cells responds di-
rectly to cAMP; that is, the channels are cAMP-gated. In Chapter 9, we 
will see that a similar version of cyclic nucleotide-gated channel is used 
for visual transduction. This is another demonstration that biology is con-
servative and evolution recycles its good ideas: Smelling and seeing use 
some very similar molecular mechanisms (Box 8.4). 

 How do the 1000 types of receptor cells used by mice discriminate among 
tens  of  thousands  of  odors?  Like  taste,  olfaction  involves  a  population- 
coding  scheme.  Each  receptor  protein  binds  different  odorants  more  or 
less readily, so its receptor cell is more or less sensitive to those  odorants 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   283
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   283

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

284

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 8.4

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Channels of Vision and Smell
by Geoffrey Gold

The  discovery  of  cyclic  nucleotide-gated  ion  channels  in 

olfactory  receptor  cells  provides  illuminating  examples  of 
how scientiﬁ c orthodoxy can inhibit progress. Ironically, the 
story begins with work on vision. Studies of visual transduc-
tion began in earnest following the discovery, in 1971, that 
light caused the breakdown of cyclic guanosine monophos-
phate (cGMP) in photoreceptors. Yet, it was not until 1985 
that  the  patch-damp  method  was  used  to  demonstrate  a 
direct effect of cGMP on ion channels from photoreceptors. 
This long delay was not due to lack of interest because there 
were at least a dozen labs working on the visual transduc-
tion mechanism. Rather, I think the widespread acceptance 
of  protein  phosphorylation  as  the  mechanism  of  action  of 
cyclic nucleotides in most cells effectively suppressed curi-
osity about other (direct) effects of cyclic nucleotides on ion 
channels. The cGMP-gated channel of photoreceptors was 
discovered by a group in the former Soviet Union, perhaps 
because these scientists were less inﬂ uenced by the reigning 
dogma in Western countries.

The  discovery  of  the  olfactory  cyclic  nucleotide-gated 
channel by Tadashi Nakamura and me also emphasizes the 
importance of listening to the beat of your own drum. After the 
odorant-stimulated adenylyl cyclase was discovered in 1985, 
only a few months after the discovery of the photoreceptor 
cGMP-gated channel, we (and probably others) thought that 
olfactory cilia might contain a cyclic nucleotide-gated chan-
nel. This was because the biochemical similarities between 

visual and olfactory transduction suggested an evolutionary 
relationship between photoreceptors and olfactory receptor 
cells. Thus, we hypothesized that if the biochemical reactions 
of  sensory  transduction  were  conserved  throughout  evolu-
tion,  ion  channels  might  also  be  conserved.  However,  we 
knew that the transduction process was located in the cilia, 
and structures as small as cilia, which are about 0.2 ␮m in di-
ameter, had never before been studied with the patch-damp 
technique. Indeed, most people I talked to thought it would 
be impossible to excise patches from the cilia. Nevertheless, 
we reasoned that it should be possible if only we could make 
patch  pipettes  with  tip  openings  smaller  than  the  ciliary  di-
ameter. This proved easy to accomplish; it only required ﬁ re 
polishing (melting) the tips of the patch pipettes slightly lon-
ger than was customary. Once we obtained high-resistance 
seals  on  cilia,  patch  excision  and  current  recording  were 
done in the conventional way.

Perhaps the most ironic thing about this story is that the 
photoreceptor  channel  was  discovered  by  a  group  led  by 
E. E. Fesenko, whose previous (and subsequent) work was 
on olfactory receptor proteins, whereas our work prior to the 
discovery  of  the  olfactory  channel  was  on  phototransduc-
tion. That just goes to show how useful it can be for people 
to  move  into  new  areas.  I  like  to  point  out  that  ours  was 
a  project  that  never  would  have  been  funded  by  the  con-
ventional  grant  review  process  because  it  was  so  unlikely 
to work.

(Figure 8.13b). Some cells are more sensitive to the chemical structure 
of the odorants they respond to than other cells are, but in general each 
receptor is quite broadly tuned. A corollary is that each odorant activates 
many of the 1000 types of receptors. The concentration of odorant is also 
important, and more odorant tends to generate stronger responses, until 
response strength saturates. Thus, each olfactory cell yields very ambig-
uous  information  about  odorant  type  and  strength.  It  is  the  job  of  the 
central olfactory pathways to respond to the full package of information 
arriving from the olfactory epithelium—the population code—and use it 
to classify odors further. 

 Central Olfactory Pathways 
 Olfactory  receptor  neurons  send  axons  into  the  two  olfactory  bulbs 
(Figure 8.14). The bulbs are a neuroscientist’s wonderland, full of neural 
circuits with numerous types of neurons, fascinating dendritic arrange-
ments,  unusual  reciprocal  synapses,  and  high  levels  of  many  different 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   284
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   284

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

285

Olfactory bulb

Olfactory tract

Glomerulus

Second-order
olfactory neuron

▲ FIGURE 8.14
The location and structure of an 
 olfactory bulb. Axons of olfactory re-
ceptor cells penetrate the cribriform 
plate and enter the olfactory bulb. 
 After multiple branching, each olfac-
tory axon synapses upon second- 
order neurons within a spherical 
 glomerulus. The second-order neurons 
send axons through the olfactory tract 
further into the brain.

Cribriform
plate

Olfactory
receptor cells

neurotransmitters. The input layer of each bulb in mice contains about 
2000  spherical  structures  called   glomeruli ,  each  about  50–200   ␮ m  in 
diameter. Within each glomerulus, the endings of about 25,000 primary 
olfactory axons (axons from the receptor cells) converge and terminate on 
the dendrites of about 100 second-order olfactory neurons. 

 Recent  studies  revealed  that  the  mapping  of  receptor  cells  onto  glo-
meruli is astonishingly precise. Each glomerulus receives receptor axons 
from a large region of the olfactory epithelium. When molecular labeling 
methods are used to tag each receptor neuron expressing one particular 
receptor gene of the mouse—in this case, a gene called  P2 —we can see 
that the P2-labeled axons all converge onto only two glomeruli in each 
bulb, one of which is shown in Figure 8.15a. No axons seem to be out of 
place, but our knowledge of axonal pathﬁ nding during development can-
not yet explain the targeting accuracy of olfactory axons (see Chapter 23). 
 This  precision  mapping  is  also  consistent  across  the  two  olfactory 
bulbs; each bulb has only two P2-targeted glomeruli in symmetrical posi-
tions (Figure 8.15b). The positions of the P2 glomeruli within each bulb 
are  consistent  from  one  mouse  to  another.  Finally,  it  seems  that  each 
 glomerulus receives input from only receptor cells of one particular type. 
This means that the array of glomeruli within a bulb is a very orderly map 
of the receptor genes expressed in the olfactory epithelium (Figure 8.16), 
and, by implication, a map of odor information. 

 Olfactory  information  is  modiﬁ ed  by  inhibitory  and  excitatory  inter-
actions  within  and  among  the  glomeruli  and  between  the  two  bulbs. 
Neurons  in  the  bulbs  are  also  subject  to  modulation  from  systems  of 
axons  that  descend  from  higher  areas  of  the  brain.  While  it  is  obvious 
that the elegant circuitry of the olfactory bulbs has important functions, 
it  is  not  entirely  clear  what  those  functions  are.  It  is  likely  that  they 
begin to segregate odorant signals into broad categories, independent of 
their strength and possible interference from other odorants. The precise 
identiﬁ cation of an odor probably requires further processing in the next 
stages of the olfactory system. 

 Many brain structures receive olfactory connections. The output axons 
of  the  olfactory  bulbs  course  through  the  olfactory  tracts  and  project 

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   285
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   285

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

286

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Olfactory
epithelium

Olfactory
bulb

(a)

Olfactory receptor
neuron axon

Glomerulus

Olfactory receptor
neuron axon

Olfactory
bulb

Olfactory receptor
neuron soma

(b)

Glomeruli receiving input from
P2-expressing receptor neurons

▲ FIGURE 8.15
The convergence of olfactory neuron axons onto the olfactory bulb. Olfactory 
receptor neurons expressing a particular receptor gene all send their axons to the 
same glomeruli. (a) In a mouse, receptor neurons expressing the P2 receptor 
gene were labeled blue, and every neuron sent its axon to the same glomeruli in 
the olfactory bulbs. In this image, only a single glomerulus with P2 axons is 
 visible. (b) When the two bulbs were cut in cross section, it was possible to see 
that the P2-containing receptor axons project to symmetrically placed glomeruli in 
each bulb. (Source: Adapted from Mombaerts et al., 1996, p. 680.)

Olfactory bulb
Olfactory bulb

Glomerulus

Olfactory
epithelium

Olfactory
receptor
cells

▲ FIGURE 8.16
Specific mapping of olfactory receptor neurons onto glomeruli. Each glomer-
ulus receives input only from receptor cells expressing a particular receptor pro-
tein gene. Receptor cells expressing a particular gene are color-coded.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   286
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   286

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

287

Thalamus

Medial
dorsal
nucleus

To olfactory cortex
and related
temporal lobe
structures

Orbitofrontal
cortex

Olfactory
tubercle

Olfactory tract

Olfactory
bulb

Olfactory
receptor cell

▲ FIGURE 8.17
Central olfactory pathways. Axons of the olfactory tract branch and enter many 
regions of the forebrain, including the olfactory cortex. The neocortex is reached 
only by a pathway that synapses in the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus.

 directly to several targets, some of which are illustrated in Figure 8.17. 
Among the most important targets are the primitive region of cerebral 
cortex  called  the   olfactory  cortex   and  some  of  its  neighboring  struc-
tures  in  the  temporal  lobes.  This  anatomy  makes  olfaction  unique.  All 
other sensory systems  ﬁ rst  pass information through the thalamus before 
projecting it to the cerebral cortex. The olfactory arrangement produces 
an  unusually  direct  and  widespread  inﬂ uence  on  the  parts  of  the  fore-
brain  that  have  roles  in  odor  discrimination,  emotion,  motivation,  and 
certain kinds of memory (see Chapters 16, 18, 24 and 25). Conscious per-
ceptions of smell may be mediated by a path from the  olfactory tubercle,  to 
the  medial dorsal nucleus  of the thalamus, and to the  orbitofrontal cortex  
(situated right behind the eyes). 

 Spatial and Temporal Representations of Olfactory 
Information 
 In olfaction, there is an apparent paradox similar to the one in gustation. 
Individual receptors are broadly tuned to their stimuli; that is, each cell 
is sensitive to a wide variety of chemicals. However, when we smell those 
same chemicals, we can easily tell them apart. How is the whole brain 
doing what single olfactory cells cannot? We will discuss three important 
ideas: (1) Each odor is represented by the activity of a large population 
of neurons; (2) the neurons responsive to particular odors may be orga-
nized into spatial maps; and (3) the timing of action potentials may be an 
 essential code for particular odors. 

 Olfactory Population Coding. As in gustation, the olfactory system uses 
the responses of a large population of receptors to encode a speciﬁ c stimu-
lus. A  simplistic  example  was  shown  in  Figure  8.13b. When  presented 
with  a  citrus  smell,  none  of  the  three  different  receptor  cells  can  indi-
vidually distinguish it clearly from the other odors. But by looking at the 
 combination  of responses from all three cells, the brain could distinguish 
the  citrus  smell  unambiguously  from  ﬂ oral,  peppermint,  and   almond. 
By using such population coding, you can imagine how an olfactory sys-

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   287
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   287

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

288

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

tem with 1000 different receptors might be able to recognize many dif-
ferent odors. In fact, by one recent estimate humans can discriminate at 
least one trillion different combinations of odor stimuli. 

 Olfactory  Maps. A   sensory  map   is  an  orderly  arrangement  of  neurons 
that  correlates  with  certain  features  of  the  environment.  Microelectrode 
recordings show that many receptor neurons respond to the presentation of 
a single odorant and that these cells are distributed across a broad area of 
the olfactory epithelium (see Figure 8.13). This is consistent with the wide-
spread distribution of each receptor gene. However, we have seen that the 
axons of each receptor cell type synapse upon particular glomeruli in the ol-
factory bulbs. Such an arrangement yields a sensory map in which neurons 
in a speciﬁ c place in the bulb respond to particular odors. The maps of re-
gions activated by one chemical stimulus can be visualized with special re-
cording methods. Experiments reveal that while a particular odor activates 
many bulb neurons, the neurons’ positions form complex but reproducible 
 spatial  patterns. This is evident from the experiment shown in Figure 8.18, 
in which a minty-smelling chemical activates one pattern of glomeruli and 
a fruity scent activates quite a different pattern. Thus, the smell of a par-
ticular chemical is converted into a speciﬁ c map deﬁ ned by the positions of 
active neurons within the “neural space” of the bulbs, and the form of the 
map depends on the nature and concentration of the odorant. 

 You will see in subsequent chapters that every sensory system uses 
spatial  maps,  perhaps  for  many  different  purposes.  In  most  cases,  the 
maps correspond obviously to features of the sensory world. For exam-
ple, in the visual system, there are maps of visual space; in the auditory 
 system, there are maps of sound frequency; and in the somatic sensory 
system,  there  are  maps  of  the  body  surface.  The  maps  of  the  chemical 
senses are unusual in that the stimuli themselves have no meaningful 

CH3

H3C

O

CH3

H3C

O

CH3

CH3

Isopropyl tiglate

“minty”

CH3

Ethyl tiglate

“fruity”

Olfactory
bulb

Strong
response

Weak
response

(c)  

(b)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 8.18
Maps of neural activation of the olfactory bulb. The activity of neurons in the 
glomeruli of a mouse olfactory bulb was recorded with a specialized optical 
method. The cells expressed a fluorescent protein sensitive to intracellular Ca2⫹ 
levels, and neural activity was then signaled by changes in the amount of light 
emitted by the protein. The colors on the maps represent differing levels of neural 
activity; hotter colors (red and orange) imply more activity. Activated glomeruli 
show up as spots of color. (a)  The blue box shows the area of one olfactory bulb 
that was mapped. Different olfactants evoked different spatial patterns of neural 
activation in the bulb: (b) isopropyl tiglate, which smells minty to humans, and 
(c) ethyl tiglate, which smells fruity, activate completely different patterns of 
 glomeruli. (Source: Adapted from Blauvelt et al., 2013, Figure 4.)

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   288
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   288

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

289

spatial properties. Although seeing a skunk walking in front of you may 
tell you  what  and  where  it is, smell by itself can reveal only the  what.  (By 
moving your head about, you can localize smells only crudely.) The most 
critical feature of each odorant is its chemical structure, not its position 
in space. Because the olfactory system does not have to map the spatial 
pattern of an odor in the same way that the visual system has to map 
the spatial patterns of light, neural odor maps may have other functions, 
such  as  discrimination  among  a  huge  number  of  different  chemicals. 
Recent studies of the olfactory cortex show that each distinct odor trig-
gers activity in a different subset of neurons. In the experiment shown in 
Figure 8.19, the orange-smelling octanal excites a group of neurons that 
are mostly different from the neurons excited by either the piney-scented 
 ␣ -pinene or the grassy-smelling hexanal (Figure 8.19). 

Olfactory tract

Olfactory cortex

Olfactory bulb

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

CH3

H3C

H3C

α-pinene

“piney, resinous”

O

H

H3C

octanal

“fruity, citrus”

H3C

hexanal

“cut grass”

O

H

O

H3C

octanal

“fruity, citrus”

H

▲ FIGURE 8.19
Maps of neural activation of the olfactory 
 cortex. The activity of many neurons in the mouse 
olfactory cortex was recorded with a specialized 
optical method. The cells were loaded with a Ca2⫹-
sensitive fluorescent dye, and neural activity was 
then signaled by changes in the amount of light 
emitted. (a) The olfactory regions are shaded orange. 
(b) Neurons responsive to the piney scent of 
 ␣-pinene are color-coded green, neurons respon-
sive to the fruity scent of octanal are red, and cells 
responsive to both are yellow. (c) Neurons respon-
sive to the grassy scent of hexanal are coded 
green, those responsive to the fruity scent of 
 octanal are red, and cells responsive to both are 
 yellow. Each of the three odorants activated a dis-
tinctly different pattern of cortical neurons. (Source: 
Adapted from Stettler and Axel, 2009, p. 858.)

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   289
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   289

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

290

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 But  are  neural  odor  maps  actually  used  by  the  brain  to  distinguish 
among  chemicals?  We  don’t  know  the  answer.  For  a  map  to  be  useful, 
there must be something that reads and understands it. With practice 
and very specialized goggles, we might be able to read the “alphabet” of 
odors mapped on the surface of the olfactory bulb with our eyes. This may 
roughly approximate what higher regions of the olfactory system do, but 
so far there is no evidence that the olfactory cortex has this capability. An 
alternative idea is that spatial maps do not encode odors at all but are 
simply the most efﬁ cient way for the nervous system to form appropriate 
connections between related sets of neurons (e.g., receptor cells and glo-
merular cells). With orderly mapping, the lengths of axons and dendrites 
can be minimized. Neurons with similar functions can interconnect more 
easily if they are neighbors. The spatial map that results may be simply 
a side effect of these developmental requirements, rather than a funda-
mental mechanism of sensory coding itself. 

 Temporal  Coding  in  the  Olfactory  System.  There  is  growing  evidence 
that  the   temporal   patterns  of  spiking  in  olfactory  neurons  are  essen-
tial features of olfactory coding. Compared to many sounds and sights, 
odors  are  inherently  slow  stimuli,  so  the  rapid  timing  of  action  poten-
tials is not necessary for encoding the timing of odors.  Temporal coding,  
which depends on the timing of spikes, might instead encode the quality 
of odors. Hints about the possible importance of timing are easy to ﬁ nd. 
Researchers have known for many decades that the olfactory bulb and 
cortex generate oscillations of activity when odors are presented to the 
receptors, but the relevance of these rhythms is still unknown. Temporal 
patterns  are  also  evident  in  the  spatial  odor  maps,  as  they  sometimes 
change shape during the presentation of a single odor. 

 Recent studies of insects and rodents have provided some of the most 
convincing  evidence  for  temporal  odor  codes  (Figure  8.20).  Recordings 
from the olfactory systems of mice and insects demonstrate that odor in-
formation  is  encoded  by  the  detailed  timing  of  spikes  within  cells  and 
between  groups  of  cells  as  well  as  by  the  number,  temporal  pattern, 
 rhythmicity, and cell-to-cell synchrony of spikes. 

Air

Odor

▲ FIGURE 8.20
Spiking patterns may include changes 
of number, rate, and timing. As a 
mouse inspired (black trace at top) first 
air and then air with odorants, the 
activity of two neurons in the olfactory 
bulb was recorded. Spikes from the two 
cells are represented by red and blue 
lines. Both cells tended to spike twice 
during inspiration of air alone. Odor 1 
did not change the numbers of spikes, 
but it did cause the red cell to spike 
much later in the respiratory cycle. Odor 
2 increased the numbers of spikes 
without changing their timing much. 
Odor 3 increased spike numbers and 
delayed their onset. (Source: Dhawale 
et al., 2010, p. 1411.)

Inspiration

Odor 1

Odor 2

Odor 3

Time

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   290
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   290

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER 8    THE CHEMICAL SENSES

291

 As  with  spatial  maps,  however,  demonstrating  that  information  is 
carried by spike timing is only a ﬁ rst step; proving that the brain actu-
ally  uses  that information is much more difﬁ cult. In a fascinating experi-
ment with honeybees, Gilles Laurent and his colleagues at the California 
Institute of Technology were able to disrupt the rhythmic synchrony of 
odor responses without otherwise affecting their spiking responses. This 
loss of synchronous spiking was associated with a loss of the bees’ ability 
to discriminate between similar odors, although not between broad cat-
egories of odors. The implication is that the bee analyzes an odor not only 
by keeping track of  which  olfactory neurons ﬁ re but also by  when  they 
ﬁ re. It will be very interesting to learn whether similar processes occur in 
a mammalian olfactory system. 

CONCCLUDIING REMARKS
CONCLUDING REMARKS 

 The chemical senses are a good place to begin learning about sensory sys-
tems because smell and taste are the most basic of sensations. Gustation 
and olfaction use a variety of transduction mechanisms to recognize the 
enormous  number  of  chemicals  we  encounter  in  the   environment.  Yet, 
the  molecular  mechanisms  of  transduction  are  very  similar  to  the  sig-
naling  systems  used  in  every  cell  of  the  body,  for  functions  as  diverse 
as  neurotransmission  and  fertilization.  We  will  see  that  the  transduc-
tion mechanisms in other sensory systems are also highly specialized and 
derive from common cellular processes. Remarkable parallels have been 
discovered, such as the molecular similarity between the sensory cells of 
smelling and seeing. 

 Common sensory principles also extend to the level of neural systems. 
Most sensory cells are broadly tuned for their stimuli. This means that 
the nervous system must use population codes to represent and analyze 
sensory  information,  resulting  in  our  remarkably  precise  and  detailed 
perceptions. Populations of neurons are often arranged in sensory maps 
within  the  brain.  And  the  timing  of  action  potentials  may  function  to 
represent  sensory  information  in  ways  that  are  not  yet  understood.  In 
the chapters that follow, we will see similar trends in the anatomy and 
 physiology of systems dealing with light, sound, and pressure. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
gustation (p. 266)
olfaction (p. 266)
chemoreceptors (p. 266)
Taste
papillae (p. 267)
taste buds (p. 268)
taste receptor cells (p. 268)

receptor potential (p. 270)
transduction (p. 271)
gustatory nucleus (p. 276)
ventral posterior medial (VPM) 

nucleus (p. 276)

primary gustatory cortex 

(p. 276)

population coding (p. 277)

Smell
pheromones (p. 278)
olfactory epithelium (p. 278)
olfactory bulb (p. 280)
glomeruli (p. 285)
olfactory cortex (p. 287)
sensory map (p. 288)
temporal coding (p. 290)

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   291
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   291

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

292

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Most tastes involve some combination of the ﬁ ve basic tastes. What other sensory factors can 

help deﬁ ne the speciﬁ c perceptions associated with a particular food?

2.  The transduction of saltiness is accomplished, in part, by a Na⫹-permeable channel. Why would 

a sugar-permeable membrane channel be a poor mechanism for the transduction of sweetness?

3.  Chemicals that have sweet, bitter, and umami tastes all activate precisely the same intracellular 
signaling molecules. Given this fact, can you explain how the nervous system can distinguish the 
tastes of sugars, alkaloids, and amino acids?

4.  Why would the size of an animal’s olfactory epithelium (and consequently the number of receptor 

cells) be related to its olfactory acuity?

5.  Receptor cells of the gustatory and olfactory systems undergo a constant cycle of growth, death, 
and  maturation.  Therefore,  the  connections  they  make  with  the  brain  must  be  continually 
 renewed as well. Can you propose a set of mechanisms that would allow the connections to be 
remade in a speciﬁ c way, again and again, over the course of an entire lifetime?

6.  If the olfactory system does use some kind of spatial mapping to encode speciﬁ c odors, how might 

the rest of the brain read the map?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Kinnamon SC. 2013. Neurosensory transmission 
without a synapse: new perspectives on taste 
signaling. BMC Biology 11:42.

Liberles SD. 2014. Mammalian pheromones. 
Annual Review of Physiology 76:151–175.

Murthy VN. 2011. Olfactory maps in the brain. 

Annual Review of Neuroscience 34:233–258.
Stettler DD, Axel R. 2009. Representations of 

odor in the piriform cortex. Neuron 63:
854–864.

Liman ER, Zhang YV, Montell C. 2014. 
Peripheral coding of taste. Neuron 81:
984–1000.

Zhang X, Firestein S. 2002. The olfactory recep-

tor gene superfamily of the mouse. Nature 
Neuroscience 5:124–133.

263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   292
263–292_Bear_08_revised_final.indd   292

12/20/14   4:38 AM
12/20/14   4:38 AM

CHAPTER NINE

The Eye

INTRODUCTION
PROPERTIES OF LIGHT

Light
Optics

THE STRUCTURE OF THE EYE

Gross Anatomy of the Eye
Ophthalmoscopic Appearance of the Eye

 BOX 9.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Demonstrating the Blind Regions of Your Eye

Cross-Sectional Anatomy of the Eye

 BOX 9.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Eye Disorders

IMAGE FORMATION BY THE EYE

Refraction by the Cornea
Accommodation by the Lens

 BOX 9.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Vision Correction

The Pupillary Light Reﬂ ex
The Visual Field
Visual Acuity

MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY OF THE RETINA

The Laminar Organization of the Retina
Photoreceptor Structure

 BOX 9.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Seeing Through the Photoreceptor Mosaic, 
by David Williams

Regional Differences in Retinal Structure and Their Visual Consequences

PHOTOTRANSDUCTION
Phototransduction in Rods
Phototransduction in Cones

Color Perception
 BOX 9.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Genetics of Color Vision

Dark and Light Adaptation

Calcium’s Role in Light Adaptation
Local Adaptation of Dark, Light, and Color
RETINAL PROCESSING AND OUTPUT

The Receptive Field
Bipolar Cell Receptive Fields
Ganglion Cell Receptive Fields

Structure-Function Relationships
Color-Opponent Ganglion Cells

Ganglion Cell Photoreceptors
Parallel Processing

CONCLUDING REMARKS

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   293
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   293

293
22929292299229222 333333333

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

294

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

Vision  is remarkable; it lets us detect things as tiny and close as a mos-
quito  on  the  tip  of  our  nose,  or  as  immense  and  far  away  as  a  galaxy 
hundreds of thousands of light-years away. Sensitivity to light enables 
animals, including humans, to detect prey, predators, and mates. Based 
on the light bounced into our eyes from objects around us, we somehow 
make sense of a complex world. While this process seems effortless, it is 
in reality extremely complicated. Indeed, it has proven quite difﬁ cult to 
make computer visual systems with even a small fraction of the capabili-
ties of the human visual system. 

 Light is electromagnetic energy that is emitted in the form of waves. 
We live in a turbulent sea of electromagnetic radiation. Like any ocean, 
this sea has large waves and small waves, short wavelets, and long  rollers. 
The waves crash into objects and are absorbed, scattered, reﬂ ected, and 
bent. Because of the nature of electromagnetic waves and their interac-
tions  with  the  environment,  the  visual  system  can  extract  information 
about the world. This is a big job, and it requires a lot of neural  machinery. 
However,  the  mastery  of  vision  over  the  course  of  vertebrate  evolution 
has had surprising rewards. It has provided new ways to communicate, 
given rise to brain mechanisms for predicting the trajectory of objects and 
events in time and space, allowed for new forms of mental imagery and 
abstraction, and led to the creation of a world of art. The signiﬁ cance of 
vision is perhaps best demonstrated by the fact that more than a third of 
the human cerebral cortex is involved with analyzing the visual world. 

 The mammalian visual system begins with the eye. At the back of the 
eye is the  retina , which contains photoreceptors specialized to convert 
light energy into neural activity. The rest of the eye acts like a camera 
and forms crisp, clear images of the world on the retina. Like a camera, 
the eye automatically adjusts to differences in illumination and focuses 
on objects of interest. The eye can also track moving objects (by eye move-
ment) and can keep its transparent surfaces clean (by tears and blinking). 
 While much of the eye functions like a camera, the retina does much 
more  than  passively  register  light  levels  across  space.  In  fact,  as  men-
tioned in Chapter 7, the retina is actually part of the brain. (Think about 
that the next time you look deeply into someone’s eyes.) In a sense, each 
eye has two overlapping retinas: one specialized for low light levels that 
we encounter from dusk to dawn, and another specialized for higher light 
levels and for the detection of color from sunrise to sunset. Regardless of 
the time of day, however, the output of the retina is not a faithful repro-
duction of the intensity of the light falling on it. Rather, the retina is spe-
cialized to detect  differences  in the intensity of light falling on different 
parts of it. Image processing is well under way in the retina before any 
visual information reaches the rest of the brain. 

 Axons of retinal neurons are bundled into optic nerves, which distribute 
visual information (in the form of action potentials) to several brain struc-
tures that perform different functions. Some targets of the optic nerves are 
involved  in  regulating  biological  rhythms,  which  are  synchronized  with 
the light–dark daily cycle; others are involved in the control of eye position 
and optics. However, the ﬁ rst synaptic relay in the pathway that serves 
visual perception occurs in a cell group of the dorsal thalamus called the 
lateral  geniculate  nucleus ,  or   LGN .  From  the  LGN,  visual  information 
 ascends to the cerebral cortex, where it is interpreted and remembered. 

 This chapter explores the eye and the retina. We’ll see how light  carries 
information to our visual system, how the eye forms images on the retina, 
and  how  the  retina  converts  light  energy  into  neural  signals  that  can 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   294
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   294

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

be used to extract information about luminance and color differences. In 
Chapter 10, we will pick up the visual pathway at the back of the eye and 
take it through the thalamus to the cerebral cortex. 

PROPERTIES OF LIGHT 
PROPPERTIES OF LIGHT 

 The visual system uses light to form images of the world around us. Let’s 
brieﬂ y review the physical properties of light and its interactions with the 
environment. 

 Light 
 Electromagnetic radiation is all around us. It comes from innumerable 
sources, including radio antennas, mobile phones, X-ray machines, and 
the  sun.  Light  is  the  electromagnetic  radiation  that  is  visible  to  our 
eyes.  Electromagnetic  radiation  can  be  described  as  a  wave  of  energy. 
Like any wave, electromagnetic radiation has a  wavelength , the distance 
 between successive peaks or troughs; a  frequency , the number of waves 
per  second; and an  amplitude , the difference between wave trough and 
peak (Figure 9.1). 

 The energy content of electromagnetic radiation is proportional to its 
frequency. Radiation emitted at a high frequency (short wavelengths) has 
the  highest  energy  content;  examples  are  gamma  radiation  emitted  by 
some  radioactive  materials  and  X-rays  used  for  medical  imaging,  with 
wavelengths  less  than  10 ⫺  9   m  ( ⬍ 1  nm).  Conversely,  radiation  emitted 
at lower frequencies (longer wavelengths) has less energy; examples are 
radar and radio waves, with wavelengths greater than 1 mm. Only a small 
part of the electromagnetic spectrum is detectable by our visual system; 
visible light consists of wavelengths of 400–700 nm (Figure 9.2). As ﬁ rst 
shown by Isaac Newton early in the eighteenth century, the mix of wave-
lengths  in  this  range  emitted  by  the  sun  appears  to  humans  as  white, 
whereas light of a single wavelength appears as one of the colors of the 
rainbow. It is interesting to note that a “hot” color like red or orange con-
sists of light with a longer wavelength, and hence has  less   energy, than a 
“cool” color like blue or violet. Clearly, colors are themselves  “colored” by 
the brain, based on our subjective experiences. 

 Optics 
 In a vacuum, a wave of electromagnetic radiation travels in a straight 
line and thus can be described as a  ray . Light rays in our environment 

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

295

▲ FIGURE 9.1
Characteristics of electromagnetic 
 radiation.

▲ FIGURE 9.2
The electromagnetic spectrum. 
Only electromagnetic radiation with 
wavelengths of 400–700 nm is visible 
to the human eye. Within this visible 
spectrum, different wavelengths 
 appear as different  colors.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   295
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   295

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

296

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

also travel in straight lines until they interact with the atoms and mol-
ecules of the atmosphere and objects on the ground. These interactions 
include reﬂ ection, absorption, and refraction (Figure 9.3). The study of 
light rays and their interactions is called  optics . 

Reﬂ ection  is the bouncing of light rays off a surface. The manner in which 
a ray of light is reﬂ ected depends on the angle at which it strikes the surface. 
A ray striking a mirror perpendicularly is reﬂ ected 180° back upon itself, 
a ray striking the mirror at a 45° angle is reﬂ ected 90°, and so on. Most of 
what we see is light that has been reﬂ ected off objects in our environment. 
  Absorption  is the transfer of light energy to a particle or surface. You 
can feel this energy transfer on your skin on a sunny day, as visible light 
is  absorbed  and  warms  you  up.  Surfaces  that  appear  black  absorb  the 
energy of all visible wavelengths. Some compounds absorb light energy 
only in a limited range of wavelengths and reﬂ ect the remaining wave-
lengths. This property is the basis for the colored pigments of paints. For 
example, a blue pigment absorbs long wavelengths but reﬂ ects a range 
of short wavelengths centered on 430 nm that are perceived as blue. As 
we will see in a moment, light-sensitive photoreceptor cells in the retina 
also contain pigments and use the energy absorbed from light to generate 
changes in membrane potential. 

 Images are formed in the eye by  refraction , the bending of light rays 
that can occur when they travel from one transparent medium to another. 
When you dangle your leg into a swimming pool, for example, the odd way 
the leg appears to bend at the surface is a result of refraction. Consider 
a ray of light passing from the air into a pool of water. If the ray strikes 
the water surface perpendicularly, it will pass through in a straight line. 
However, if light strikes the surface at an angle, it will bend toward a line 
that is perpendicular to the surface. This bending of light occurs because 
the speed of light differs in the two media; light passes through air more 
rapidly than through water. The greater the difference between the speed 
of light in the two media, the greater the angle of refraction. The trans-
parent media in the eye bend light rays to form images on the retina. 

▲ FIGURE 9.3
Interactions between light and the 
 environment. When light strikes an 
 object in our environment, the light may 
be reflected, absorbed, or some combi-
nation of both. Visual perception is 
based on light coming directly into the 
eye from a luminous object such as a 
neon sign or being reflected off objects. 
 Images are formed in the eye by refrac-
tion. In this example of light passing 
through air and then water, the light rays 
bend toward a line perpendicular to the 
air–water interface.

Pupil

Iris

Sclera

Optic
nerve

Conjunctiva

Cornea

Extraocular
muscles

▲ FIGURE 9.4
Gross anatomy of the human eye.

 THE STRUCTURE OF THE EYE 
THE SSTRUCCTURE OF THE EYEE 

 The eye is an organ specialized for the detection, localization, and analy-
sis  of  light.  Here  we  introduce  the  structure  of  this  remarkable  organ 
in  terms  of  its  gross  anatomy,  ophthalmoscopic  appearance,  and  cross-
sectional anatomy. 

 Gross Anatomy of the Eye 
 When you look into someone’s eyes, what are you really looking at? The 
main structures are shown in Figure 9.4. The  pupil  is the opening that 
allows light to enter the eye and reach the retina; it appears dark because 
of the light-absorbing pigments in the retina. The pupil is surrounded by 
the  iris , whose pigmentation provides what we call the eye’s color. The 
iris contains two muscles that can vary the size of the pupil; one makes 
it  smaller  when  it  contracts,  the  other  makes  it  larger.  The  pupil  and 
iris  are  covered  by  the  glassy  transparent  external  surface  of  the  eye, 
the  cornea . The cornea is continuous with the  sclera , the “white of the 
eye,” which forms the tough wall of the eyeball. The eyeball sits in a bony 
eye socket in the skull, also called the eye’s orbit. Inserted into the sclera 
are three pairs of  extraocular muscles , which move the eyeball in the 
orbit. These muscles are normally not visible because they lie behind the 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   296
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   296

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

297

  conjunctiva , a membrane that folds back from the inside of the eyelids 
and  attaches  to  the  sclera.  The   optic  nerve ,  carrying  axons  from  the 
retina, exits the back of the eye, passes through the orbit, and reaches the 
base of the brain near the pituitary gland. 
 Ophthalmoscopic Appearance of the Eye 
 Another  view  of  the  eye  is  afforded  by  the  ophthalmoscope,  a  device 
that  enables  one  to  peer  into  the  eye  through  the  pupil  to  the  retina 
(Figure 9.5). The most obvious feature of the retina viewed through an 
ophthalmoscope is the blood vessels on its surface. These retinal vessels 
originate from a pale circular region called the  optic disk , which is also 
where the optic nerve ﬁ bers exit the retina. 

 It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  sensation  of  light  cannot  occur  at 
the optic disk because there are no photoreceptors here, nor can it occur 
where the large blood vessels exist because the vessels cast shadows on 
the retina. And yet, our perception of the visual world appears seamless. 
We are not aware of any holes in our ﬁ eld of vision because the brain ﬁ lls 
in our perception of these areas. However, there are tricks by which we 
can demonstrate the “blind” retinal regions (Box 9.1). 

 At the middle of each retina is a darker-colored region with a yellow-
ish hue. This is the  macula  (from the Latin word for “spot”), the part of 
the retina for central vision (as opposed to peripheral vision). Besides its 
color, the macula is distinguished by the relative absence of large blood 
vessels. Notice in Figure 9.5 that the vessels arc from the optic disk to the 
macula; this is also the trajectory of the optic nerve ﬁ bers from the macula 
en route to the optic disk. The relative absence of large blood vessels in 
this region of the retina is one of the specializations that improves the 
quality of central vision. Another specialization of the central retina can 
sometimes be discerned with the ophthalmoscope: the  fovea , a dark spot 
about 2 mm in diameter. The term is from the Latin for “pit,” and the ret-
ina is thinner in the fovea than elsewhere. Because it marks the center of 
the retina, the fovea is a convenient anatomical reference point. Thus, the 
part of the retina that lies closer to the nose than the fovea is referred to 
as nasal, the part that lies near the temple is called temporal, the part of 
the retina above the fovea is called superior, and the part below is inferior. 

▲ FIGURE 9.5
The retina, viewed through an ophthalmoscope. The dotted 
line through the fovea represents the demarcation between the 
side of the eye nearer the nose (nasal retina) and the side of the 
eye nearer the ear (temporal retina). The imaginary line crosses 
through the macula, which is in the center of the retina (it appears 
slightly to one side here because the photograph was taken to 
 include the optic disk off to the nasal side of the retina).

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   297
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   297

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

298

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 9.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Demonstrating the Blind Regions of Your Eye

A look through an ophthalmoscope reveals that there is a siz-

able hole in the retina. The region where the optic nerve axons 
exit the eye and the retinal blood vessels enter the eye, the optic 
disk,  is  completely  devoid  of  photoreceptors.  Moreover,  the 
blood vessels coursing across the retina are opaque and block 
light from falling on photoreceptors beneath them. Although we 
normally don’t notice them, these blind regions can be demon-
strated. Look at Figure A. Hold the book about 1.5 feet away, 
close your right eye, and ﬁ xate on the cross with your left eye. 
Move the book (or your head) around slightly, and eventually 
you will ﬁ nd a position where the black circle disappears. At this 
position, the spot is imaged on the optic disk of the left eye. This 
region of visual space is called the blind spot for the left eye.

The blood vessels are a little tricky to demonstrate, but give 
this a try. Get a standard household ﬂ ashlight. In a dark or dimly 
lit room, close your left eye (it helps to hold the eye closed with 
your ﬁ nger so you can open your right eye fully). Look straight 

ahead with the open right eye, and shine the ﬂ ashlight at an 
angle into the outer side of the right eye. Jiggle the light back 
and forth, up and down. If you’re lucky, you’ll see an image of 
your own retinal blood vessels. This is possible because the 
illumination of the eye at this oblique angle causes the retinal 
blood vessels to cast long shadows on the adjacent regions of 
retina. For the shadows to be visible, they must be swept back 
and forth on the retina, hence the jiggling of the light.

If we have all these light-insensitive regions in the retina, why 
does  the  visual  world  appear  uninterrupted  and   seamless? 
The answer is that mechanisms in the visual cortex appear to 
“ﬁ ll in” the missing regions. Perceptual ﬁ lling-in can be dem-
onstrated with the stimulus shown in Figure B. Fixate on the 
cross with your left eye and move the book closer and farther 
from your eye. You’ll ﬁ nd a distance at which you will see a 
continuous uninterrupted line. At this point, the space in the 
line is imaged on the blind spot, and your brain ﬁ lls in the gap.

Figure A

Figure B

 Cross-Sectional Anatomy of the Eye 
 A  cross-sectional  view  of  the  eye  shows  the  path  taken  by  light  as  it 
passes  through  the  cornea  toward  the  retina  (Figure  9.6).  The  cornea 
lacks blood vessels and is nourished by the ﬂ uid behind it, the   aqueous 
humor . This view reveals the transparent  lens  located behind the iris. 
The lens is  suspended by ligaments (called zonule ﬁ bers) attached to the 
ciliary muscle , which forms a ring inside the eye. If you imagine using 
toothpicks to center a strawberry in the hole of a bagel, you have the right 
mental picture: The strawberry is the lens, the toothpicks represent the 
 zonule  ﬁ bers,  and  the  bagel  is  the  ciliary  muscle  that  attaches  to  the 
sclera. As we shall see, changes in the shape of the lens enable our eyes 
to adjust their focus to different viewing distances. 

 The  lens  also  divides  the  interior  of  the  eye  into  two  compartments 
 containing  slightly  different  ﬂ uids.  The  aqueous  humor  is  the  watery 
ﬂ uid that lies between the cornea and the lens. The more viscous, jelly-
like  vitreous humor  lies between the lens and the retina; it serves to 
keep the eyeball spherical. 

 Although  the  eyes  do  a  remarkable  job  of  delivering  precise  visual 
 information to the rest of the brain, a variety of disorders can compromise 
this ability (Box 9.2). 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   298
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   298

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

299

Zonule
fibers

Iris

Lens

Light

Cornea

Aqueous
humor

Ciliary
muscle

Retina

Fovea

Optic nerve

Vitreous
humor

Sclera

▲ FIGURE 9.6
The eye in cross section. Structures at the front of the eye regulate the amount 
of light allowed in and refract light onto the retina, which wraps around the inside 
of the eye.

IMAGE FORMATION BY THE EYE 
IMAGGE FORRMATION BY THE EEYE 

 The eye collects the light rays emitted by or reﬂ ected off objects in the envi-
ronment, and focuses them onto the retina to form images. Bringing objects 
into focus involves the combined refractive powers of the cornea and lens. 
You may be surprised to learn that the cornea, rather than the lens, is the 
site of most of the refractive power of the eyes. This occurs because light 
reaches the eye from air and the cornea is mostly made of water. A good 
deal of refraction occurs because light travels signiﬁ cantly slower in water 
than  air.  In  comparison  there  is  less  refraction  by  the  lens  because  the 
aqueous humor, lens, and vitreous humor are all composed largely of water. 
 Refraction by the Cornea 
 Consider the light emitted from a distant source, perhaps a bright star at 
night. Light rays are emitted in all directions from the star, but because 
of the great distance, the rays that reach our eye on earth are virtually 
parallel. These parallel rays hit our cornea from one side to the other. 
Nonetheless,  we  see  the  star  as  a  point  of  light,  rather  than  a  bright 
splotch ﬁ lling our ﬁ eld of view, because the eye uses refraction to focus all 
the star’s light reaching the cornea into a small point on the retina. 

 Recall that as light passes into a medium where its speed is slowed, it will 
bend toward a line that is perpendicular to the border, or interface, between 
the media (see Figure 9.3). This is precisely the situation as light strikes 
the cornea and passes from the air into the aqueous humor. As shown in 
Figure 9.7, light that enters the eye perpendicular to the corneal surface 
passes straight to the retina, but light rays that strike the curved surface 
of the cornea at angles other than perpendicular are bent such that they 
converge on the back of the retina. The distance from the refractive surface 
to the point where parallel light rays converge is called the  focal  distance . 
Focal  distance  depends  on  the  curvature  of  the  cornea—the  tighter  the 
curve, the shorter the focal distance. The equation in Figure 9.7 shows that 
the reciprocal of the focal distance in meters is a unit of measurement called 
the  diopter . The cornea has a refractive power of about 42 diopters, which 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   299
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   299

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

300

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 9.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Eye Disorders

Once  you  know  the  basic  structure  of  the  eye,  you  can 

 understand  how  a  partial  or  complete  loss  of  vision  results 
from  abnormalities  in  various  components.  For  example,  if 
there is an imbalance in the extraocular muscles of the two 
eyes, the eyes will point in different directions. Such a mis-
alignment  or  lack  of  coordination  between  the  two  eyes  is 
called strabismus, and there are two varieties. In esotropia, 
the directions of gaze of the two eyes cross, and the person 
is said to be cross-eyed. In exotropia, the directions of gaze 
diverge,  and  the  person  is  said  to  be  wall-eyed  (Figure  A). 
In most cases, both types of strabismus are congenital; it can 
and  should  be  corrected  during  early  childhood.  Treatment 
usually involves the use of prismatic glasses or surgery to the 
extraocular  muscles  to  realign  the  eyes.  Without  treatment, 
conﬂ icting  images  are  sent  to  the  brain  from  the  two  eyes, 
 degrading depth perception and, more importantly, causing 
the person to suppress input from one eye. The dominant eye 
will be normal but the suppressed eye will become amblyopic, 
meaning that it has poor visual acuity. If medical intervention 
is delayed until adulthood, the condition cannot be corrected.
A common eye disorder among older adults is cataract, 
a clouding of the lens (Figure B). Many people over 65 years 
of age have some degree of cataract; if it signiﬁ cantly impairs 
vision, surgery is usually required. In a cataract operation, the 
lens  is  removed  and  replaced  with  an  artiﬁ cial  plastic  lens. 
Although the artiﬁ cial lens cannot adjust its focus as the nor-
mal lens does, it provides a clear image, and glasses can be 
used for near and far vision (see Box 9.3).

Glaucoma,  a  progressive  loss  of  vision  associated  with 
 elevated intraocular pressure, is a leading cause of blindness. 
Pressure in the aqueous humor plays a crucial role in main-
taining the shape of the eye. As this pressure increases, the 
entire eye is stressed, ultimately damaging the relatively weak 
point where the optic nerve leaves the eye. The optic nerve 
axons are compressed, and vision is gradually lost from the 

periphery inward. Unfortunately, by the time a person  notices 
a loss of more central vision, the damage is advanced and 
a signiﬁ cant portion of the eye is permanently blind. For this 
reason,  early  detection  and  treatment  with  medication  or 
 surgery to reduce intraocular pressure are essential.

The light-sensitive retina at the back of the eye is the site 
of  numerous  disorders  that  pose  a  signiﬁ cant  risk  of  blind-
ness. You may have heard of a professional boxer having a 
detached retina. As the name implies, the retina pulls away 
from the underlying wall of the eye from a blow to the head 
or by shrinkage of the vitreous humor. Once the retina has 
started to detach, ﬂ uid from the vitreous space ﬂ ows through 
small  tears  in  the  retina  resulting  from  the  trauma,  thereby 
causing more of the retina to separate. Symptoms of retinal 
detachment  include  abnormal  perception  of  shadows  and 
ﬂ ashes of light. Treatment often involves laser surgery to scar 
the edge of the retinal tear, thereby reattaching the retina to 
the back of the eye.

Retinitis  pigmentosa  is  characterized  by  a  progressive 
 degeneration of the photoreceptors. The ﬁ rst sign is usually a 
loss of peripheral vision and night vision. Subsequently, total 
blindness may result. The cause of this disease is unknown. 
Some forms clearly have a strong genetic component, and 
more than 100 genes have been identiﬁ ed that can contain 
mutations leading to retinitis pigmentosa. There is currently 
no cure, but taking vitamin A may slow its progression.

In  contrast  to  the  tunnel  vision  typically  experienced  by 
patients  with  retinitis  pigmentosa,  people  with  macular 
 degeneration lose only central vision. The condition is quite 
common,  affecting  more  than  25%  of  all  Americans  over 
65 years of age. While peripheral vision usually remains nor-
mal, the ability to read, watch television, and recognize faces 
is lost as central photoreceptors gradually deteriorate. Laser 
surgery can sometimes minimize further vision loss, but the 
disease currently has no known cure.

Figure A 
Exotropia. (Source: Newell, 1965, 
p. 330.)

Figure B 
Cataract. (Source: Schwab, 
1987, p. 22.)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   300
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   300

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

301

▲ FIGURE 9.7
Refraction by the cornea. The cornea 
must have sufficient refractive power, 
measured in diopters, to focus light on 
the retina at the back of the eye.

means that parallel light rays striking the corneal surface will be focused 
0.024 m (2.4 cm) behind it, about the distance from cornea to retina. To get 
a sense of the large amount of refraction produced by the cornea, note that 
many prescription eyeglasses have a power of only a few diopters. 

 Remember that refractive power depends on the slowing of light at the 
air–cornea interface. If we replace air with a medium that passes light at 
about the same speed as the internal structures of the eye, the refractive 
power of the cornea would be eliminated. This is why things look blurry 
when you open your eyes underwater; the water–cornea interface has very 
little focusing power. Wearing swimmer’s goggles or a scuba mask restores 
the air–cornea interface and, consequently, the refractive power of the eye. 

 Accommodation by the Lens 
 Although the cornea performs most of the eye’s refraction, the lens also 
contributes  another  dozen  or  so  diopters  to  the  formation  of  a  sharp 
image of a distant point. However, the lens is involved more importantly 
in forming crisp images of objects located closer than about 9 m from the 
eye. With near objects, the light rays originating at a point are no longer 
parallel. Rather, these rays diverge from a light source or a point on an 
object, and greater refractive power is required to bring them into focus 
on the retina. This additional focusing power is provided by changing the 
shape of the lens, a process known as  accommodation  (Figure 9.8). 

Far point

(a)

Flat lens

Near point

(b)

Fat lens

▲ FIGURE 9.8
Accommodation by the 
lens. (a) To focus the eye on 
a distant point, relatively little 
refraction is required. The cil-
iary muscle  relaxes, stretch-
ing the zonule fibers and 
flattening the lens. (b) Near 
objects require greater re-
fraction provided by a more 
spherical lens. This is 
achieved by contracting the 
ciliary muscle so there is less 
tension in the zonule fibers.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   301
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   301

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

302

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 9.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Vision Correction

When the ciliary muscles are relaxed and the lens is ﬂ at, 

the  eye  is  said  to  be  emmetropic  if  parallel  light  rays  from 
a  distant  point  source  are  focused  sharply  on  the  back  of 
the retina. (The word is from the Greek emmetros, meaning 
“in proper measure,” and ope, “sight.”) Stated another way, 
the emmetropic eye focuses parallel light rays on the retina 
without the need for accommodation (Figure A), and accom-
modation is sufﬁ cient to focus the images of objects over a 
wide range of distances.

Now consider what happens when the eyeball is too short 
from  front  to  back.  Without  accommodation,  parallel  light 
rays are focused at a point behind the eye. This condition is 
known as hyperopia, or farsightedness. The eye has enough 
accommodation  to  achieve  good  focus  for  distant  objects, 
but even with the maximum amount of accommodation, near 
objects are focused at a point behind the retina (Figure B). 
Farsightedness can be corrected by placing a convex glass 
or plastic lens in front of the eye (Figure C). The curved front 
edge  of  the  lens,  like  the  cornea,  bends  light  toward  the 
 center of the retina. Also, as the light passes from glass into 
air as it exits the lens, the back of the lens also increases the 
refraction (light going from glass to air speeds up and is bent 
away from the perpendicular).

If the eyeball is too long rather than too short, parallel rays 
will converge before the retina, cross, and again be  imaged 
on  the  retina  as  a  blurry  circle.  This  condition  is  known  as 
 myopia,  or  nearsightedness.  There  is  more  than  enough 
refraction  to  image  close  objects,  but  even  with  the  least 
amount  of  accommodation,  distant  objects  are  focused  in 
front of the retina (Figure D). For the nearsighted eye to see 
distant objects clearly, artiﬁ cial concave lenses must be used 
to move the image back onto the retina (Figure E).

Some eyes have irregularities such that the curvature and 
refraction  in  the  horizontal  and  vertical  planes  is  different. 

This condition is called astigmatism, and it can be corrected 
with an artiﬁ cial lens that is curved more along one axis than 
others.

Even if you are fortunate enough to have perfectly shaped 
eyeballs and a symmetrical refractive system, you probably will 
not escape presbyopia (from the Greek meaning “old eye”). 
This condition is a hardening of the lens that  accompanies 
the aging process and is thought to be explained by the fact 
that while new lens cells are generated throughout life, none 
are lost. The hardened lens is less elastic, leaving it unable 
to change shape and accommodate sufﬁ ciently to focus on 
both  near  and  far  objects.  The  correction  for  presbyopia, 
ﬁ rst introduced by Benjamin Franklin, is a bifocal lens. These 
lenses are concave on top to assist far vision and convex on 
the bottom to assist near vision.

In hyperopia and myopia, the amount of refraction provided 
by the cornea is either too little or too great for the length of the 
eyeball. But modern techniques can now change the amount 
of refraction the cornea provides. In radial keratotomy, a pro-
cedure to correct myopia, tiny incisions through the peripheral 
portion of the cornea relax and ﬂ atten the central cornea, thus 
reducing the amount of refraction and minimizing the  myopia. 
The most recent techniques use lasers to reshape the cor-
nea. In photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), a laser is used to 
reshape  the  outer  surface  of  the  cornea  by  vaporizing  thin 
layers. Laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) has become very 
common; you’ve probably seen clinics offering this procedure 
in shopping areas or malls. In LASIK, a microkeratome or laser 
is used to make a thin ﬂ ap in the outer cornea. With the cor-
nea ﬂ ap temporarily lifted, the laser can reshape the cornea 
from the inside (Figure F). Nonsurgical methods are also being 
used to reshape the cornea. A person can be ﬁ tted with spe-
cial retainer contact lenses or plastic corneal rings that alter 
the shape of the cornea and correct refractive errors.

 Recall  that  the  ciliary  muscle  forms  a  ring  around  the  lens.  During 
accommodation, the ciliary muscle contracts and swells in size, thereby 
making the area inside the ring smaller (i.e., a smaller hole inside the 
bagel in our analogy) and decreasing the tension in the suspensory liga-
ments. Consequently, the lens becomes rounder and thicker because of its 
natural elasticity. This rounding increases the curvature of the lens sur-
faces, thereby increasing their refractive power. Conversely, relaxation of 
the ciliary muscle increases the tension in the suspensory ligaments, and 
the lens is stretched into a ﬂ atter shape. 

 The ability to accommodate changes with age. An infant’s eyes can focus 
on objects just beyond his or her nose, whereas many middle-aged adults 
cannot  clearly  see  objects  closer  than  about  arm’s  length.  Fortunately, 
artiﬁ cial  lenses  can  compensate  for  this  and  other  defects  of  the  eye’s 
optics (Box 9.3). 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   302
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   302

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

303

Emmetropia 

Myopia 

Figure A  

Figure D  

Hyperopia 

Myopia corrected

Figure B  

Figure E  

Corneal flap

Hyperopia corrected

Lasik

Figure C  

Figure F 

 The Pupillary Light Reﬂ ex 
 In addition to the cornea and the lens, the pupil contributes to the opti-
cal functioning of the eye by continuously adjusting for different ambi-
ent light levels. To check this for yourself, stand in front of a bathroom 
mirror with the lights out for a few seconds, and then watch your pupils 
shrink when you turn the lights on. This  pupillary light reﬂ ex  involves 
 connections between the retina and neurons in the brain stem that con-
trol the muscles that constrict the pupils. An interesting property of this 
reﬂ ex  is  that  it  is   consensual ;  shining  a  light  into  only  one  eye  causes 
the  constriction  of  the  pupils  of  both  eyes.  It  is  unusual,  indeed,  when 
the  pupils are not the same size; the lack of a consensual pupillary light 
reﬂ ex is often taken as a sign of a serious neurological disorder involving 
the brain stem. 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   303
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   303

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

304

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 A beneﬁ cial effect of the pupil constriction that results from an increase 
in light level is an increase in the depth of focus (the range of distances 
from the eye that appear in focus), just like decreasing the aperture size 
(increasing the f-stop) of a camera lens. To understand why this is true, 
consider two points in space, one close and the other far away. When the 
eye accommodates to the closer point, the image of the farther point on 
the retina no longer forms a point but rather a blurred circle. Decreasing 
the  aperture—constricting  the  pupil—reduces  the  size  of  this  blurred 
circle so that its image more closely approximates a point. In this way, 
distant objects appear to be less out of focus. 

 The Visual Field 
 The  structure  of  the  eyes,  and  where  they  are  positioned  in  the  head, 
 limits how much of the world we can see at any one time. Let’s investigate 
the extent of the space seen by one eye. Holding a pencil vertically in your 
right hand, close your left eye and look at a point straight ahead. Keeping 
your eye ﬁ xated on this point, slowly move the pencil to the right  (toward 
your right ear) across your ﬁ eld of view until the pencil disappears. Repeat 
this exercise, moving the pencil to the left where it will disappear behind 
your nose, and then up and down. The points where you can no longer 
see the pencil mark the limits of the  visual ﬁ eld  for your right eye. Now 
look at the middle of the pencil as you hold it horizontally in front of you. 
Figure 9.9 shows how the light reﬂ ected off this pencil falls on your retina. 
Notice that the image is inverted; the left visual ﬁ eld is imaged on the 
right side of the retina, and the right visual ﬁ eld is imaged on the left side 
of the retina. Similarly, the upper visual ﬁ eld is imaged on the bottom of 
the retina and the lower visual ﬁ eld is imaged on the upper retina. 

 Visual Acuity 
 The  ability  of  the  eye  to  distinguish  two  points  near  each  other  is  called 
visual acuity . Acuity depends on several factors but especially on the spac-
ing of photoreceptors in the retina and the precision of the eye’s refraction. 

 Distance  across  the  retina  can  be  described  in  terms  of  degrees  of 
visual  angle .  A  right  angle  subtends  (spans)  90°,  and  the  moon,  for 
 example, subtends an angle of about 0.5° (Figure 9.10). At arm’s length, 
your thumb is about 1.5° across and your ﬁ st about 10°. We can speak of 
the eye’s ability to resolve points that are separated by a certain number 
of degrees of visual angle. The Snellen eye chart, which we have all read 
at the doctor’s ofﬁ ce, tests our ability to discriminate letters and numbers 
at a viewing distance of 20 feet. Your vision is 20/20 when you can recog-
nize a letter that subtends an angle of 0.083° (equivalent to 5 minutes of 
arc, where 1 minute is 1/60 of a degree). 

MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY OF THE RETINA 
MICRROSCOOPIC ANATOMY OFF THE RETINA 

 Now that we have an image formed on the retina, we can get to the neu-
roscience  of  vision:  the  conversion  of  light  energy  into  neural  activity. 
To begin our discussion of image processing in the retina, we must intro-
duce the cellular architecture of this bit of brain. 

 The  basic  system  of  retinal  information  processing  is  shown  in 
Figure 9.11. The most direct pathway for visual information to exit the eye 
is from  photoreceptors  to  bipolar cells  to  ganglion cells . The photore-
ceptors respond to light, and they inﬂ uence the membrane potential of the 
bipolar cells connected to them. The ganglion cells ﬁ re action potentials in 
response to light, and these impulses propagate along the optic nerve to 

150°

Right eye

▲ FIGURE 9.9
The visual field for one eye. The visual 
field is the total amount of space that 
can be viewed by the retina when the 
eye is fixated straight ahead. Notice 
how the image of an object in the visual 
field (pencil) is left–right reversed on the 
retina. The visual field extends nearly 
100° to the temporal side but only about 
60° to the nasal side of the retina, where 
vision is blocked by the nose.

0.5º of
visual angle

▲ FIGURE 9.10
Visual angle. Distances across the 
 retina can be expressed as degrees of 
visual angle.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   304
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   304

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

305

the rest of the brain. Besides the cells in this direct path from photorecep-
tor to brain, retinal processing is inﬂ uenced by two additional cell types. 
 Horizontal cells  receive input from the photoreceptors and project neu-
rites laterally to inﬂ uence surrounding bipolar cells and photoreceptors. 
A wide variety of types of  amacrine cells  generally receive input from 
bipolar cells and project laterally to inﬂ uence surrounding ganglion cells, 
bipolar cells, and other amacrine cells. 

 There are three important points to remember here: 

▲ FIGURE 9.11
The basic system of retinal information 
processing. Information about light flows 
from the photoreceptors to bipolar cells 
to ganglion cells, which project axons out 
of the eye in the optic nerve. Horizontal 
cells and amacrine cells modify the 
 responses of bipolar cells and ganglion 
cells via lateral connections.

 1.  With  one  exception,  the  only  light-sensitive  cells  in  the  retina  are  the 
rod and cone photoreceptors.  All other cells are inﬂ uenced by light only 
via direct and indirect synaptic interactions with the photoreceptors. 
(We will see in a moment that recently discovered types of ganglion 
cells are also light sensitive, but these uncommon cells do not appear 
to play a major role in visual perception.) 

 2.  The ganglion cells are the only source of output from the retina.  No other 

retinal cell type projects an axon through the optic nerve. 

 3.  Ganglion cells are the only retinal neurons that ﬁ re action potentials, 
and this is essential for transmitting information outside the eye.  All 
other  retinal  cells  depolarize  or  hyperpolarize,  with  a  rate  of  neu-
rotransmitter release that is proportional to the membrane potential, 
but they do not ﬁ re action potentials. 

 Now let’s take a look at how the different cell types are arranged in 

the retina. 

 The Laminar Organization of the Retina 
 Figure 9.12 shows that the retina has a  laminar organization : Cells are 
organized in layers. Notice that the layers are seemingly inside-out; light 
must pass from the vitreous humor through the ganglion cells and bipolar 
cells  before  it reaches the photoreceptors. Because the retinal cells above 
the photoreceptors are relatively transparent, image distortion is mini-
mal  as  light  passes  through  them.  One  reason  the  inside-out  arrange-
ment is advantageous is that the  pigmented epithelium  that lies below 
the photoreceptors plays a critical role in the maintenance of the photore-
ceptors and photopigments. The pigmented epithelium also absorbs any 
light that passes entirely through the retina, thus minimizing the scat-
tering of light within the eye that would blur the image. Many nocturnal 
animals, such as cats and raccoons, have a reﬂ ective layer beneath the 
photoreceptors, called the tapetum lucidum, which bounces light back at 
the  photoreceptors  if  it  passes  through  the  retina.  The  animal  is  thus 
more  sensitive  to  low  light  levels  at  the  expense  of  reduced  acuity.  An 
 interesting  side  effect  of  the  reﬂ ective  tapetum  can  be  seen  when  you 
shine a light at or take a ﬂ ash photograph of nocturnal animals: There is 
striking “eyeshine” in which the pupils seem to glow (Figure 9.13). 

 The cell layers of the retina are named in reference to the middle of the 
eyeball. Don’t get confused by thinking about the head instead of the eye: The 
photoreceptors are the outermost part of the retina even though they are the 
farthest from the front of the eye and the deepest inside the head. The inner-
most retinal layer is the  ganglion cell layer , which contains the cell bodies 
of the ganglion cells. Moving outward, there are two other layers that contain 
the cell bodies of neurons: the  inner nuclear layer , which contains the cell 
bodies of the bipolar cells, horizontal cells, and amacrine cells, and the  outer 
nuclear layer , which contains the cell bodies of the photoreceptors. 

 Between the ganglion cell layer and the inner nuclear layer is the  inner 
plexiform  layer   (“plexiform”  means  a  network  of  connections),  which 
contains the synaptic contacts between bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   305
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   305

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

306

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.12
The laminar organization of the retina. 
Notice how light must pass through several 
cell layers before it reaches the photoreceptors 
at the back of the retina.

ganglion cells. Between the outer and inner nuclear layers is the  outer 
plexiform layer , where the photoreceptors make synaptic contact with 
the  bipolar  and  horizontal  cells.  Finally,  the   layer  of  photoreceptor 
outer segments  contains the light-sensitive elements of the retina. The 
outer segments are embedded in the pigmented epithelium . 

 Photoreceptor Structure 
 The  conversion  of  electromagnetic  radiation  into  neural  signals  occurs 
in the photoreceptors at the back of the retina. Every photoreceptor has 
four  regions:  an  outer  segment,  an  inner  segment,  a  cell  body,  and  a 
synaptic terminal. The outer segment contains a stack of membranous 
disks. Light-sensitive  photopigments  in the disk membranes absorb light, 
thereby  triggering  changes  in  the  photoreceptor  membrane  potential 
 (discussed later). Figure 9.14 shows the two types of photoreceptors in the 
retina, easily distinguished by the appearance of their outer segments. 
 Rod  photoreceptors   have  a  long,  cylindrical  outer  segment,  contain-
ing many disks.  Cone photoreceptors  have a shorter, tapering outer 
segment with fewer membranous disks. The greater number of disks and 
higher photopigment concentration in rods makes them over 1000 times 
more sensitive to light than cones. It is estimated that there are about 
5 million cones and 92 million rods in each human retina. 

▲ FIGURE 9.13
Eyeshine results from the reflective 
tapetum in cats.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   306
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   306

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

307

Synaptic
terminals

Cell
bodies

Inner
segments

Cone
photo-
receptor

Outer
segments 

Rod
photoreceptor

(a)

Membranous disks
containing photopigment

Cone

Rods

(b)

▲ FIGURE 9.14
Rods and cones. (a) Rods contain more 
disks and make vision possible in low 
light; cones enable us to see in daylight. 
(b) Scanning electron micrograph of rods 
and cones. (Source: Courtesy of J. Franks 
and W. Halfter.)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   307
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   307

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

308

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 9.4

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Seeing Through the Photoreceptor Mosaic
by David Williams

When I started graduate school in 1975, we knew almost 

nothing about the topography of the three classes of cones that 
form  the  basis  of  trichromatic  color  vision  in  the  human  eye. 
Although Thomas Young had deduced 175 years earlier that 
color vision depended on three fundamental channels, we did 
not know the relative numbers of the three kinds of cones or 
how they were arranged in the retina. With my graduate advisor, 
Don MacLeod at the University of California, San Diego, I used 
psychophysical methods to map retinal sensitivity to violet light. 
We found that the S cones, which are stimulated by this light, 
are sparsely sprinkled across a mosaic of L and M cones. We 
also discovered that a person can reliably detect a ﬂ ash of light 
that stimulates just one of the 5 million or so cones in the retina.
Later,  I  kept  returning  to  the  topography  of  the  trichro-
matic mosaic. After several failed attempts over many years, 
I hit upon a solution from a completely unexpected direction. 
I’d had a long-standing interest in the limits of visual acuity. 
While  exploring  various  technologies  to  prevent  the  normal 
optical  blurring  of  the  retinal  image,  I  came  upon  adaptive 
optics, in which astronomers use a deformable mirror to cor-
rect for the blur caused by the turbulent atmosphere when 
imaging stars with telescopes on earth.

A  major  obstacle  to  using  adaptive  optics  in  vision  sci-
ence was that such telescope mirrors cost about $1 million. 
Fortunately, we found an engineer who made us an affordable 
deformable mirror. We were also fortunate that the military’s 
work with adaptive optics had been recently declassiﬁ ed, so 
my post-doc, Junzhong Liang, and I were allowed to visit the 
Starﬁ re Optical Range (SOR), a $16 million satellite-tracking 
telescope equipped with adaptive optics. I was discouraged 
by  the  legions  of  engineers  and  expensive  optical  system 
needed  to  run  the  facility—but  then  something  remarkable 
happened.  Bob  Fugate,  director  of  the  SOR,  was  trying  to 
measure  atmospheric  aberrations  by  reﬂ ecting  light  from  a 
high-power  laser  off  a  mirror  left  on  the  moon’s  surface  in 
the Apollo program. I heard Bob say, “Move that beam over 

to the right, you missed the whole damn moon!” Suddenly 
I realized that they were learning from fumbling just the same 
as in my lab—so there was hope after all.

Liang and I hurried back to the University of Rochester and 
with another post-doc, Don Miller, built the ﬁ rst adaptive optic 
system  that  could  correct  all  of  the  eye’s  monochromatic 
 aberrations. This started a minor revolution in optometry and 
ophthalmology because now many more of the eye’s optical 
defects could be corrected than had been possible before. 
A person’s visual acuity using an adaptive optics system can 
be better than with the most carefully prescribed spectacles. 
This led to a better way to correct vision with laser refractive 
surgery as well as improved designs for contact lenses and 
intraocular lenses.

We  also  equipped  a  camera  with  adaptive  optics  to  take 
the sharpest pictures ever of the living human retina, so sharp 
that the individual cones in the photoreceptor mosaic can be 
seen. Could we also use adaptive optics to identify which of the 
three photopigments resides in each cone imaged in the living 
eye, solving the problem I’d started with in graduate school? 
Using adaptive optics and another technique called retinal den-
sitometry, two post-docs in my lab, Austin Roorda and later 
Heidi Hofer, ﬁ nally answered the question deﬁ nitively. It turns 
out  the  three  classes  of  cones  are  remarkably  disorganized 
(Figure  A),  unlike  the  highly  regular  mosaics  of  many  insect 

Figure A 
The arrangement of the three cone 
classes in the human eye. (Source: 
Roorda and Williams, 1999.)

 The large differences in the structure and sensitivity of rods and cones 
led investigators to say humans have a  duplex retina:  essentially two com-
plementary systems in one eye. Some animals have only rods or only cones 
and thus do not have a duplex retina. The structural differences between 
rods  and  cones  correlate  with  important  functional  differences.  For  ex-
ample, in nighttime lighting, or  scotopic  conditions, only rods contribute 
to vision. Conversely, in daytime lighting, or  photopic  conditions, cones do 
the bulk of the work. At intermediate light levels (indoor lighting or out-
door trafﬁ c lighting at night), or  mesopic  conditions, both rods and cones 
are responsible for vision. 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   308
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   308

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

309

eyes. Moreover, the relative numbers of the M and L cones vary 
enormously from one person to another, despite the similarity 
of color vision in people (Figure B). Joe Carroll, another former 
postdoc, has gone on to reveal the mosaic organization in col-
orblind eyes and those with many different genetic mutations.

Adaptive  optics  is  also  being  used  to  image  many 
other cells in the retina, including ganglion cells, and is a 

valuable tool in the diagnosis and treatment of retinal dis-
ease. I certainly could never have foreseen that advances 
in  astronomic  technology  would  provide  these  tools  for 
vision  research—or  that  my  graduate  school  interest  in 
the trichromacy of the cone mosaic would 20 years later 
spawn  these  advances  in  vision  correction  and  single 
cell  imaging.

HS

YY

*AN

AP nasal

AP temporal

MD

JP

JC

RS

*JW nasal

*JW temporal

BS

Figure B 
Variation in the relative numbers of cones in eyes with normal color vision. (Source: Hofer et al., 2005; Roorda and Williams, 
1999.)

 Rods and cones differ in other respects as well. All rods contain the 
same photopigment, but there are three types of cones, each containing  
a different pigment. The variations among pigments make the different 
cones sensitive to different wavelengths of light. As we shall see in a mo-
ment, only the cones, not the rods, are responsible for our ability to see 
color. David Williams at the University of Rochester has used clever im-
aging techniques to reveal the distribution of human cones in exquisite 
detail. Surprisingly, rather than an arrangement like the neat arrange-
ment of pixels in a computer display, human retinas show striking diver-
sity in the arrangement and distribution of cone photoreceptors (Box 9.4). 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   309
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   309

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

310

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 Regional Differences in Retinal Structure and 
Their Visual Consequences 
 Retinal structure varies from the fovea to the retinal periphery. Most of 
the 5 million cones are in the fovea, and the proportion diminishes sub-
stantially in the retinal periphery. There are no rods in the central fovea, 
but there are many more rods than cones in the peripheral retina. Rod 
and cone distributions in the retina are summarized in Figure 9.15. 

 The  differences  in  rod  and  cone  numbers  and  distribution  across 
the retina have important visual consequences. At photopic light  levels 

▲ FIGURE 9.15
Regional differences in retinal structure. (a) Cones are found primarily in the 
central retina, within 10° of the fovea. Rods are absent from the central fovea and 
are found mainly in the peripheral retina. (b) In the central retina, relatively few 
photoreceptors feed information to a ganglion cell; in the peripheral retina, many 
photoreceptors provide input. This arrangement makes the peripheral retina better 
at detecting dim light but the central retina better for high-resolution vision. 
(c) This magnified cross section of the human central retina shows the dense 
packing of cone inner segments. (d) At a more peripheral location on the retina, 
the cone inner segments are larger and appear as islands in a sea of smaller rod 
inner segments. A 10-micron scale bar for the images in c and d is shown to the 
right in d. (Source for parts c and d: Curcio et al., 1990, p. 500.)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   310
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   310

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

311

▲ FIGURE 9.16
The fovea in cross section. The ganglion cell layer and the inner nuclear layer 
are displaced laterally to allow light to strike the foveal photoreceptors directly.

 (daylight), the most obvious is that  we have much greater spatial  sensitivity 
on our central retina . Visual acuity is measured when we look directly 
at symbols on a test chart, placing the critical features in our cone-rich 
fovea. Recall that the fovea is a thinning of the retina at the center of the 
macula. In cross section, the fovea appears as a pit in the retina. This 
appearance is due to the lateral displacement of the cells above the pho-
toreceptors, allowing light to strike the photoreceptors without passing 
through the other retinal cell layers (Figure 9.16). This structural spe-
cialization maximizes visual acuity at the fovea by pushing aside other 
cells that might scatter light and blur the image. If you were to take an 
eye test while looking slightly away from the test chart, or if you try to 
read the titles of books on a shelf using your peripheral vision, you would 
need the letters to be much larger for you to read them. Less obvious than 
the   fovea’s  high  spatial  acuity  is  that   we  are  poorer  at  discriminating 
 colors on our peripheral retina  because of the smaller number of cones. 
You  might  be  able  to  demonstrate  this  by  looking  straight  ahead  and 
moving a small colored object slowly to the side. 

 The consequences of rod and cone distribution differences are very dif-
ferent with the light at dim scotopic levels, when we see only with rods. 
For example,  we are more sensitive to low levels of light on our  peripheral 
retina . Put another way,  our central vision is blind at scotopic light  levels . 
This is because rods respond more strongly to low light levels than cones, 
there  are  more  rods  in  the  peripheral  retina  (and  none  in  the  central 
fovea), and more rods project to single bipolar and ganglion cells in the 
peripheral  retina  (thereby  aiding  the  detection  of  dim  light).  You  can 
demonstrate the greater sensitivity of your peripheral retina to yourself 
on a starry night. (It’s fun; try it with a friend.) First, spend about 20 min-
utes in the dark getting oriented, and then gaze at a bright star. Fixating 
on this star, search your peripheral vision for a dim star. Then move your 
eyes to look at this dim star. You will ﬁ nd that the faint star disappears 
when  it  is  imaged  on  the  central  retina  (when  you  look  straight  at  it) 
but reappears when it is imaged on the peripheral retina (when you look 
slightly to the side of it). 

 Because  cones  alone  make  the  perception  of  color  possible,   we  are 
 unable  to  perceive  color  differences  at  night   when  rods  are  active  but 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   311
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   311

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

312

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

cones are not. A green tree, a blue car, and a red house all appear to have 
vaguely the same color (or lack of color). The peak sensitivity of rods is to a 
wavelength of about 500 nm, and thus at scotopic light levels objects tend 
to look dark blue-green. The loss of color as the sun goes down is a huge 
perceptual effect, but one that we hardly notice because of its familiarity. 
 Nighttime  vision  for  modern  humans  is  not  due  exclusively  to  rods, 
however.  In  densely  populated  areas,  we  actually  can  perceive  some 
color at night because streetlights and neon signs emit sufﬁ cient light to 
 activate the cones. This fact is the basis for differing points of view about 
the design of automobile dashboard indicator lights. One view is that the 
lights should be dim blue-green to take advantage of the spectral sensitiv-
ity of the rods. An alternate view is that the lights should be bright red 
because this wavelength affects mainly cones, leaving the rods unsatu-
rated and thus resulting in better night vision. 

PHOTOTRANSDUCTION 
PHOTTOTRAANSDUCTION 

 The  photoreceptors  convert,  or   transduce ,  light  energy  into  changes  in 
membrane potential. We begin our discussion of phototransduction with 
rods, which outnumber cones in the human retina by about 20 to 1. Most 
of what has been learned about phototransduction by rods has proven to 
be applicable to cones as well. 

 Phototransduction in Rods 
 As we discussed in Part I of this book, one way information is represented 
in the nervous system is as changes in the membrane potential of neu-
rons.  Thus,  we  look  for  a  mechanism  by  which  the  absorption  of  light 
 energy can be transduced into a change in the photoreceptor membrane 
potential.  In  many  respects,  this  process  is  analogous  to  the  transduc-
tion of chemical signals into electrical signals that occurs during synaptic 
transmission. At a G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter receptor, the bind-
ing of transmitter to the receptor activates G-proteins in the membrane, 
which in turn stimulate various effector enzymes (Figure 9.17a). These 
enzymes alter the intracellular concentration of cytoplasmic second mes-
senger molecules, which (directly or indirectly) change the conductance of 
membrane ion channels, thereby altering membrane potential. Similarly, 
in  the  photoreceptor,  light  stimulation  of  the  photopigment  activates 
G-proteins, which in turn activate an effector enzyme that changes the 
cytoplasmic concentration of a second messenger molecule. This change 
causes a membrane ion channel to close, and the membrane potential is 
thereby altered (Figure 9.17b). 

 Recall from Chapter 3 that a typical neuron at rest has a membrane 
potential  of  about   ⫺ 65  mV,  close  to  the  equilibrium  potential  for  K ⫹ . 
In   contrast,  in  complete  darkness,  the  membrane  potential  of  the  rod 
outer  segment  is  about   ⫺ 30  mV.  This  depolarization  is  caused  by  the 
steady inﬂ ux of Na ⫹  through special channels in the outer segment mem-
brane (Figure 9.18a). The movement of positive charge across the mem-
brane,  which  occurs  in  the  dark,  is  called  the   dark  current .  Sodium 
channels are stimulated to open—are gated—by an intracellular second 
messenger called  cyclic guanosine monophosphate , or  cGMP.  cGMP 
is produced in the photoreceptor by the enzyme guanylyl cyclase, keeping 
the Na ⫹  channels open. Light reduces cGMP, causing the Na ⫹  channels to 
close, and the membrane potential becomes  more negative  (Figure 9.18b). 
Thus,  photoreceptors hyperpolarize in response to light  (Figure 9.18c). 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   312
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   312

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

313

Neurotransmitter

Light

G-protein-coupled 
receptor

Cell membrane

Effector
enzyme

Photopigment

Disk membrane

Effector
enzyme

G-protein

G-protein

Second

messenger

Ion channel

opens or closes

Second

messenger

Ion channel

closes

(a) G-protein-coupled
        neurotransmitter receptor

(b) Photopigment 

Stimulus:

Transmitter

Stimulus:

Light

Receptor
activation:

G-protein
response:

Second
messenger
change:

Change in protein
conformation

Binds GTP

Increase second messenger

Ion channel
response:

Increase or decrease
conductance

Receptor
activation:

G-protein
response:

Second
messenger
change:

Ion channel
response:

Change in protein
conformation

Binds GTP

Decrease second messenger

Decrease Na+ conductance

▲ FIGURE 9.17
Light transduction and G-proteins. G-protein-coupled receptors and photore-
ceptors use similar mechanisms. (a) At a G-protein-coupled receptor, the binding 
of neurotransmitter activates G-proteins and  effector enzymes. (b) In a photore-
ceptor, light begins a similar process using the G-protein transducin.

 The  hyperpolarizing  response  to  light  is  initiated  by  the  absorption 
of  electromagnetic  radiation  by  the  photopigment  in  the  membrane  of 
the stacked disks in the rod outer segments. In the rods, this pigment 
is called   rhodopsin . Rhodopsin can be thought of as a receptor protein 
with a prebound chemical agonist. The receptor protein is called  opsin , 
and it has the seven transmembrane alpha helices typical of G-protein-
coupled  receptors  throughout  the  body.  The  prebound  agonist  is  called 
 retinal , a derivative of vitamin A. The absorption of light causes a change 
in the conformation of retinal so that it activates the opsin (Figure 9.19). 
This process is known as bleaching because it changes the wavelengths 
absorbed by the rhodopsin (the photopigment literally changes color from 
purple  to  yellow).  The  bleaching  of  rhodopsin  stimulates  a  G-protein 
called   transducin   in  the  disk  membrane,  which  in  turn  activates  the 
 effector  enzyme   phosphodiesterase  (PDE) ,  which  breaks  down  the 
cGMP that is normally  present in the cytoplasm of the rod (in the dark). 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   313
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   313

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

314

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.18
The hyperpolarization of 
 photoreceptors in response 
to light. Photoreceptors are 
continuously depolarized in the 
dark because of an inward so-
dium current, the dark current. 
(a) Sodium enters the photore-
ceptor through a cGMP-gated 
channel. (b) Light leads to the 
activation of an enzyme that 
destroys cGMP, thereby shut-
ting off the Na⫹ current and hy-
perpolarizing the cell. (c) In a 
dark auditorium, the membrane 
potential of our photoreceptors 
is ⫺30 mV (left). At intermission, 
we move to a bright lobby and 
the cells hyperpolarize (middle). 
The slower depolarization that 
follows is adaptation. Returning 
to the dark room sends mem-
brane potential back to 
⫺30 mV (right).

Membrane

depolarization

Membrane

hyperpolarization

NaNa++Na+

(a)  

Dark

(b)   Light

Inner
segment

Outer
segment

–30 mV

Vm

–60 mV

(c)  

Time 

Opsin

Opsin

Retinal
(inactive)

Disk
membrane

Retinal
(active)

Disk
membrane

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 9.19
The activation of rhodopsin by light. Rhodopsin consists of opsin, a protein 
with seven transmembrane alpha helices, and retinal, a small molecule derived 
from vitamin A. (a) In the dark, retinal is inactive. (b) Retinal undergoes a change 
in conformation when it absorbs light, thereby activating (bleaching) the opsin.

(b)  

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   314
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   314

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

315

The reduction in cGMP causes the Na ⫹  channels to close and the mem-
brane to hyperpolarize. 

 One  of  the  interesting  functional  consequences  of  using  a  biochemi-
cal cascade for transduction is signal  ampliﬁ cation . Many G-proteins are 
activated by each photopigment molecule, and each PDE enzyme breaks 
down more than one cGMP molecule. This ampliﬁ cation gives our visual 
system  incredible  sensitivity  to  small  amounts  of  light.  Rods  are  more 
sensitive  to  light  than  cones  because  they  contain  more  disks  in  their 
outer  segments  and  thus  more  photopigment,  and  also  because  they 
 amplify the response to light more than cones do. The combined result 
is, incredibly, that rods give a measureable response to the capture of a 
single photon of light, the elementary unit of light energy. 

 To summarize, here are the steps in the transduction of light by rods: 

 1. Light activates (bleaches) rhodopsin. 
 2. Transducin, the G-protein, is stimulated. 
 3. Phosphodiesterase (PDE), the effector enzyme, is activated. 
 4. PDE activity reduces the cGMP level. 
 5. Na ⫹  channels close, and the cell membrane hyperpolarizes. 

 The complete sequence of events of phototransduction in rods is illus-

trated in Figure 9.20. 

 Phototransduction in Cones 
 In bright light, cGMP levels in rods fall to the point where the response 
to light becomes  saturated ; increasing the light level causes no additional 
hyperpolarization. Thus, vision during the day depends entirely on the 
cones, whose photopigments require more energy to become bleached. 

 The process of phototransduction in cones is virtually the same as in 
rods; the only major difference is in the type of opsins in the membranous 
disks of the cone outer segments. The cones in our retinas contain one of 

Disk membrane

Cell membrane

Disk membrane

Cell membrane

Rhodopsin G-protein
(transducin)

(inactive)

Na+

cGMP-gated sodium channel
(open)

Phosphodiesterase

␤

(active)

Closed
sodium channel

(a) Dark
▲ FIGURE 9.20
The light-activated biochemical cascade in a photoreceptor. (a) In the dark, 
cGMP gates a sodium channel, causing an inward Na⫹ current and depolarization 
of the cell. (b) The activation of rhodopsin by light energy causes the G-protein 
(transducin) to exchange guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate 
(see Chapter 6), which in turn activates the enzyme phosphodiesterase (PDE). 
PDE breaks down cGMP and shuts off the dark current.

(b) Light

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   315
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   315

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

316

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.21
The spectral sensitivity of the 
three types of cone pigments. Each 
photopigment absorbs a wide range of 
wavelengths from the color spectrum 
(see Figure 9.2).

▲ FIGURE 9.22
Mixing colored lights. The mixing of 
red, green, and blue light causes equal 
activation of the three types of cones, 
and the perception of “white” results.

three opsins that give the photopigments different spectral sensitivities. 
Thus, we can speak of short-wavelength or “blue” cones that are maxi-
mally  activated  by  light  with  a  wavelength  of  about  430  nm,  medium-
wavelength or “green” cones that are maximally activated by light with 
a wavelength of about 530 nm, and long-wavelength or “red” cones that 
are  maximally  activated  by  light  with  a  wavelength  of  about  560  nm 
(Figure 9.21). Note that each type of cone is activated by a broad range 
of different wavelengths of light, and there is overlap in the wavelengths 
that affect the three cone types. Commonly the cones are referred to as 
blue, green, and red, but this can be confusing because different colors are 
perceived when different wavelengths of light, within the broad sensitive 
range of a particular cone type, are presented. The short, medium, long 
terminology is safer. 

 Color Perception. The color that we perceive is largely determined by the 
relative  contributions  of  short-,  medium-,  and  long-wavelength  cones  to 
the retinal signal. The fact that our visual system perceives colors in this 
way was actually predicted over 200 years ago by British physicist Thomas 
Young. Young  showed  in  1802  that  all  the  colors  of  the  rainbow,  includ-
ing white, could be created by mixing the proper ratio of red, green, and 
blue  light  (Figure  9.22). Young  proposed,  quite  correctly,  that  the  retina 
contains three receptor types, each type being maximally sensitive to a dif-
ferent spectrum of wavelengths. Young’s ideas were later championed by 
Hermann von Helmholtz, an inﬂ uential nineteenth-century German physi-
ologist.  (Among  his  accomplishments  is  the  invention  of  the  ophthalmo-
scope in 1851.) This theory of color vision came to be known as the  Young–
Helmholtz   trichromacy  theory .  According  to  the  theory,  the  brain 
assigns colors based on a comparative readout of the three cone types. When 
all types of cones are equally active, as in broad-spectrum light, we perceive 
“white.” Novel colors arise from other mixtures. For example,  orange is a 
mixture of red and yellow, and it looks somewhat red and somewhat yellow 
(red, orange, and yellow are neighbors in the color spectrum). But note that 
some color mixtures are perceptually different: No color looks simultane-
ously red and green or blue and yellow (and these “opponent” colors are not 
neighbors in the color spectrum). As we will see later, this may be a reﬂ ec-
tion of further “color opponent” processing by ganglion cells. 

 The color vision nomenclature can be puzzling, so be careful to not con-
fuse the color of light with the “color name” of a cone photoreceptor. It is 
wrong to think that lights perceived as red consist of a single wavelength 
of  light  or  that  this  wavelength  is  absorbed  only  by  long-wavelength 
cones.  The  reality  is  that  colored  lights  generally  contain  a  broad  and 
complex  spectrum  of  wavelengths  that  may  partially  activate  all  three 
types of cones. The ratios of activations determine color. Various forms of 
color blindness result when one or more of the cone photopigment types is 
missing (Box 9.5). And, as discussed earlier, if we had no cones, we would 
be unable to perceive color differences at all. 

 Dark and Light Adaptation 
 The  transition  from  all-cone  daytime  vision  to  all-rod  nighttime  vision 
is not instantaneous; depending on how high the initial light level is, it 
can take minutes to nearly an hour to reach the greatest light sensitiv-
ity in the dark (hence the time needed to get oriented in the stargazing 
exercise described earlier). This phenomenon is called  dark adaptation , 
or getting used to the dark. Sensitivity to light actually increases a mil-
lionfold or more during this period. 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   316
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   316

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

317

BOX 9.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Genetics of Color Vision

The color we perceive is largely determined by the relative 

amounts of light absorbed by the red, green, and blue visual 
pigments in our cones. This means it’s possible to perceive 
any color of the rainbow by mixing different amounts of red, 
green, and blue light. For example, the perception of yellow 
light  comes  from  an  appropriate  mixture  of  red  and  green 
light.  Because  we  use  a  “three-color”  system,  humans  are 
 referred  to  as  trichromats.  However,  not  all  normal  trichro-
mats  perceive  colors  exactly  the  same.  For  example,  if  a 
group of people are asked to choose the wavelength of light 
that  most  appears  green  without  being  yellowish  or  bluish, 
there will be small variations in their choices. However, sig-
niﬁ cant abnormalities of color vision extend well beyond this 
range of normal trichromatic vision.

Most abnormalities in color vision result from small genetic 
errors that lead to the loss of one visual pigment or a shift 
in the spectral sensitivity of one type of pigment. The most 
common abnormalities involve red–green color vision and are 
much more common in men than in women. The reason for 
this  pattern  is  that  the  genes  encoding  the  red  and  green 
pigments are on the X chromosome, whereas the gene that 
encodes the blue pigment is on chromosome 7. Men have 
abnormal red–green vision if there is a defect on the single 
X chromosome they inherit from their mother. Women have 
abnormal  red–green  vision  only  if  both  parents  contribute 
 abnormal X chromosomes.

About  6%  of  men  have  a  red  or  green  pigment  that 
 absorbs  somewhat  different  wavelengths  of  light  than  do 
the  pigments  of  the  rest  of  the  population.  These  men  are 
often called “colorblind,” but they actually see quite a color-
ful world. They are more properly referred to as anomalous 
 trichromats  because  they  require  somewhat  different  mix-
tures of red, green, and blue to see intermediate colors (and 
white) than other people. Most anomalous trichromats have 
normal genes to encode the blue pigment and either the red 
or the green pigment, but they also have a hybrid gene that 
encodes  a  protein  with  an  abnormal  absorption  spectrum 
 between that of normal red and green pigments. For exam-
ple, a person with an anomalous green pigment can match a 
yellow light with a red–green mixture containing less red than 
a normal trichromat. Anomalous trichromats perceive the full 
spectrum of colors that normal trichromats perceive, but in 
rare  instances  they  disagree  about  the  precise  color  of  an 
object (e.g., blue versus greenish blue).

About 2% of men actually lack either the red or the green 
pigment,  making  them  red–green  colorblind.  Because  this 

leaves them with a “two-color” system, they are referred to as 
dichromats. People lacking the green pigment are less sensi-
tive to green, and they confuse certain red and green colors 
that appear different to trichromats. A “green dichromat” can 
match a yellow light with either red or green light; no mixture 
is needed. In contrast to the roughly 8% of men who either 
are missing one pigment or have an anomalous pigment, only 
about 1% of women have such color abnormalities.

People without one color pigment are considered color-
blind, but they actually do see colors. Estimates of the num-
ber of people lacking all color vision vary, but less than about 
0.001% of the population is thought to have this condition. 
In one type, both red and green cone pigments are missing, 
in many cases because mutations of the red and green genes 
make them nonfunctional. These people are called blue cone 
monochromats and live in a world that varies only in lightness, 
like a trichromat’s perception of a black-and-white movie.

Although  achromatopsia  (lack  of  color  vision)  is  rare  in 
humans,  on  the  tiny  Micronesian  island  of  Pingelap  more 
than 5–10% of the population is colorblind and many more 
are unaffected carriers. It is known that the underlying basis 
for  the  disorder  is  a  genetic  mutation  associated  with  in-
complete development of cones that leaves them nonfunc-
tional. But why is achromatopsia so common on Pingelap? 
According to islanders, in the late eighteenth century a ty-
phoon  killed  all  but  about  20  of  the  inhabitants.  Those  af-
ﬂ icted with achromatopsia appear all to be descendants of 
one man who was a carrier; in subsequent generations the 
incidence of achromatopsia grew with inbreeding in the small 
surviving population.

Recent research has shown that, precisely speaking, there 
may not be such a thing as normal color vision. In a group of 
males classiﬁ ed as normal trichromats, it was found that some 
require slightly more red than others to perceive yellow in a 
red–green mixture. This difference, which is tiny compared to 
the deﬁ cits discussed above, results from a single alteration 
of the red pigment gene. The 60% of males who have the 
amino  acid  serine  at  site  180  in  the  red  pigment  gene  are 
more  sensitive  to  long-wavelength  light  than  the  40%  who 
have the amino acid alanine at this site. Imagine what would 
happen  if  a  woman  had  different  red  gene   varieties  on  her 
two X chromosomes. Both red genes should be expressed, 
leading to different red pigments in two populations of cones. 
In principle, such women should have a super-normal ability 
to discriminate colors because of their tetrachromatic color 
vision, a rarity among all animals.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   317
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   317

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

318

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 Dark adaptation is explained by a number of factors. Perhaps the most 
obvious  is  dilation  of  the  pupils,  which  allows  more  light  to  enter  the 
eye. However, the diameter of the human pupil only ranges from about 
2–8 mm; changes in its size increase sensitivity to light by a factor of only 
about 10. The larger component of dark adaptation involves the regen-
eration of unbleached rhodopsin and an adjustment of the functional cir-
cuitry of the retina so that information from more rods is available to each 
ganglion cell. Because of this tremendous increase in sensitivity, when 
the dark-adapted eye goes back into bright light, it is temporarily satu-
rated. This explains what happens when you ﬁ rst go outside on a bright 
day. Over the next 5–10 minutes, the eyes undergo  light  adaptation,  
reversing the changes in the retina that accompanied dark adaptation. 
This light-dark adaptation in the duplex retina gives our visual system 
the ability to operate in light intensities ranging from moonless midnight 
to bright high noon. 

 Calcium’s Role in Light Adaptation. In addition to the factors discussed 
earlier, the ability of the eye to adapt to changes in light level relies on 
changes in calcium concentration within the cones. When you step out into 
bright light from a dark theater, initially the cones are hyperpolarized as 
much as possible (i.e., to E K , the equilibrium potential for K ⫹ ). If the cones 
stayed in this state, we would be unable to see further changes in light level. 
As discussed earlier, the constriction of the pupil helps a bit in  reducing the 
light entering the eye. However, the most important change is a gradual 
depolarization of the membrane back to about  ⫺ 35 mV (see Figure 9.18c). 
 The  reason  this  happens  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  cGMP-gated 
 sodium channels discussed previously also admit calcium (Figure 9.23). 
In  the  dark,  Ca 2  ⫹   enters  the  cones  and  has  an  inhibitory  effect  on  the 
 enzyme (guanylyl cyclase) that synthesizes cGMP. When the cGMP-gated 
channels close, the ﬂ ow of Ca 2  ⫹  into the photoreceptor is curtailed along 
with  the  ﬂ ow  of  Na ⫹ ;  as  a  result,  more  cGMP  is  synthesized  (because 
the synthetic enzyme is less inhibited), thereby allowing the cGMP-gated 
channels to open again. Stated more simply, when the channels close, a 
process  is  initiated  that  gradually  reopens  them  even  if  the  light  level 
does not change. Calcium also appears to affect photopigments and phos-
phodiesterase in ways that decrease their response to light. These cal-
cium-based mechanisms ensure that the photoreceptors are always able 
to register relative changes in light level, though information about the 
absolute level is lost. 

 Local Adaptation of Dark, Light, and Color. The effect that pupil size has 
on light and dark adaptation is the same for all photoreceptors. However, 
photoreceptor  bleaching  and  other  adaptational  mechanisms,  such  as 
calcium’s inﬂ uence on cGMP, can occur on a cone-by-cone basis. You can 
demonstrate this to yourself with Figure 9.24. First, ﬁ xate on the black 
cross at the center of the gray square in part a for about a minute. Cones 
imaging the dark spots will become dark-adapted and cones imaging the 
white spots will be relatively light-adapted. Now look at the cross at the 
middle of the large light square in part b. Because of the local adaptation 
of the cones, you should now see white spots where you adapted to black 
and  black  spots  where  you  adapted  to  white. The  same  idea  applies  to 
color adaptation. First look at the yellow or green square in part c or d of 
the ﬁ gure, and selectively adapt your cones. Then move your ﬁ xation to 
the light square in part b. You should see blue if you adapted to yellow and 
red if you adapted to green (the exact colors depend on the inks used in 
printing). These demonstrations use abnormally long ﬁ xations to reveal 

▲ FIGURE 9.23
The role of calcium in light adaptation. 
 Ca2⫹ enters a cone through the same 
cGMP-gated channels as Na⫹; it inhibits 
the synthesis of cGMP.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   318
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   318

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

319

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

▲ FIGURE 9.24
Light and color adaptation.  Fixate on the cross in (a) for 1 minute and then look 
at (b) to see the effects of local retinal  adaptation to the light and dark spots. 
 After adaptation to the color in (c) or (d), the gray in (b) will appear to have an 
opponent color.

the critical adaptational processes that are always at work to keep photo-
receptors providing useful information. 

RETINAL PROCESSING AND OUTPUT 
RETINNAL PPROCESSING AND OOUTPUT 

 Now that we have seen how light is ﬁ rst converted into neural activity, 
we  turn  to  the  process  by  which  information  about  light  is  passed  be-
yond the eye to the rest of the brain. As the sole source of output from 
the  retina  is  the  action  potentials  arising  from  ganglion  cells,  our  goal 
is to understand what information ganglion cells convey. It is interest-
ing to note that researchers were able to explain some of the ways the 
retina processes visual images well before the discovery of how photore-
ceptors work. Since about 1950, neuroscientists have studied the action 
potential discharges of retinal ganglion cells as the retina is stimulated 
with light. The pioneers of this approach were neurophysiologists Keffer 
Hartline and Stephen Kufﬂ er working in the United States and Horace 
Barlow working in England. Their research uncovered which aspects of 
a  visual  image  were  encoded  as  ganglion  cell  output.  Early  studies  of 
horseshoe crabs and frogs gave way to investigations of cats and mon-
keys. Researchers learned that similar principles are involved in retinal 
processing across a wide range of species. 

 Progress in understanding how ganglion cell properties are  generated 
by  synaptic  interactions  in  the  retina  has  been  slower.  This  is  so  be-
cause  only ganglion cells ﬁ re action potentials ; all other cells in the retina 
 (except some amacrine cells) respond to stimulation with graded changes 
in  membrane  potential.  The  detection  of  such  graded  changes  requires 
technically challenging intracellular recording methods, whereas action 
potentials can be detected using simple extracellular recording methods 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   319
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   319

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

320

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

(see  Box  4.1).  It  was  not  until  the  early  1970s  that  John  Dowling  and 
Frank Werblin at Harvard University were able to show how ganglion cell 
responses are built from the interactions of horizontal and bipolar cells. 

 The most direct path for information ﬂ ow in the retina is from a cone 
photoreceptor to bipolar cell to ganglion cell. At each synaptic relay, the 
responses are modiﬁ ed by the lateral connections of horizontal cells and 
amacrine  cells.  Photoreceptors,  like  other  neurons,  release  neurotrans-
mitter  when  depolarized.  The  transmitter  released  by  photoreceptors 
is  the  amino  acid  glutamate.  As  we  have  seen,  photoreceptors  are  de-
polarized in the dark and are  hyperpolarized  by light. We thus have the 
counterintuitive situation in which photoreceptors actually release fewer 
transmitter molecules in the light than in the dark. However, we can rec-
oncile this apparent paradox if we take the point of view that  dark  rather 
than   light   is  the  preferred  stimulus  for  a  photoreceptor.  Thus,  when  a 
shadow  passes  across  a  photoreceptor,  it  responds  by  depolarizing  and 
releasing more neurotransmitter. 

 In the outer plexiform layer, each photoreceptor is in synaptic contact 
with two types of retinal neurons: bipolar cells and horizontal cells. Recall 
that bipolar cells create the direct pathway from photoreceptors to gan-
glion cells; horizontal cells feed information laterally in the outer plexiform 
layer to inﬂ uence the activity of neighboring bipolar cells and photorecep-
tors (see Figures 9.11 and 9.12). We now turn to the response properties of 
bipolar and then ganglion cells by analyzing their receptive ﬁ elds. 

 The Receptive Field 
 Suppose you have a ﬂ ashlight that can project a very small spot of light 
onto the retina while you monitor the activity of a visual neuron, such as 
the output of a retinal ganglion cell. You would ﬁ nd that light  applied to 
only a small portion of the retina would change the ﬁ ring rate of the neu-
ron (Figure 9.25a). This area of the retina is called the neuron’s   receptive 
ﬁ eld . Light anywhere else on the retina, outside this receptive ﬁ eld, would 
have no effect on ﬁ ring rate. This same procedure can be applied to any 
neuron in the eye or elsewhere that is involved in vision; its receptive ﬁ eld 
is speciﬁ ed by the pattern of light on the retina that elicits a neural re-
sponse. In the visual system, the optics of the eye establish a correspon-
dence between locations on the retina and the visual ﬁ eld. Therefore, it is 
customary to also describe visual receptive ﬁ elds as areas of visual space 
interchangeably with areas of the retina (Figure 9.25b). “Receptive ﬁ eld” is 
actually a general term useful in describing the stimulus speciﬁ city of neu-
rons across sensory systems. For example, we will see in Chapter 12 that 
receptive ﬁ elds of neurons in the somatosensory system are small areas of 
the skin that, when touched, produce a response in a neuron (Figure 9.25c). 
 As  we  move  farther  into  the  visual  pathway,  we  ﬁ nd  that  receptive 
ﬁ elds change in shape and correspondingly in the sort of stimulus that 
makes the neurons most active. In the retina, spots of light give optimal 
responses from ganglion cells, but in different areas of the visual cortex, 
neurons respond best to bright lines and even complex shapes of biological 
signiﬁ cance such as hands and faces. These changes may reﬂ ect important 
differences in the kind of information represented at each stage. (We will 
have a lot more to say about this in Chapter 10.) Receptive ﬁ elds receive 
a  great  deal  of  attention  because  of  the  functional  interpretation  given 
to  them.  An  instructive  example  comes  from  the  early  work  of  Horace 
Barlow, who made recordings from the frog retina. He found that a frog 
will jump and snap at a small black spot waved in front of it, and the same 
stimulus elicits a strong response from retinal ganglion cells. Might this 
be a “bug detector” used by the frog to hunt? We will see that inferences 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   320
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   320

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

321

Receptive field
projected on
visual field

Move light to map
region of the retina
that causes spiking
in the ganglion cell

Move light to
map region of the
visual field that
causes spiking in
the ganglion cell

(b)  

Receptive field on retina

Receptive field
on retina

Optic nerve

Recording
from ganglion
cell

(a)  

Move pin to map the
region of skin that
causes spiking in
the sensory axon

Receptive
field on skin

(c)  

Recording from
sensory axon
enroute to
spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 9.25
The receptive field. (a) The receptive field of a ganglion cell is located by recording 
from the neuron’s axon in the optic nerve. A small spot of light is projected onto 
various parts of the retina; the receptive field consists of the locations that increase 
or decrease the ganglion cell’s firing rate. By moving the recording electrode, the 
same procedure can be used to locate receptive fields for neurons at other loca-
tions in the brain and other retinal neurons (seen as changes in membrane potential 
if they do not fire action potentials). (b) A receptive field on the retina corresponds 
to light coming from a particular location in the visual field. (c) The receptive field is 
a useful concept in other sensory systems; for example, a small patch of skin is a 
receptive field for touch.

about function based on receptive ﬁ eld properties are also made for mon-
keys and humans, and they are as exciting as they are speculative. 

 Bipolar Cell Receptive Fields 
 Bipolar cells and receptive ﬁ elds can be categorized into two classes, ON 
and OFF, based on the response to the glutamate released by photorecep-
tors.  The  circuitry  that  gives  rise  to  bipolar  receptive  ﬁ elds  consists  of 
direct input from photoreceptors and indirect photoreceptor input relayed 
by horizontal cells (Figure 9.26a). Let’s start by considering only the inter-
actions between cones and bipolar cells in the direct path (no  horizontal 
cells  involved),  shown  in  Figure  9.26b.  Light  shined  onto  a  cone  will 
  hyperpolarize   some  bipolar  cells.  These  are  called   OFF  bipolar  cells , 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   321
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   321

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

322

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.26
Direct and indirect pathways from photoreceptors to bipolar cells.  (a) Bipolar 
cells receive direct synaptic input from a cluster of photoreceptors, constituting 
the receptive field center. In addition, they receive indirect input from surrounding 
 photoreceptors via horizontal cells. (b) An ON-center bipolar cell is depolarized by 
light in the receptive field center via the direct pathway. (c) Light in the receptive 
field surround hyperpolarizes the ON-center bipolar cell via the indirect pathway. 
 Because of the intervening horizontal cell, the effect of light on the surround pho-
toreceptors is always opposite the effect of light on the center photoreceptors.

because light effectively turns them off. Conversely, light shined onto a 
cone will  depolarize  other bipolar cells. These cells “turned on” by light 
are called  ON bipolar cells . Evidently the cone-to-bipolar synapse in-
verts the signal from the cone: The cone hyperpolarizes to light, but the 
ON bipolar cell depolarizes. 

 How can different bipolar cells give opposite responses to direct cone 
input? The answer is that there are two kinds of receptors that receive 
glutamate released by the photoreceptors. OFF bipolar cells have iono-
tropic glutamate receptors, and these glutamate-gated channels mediate 
a classical depolarizing excitatory postsynaptic potential from the inﬂ ux 
of Na ⫹ . Hyperpolarization of the cone causes less neurotransmitter to be 
released,  resulting  in  a  more  hyperpolarized  bipolar  cell.  On  the  other 
hand, ON bipolar cells have G-protein-coupled (metabotropic) receptors 
and respond to glutamate by hyperpolarizing. Each bipolar cell receives 
direct synaptic input from a cluster of photoreceptors. The number of pho-
toreceptors in this cluster ranges from one at the center of the fovea to 
thousands in the peripheral retina. 

 In addition to direct connections with photoreceptors, bipolar cells also 
are connected via horizontal cells to a circumscribed ring of photorecep-
tors  that  surrounds  the  central  cluster  (see  Figure  9.26a).  The  synap-
tic  interactions of photoreceptors, horizontal cells, and bipolar cells are 
 complex, and research is ongoing. For our purposes here, there are two 
key  points.  First,  when  a  photoreceptor  hyperpolarizes  in  response  to 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   322
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   322

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

323

light, output is sent to horizontal cells that also hyperpolarize. Second, 
the effect of horizontal cell hyperpolarization is to counteract the effect 
of  light  on  neighboring  photoreceptors.  In  Figure  9.26c,  light  is  shined 
onto two photoreceptors connected through horizontal cells to a central 
photoreceptor and bipolar cell. The effect of this indirect path input is to 
depolarize the central photoreceptor, counteracting the hyperpolarizing 
effect of light shined directly on it. 

 Let’s synthesize this discussion: The receptive ﬁ eld of a bipolar cell con-
sists of two parts: a circular area of retina providing direct photoreceptor 
input, the  receptive ﬁ eld center , and a surrounding area of retina provid-
ing input via horizontal cells, the  receptive ﬁ eld surround . The  response 
of a bipolar cell’s membrane potential to light in the receptive ﬁ eld center 
is opposite to that of light in the surround. Thus, these cells are said to 
have  antagonistic   center-surround  receptive  ﬁ elds .  Receptive  ﬁ eld 
dimensions  can  be  measured  in  millimeters  across  the  retina  or,  more 
commonly, in degrees of visual angle. One millimeter on the retina cor-
responds to a visual angle of about 3.5°. Bipolar cell receptive ﬁ eld di-
ameters range from a fraction of a degree in the central retina to several 
degrees in the peripheral retina. 

 The  center-surround  receptive  ﬁ eld  organization  is  passed  on  from 
 bipolar cells to ganglion cells via synapses in the inner plexiform layer. 
The lateral connections of the amacrine cells in the inner plexiform layer 
also contribute to the elaboration of ganglion cell receptive ﬁ elds and the 
integration  of  rod  and  cone  input  to  ganglion  cells.  Numerous  types  of 
amacrine cells have been identiﬁ ed, which make diverse contributions to 
ganglion cell responses. 

 Ganglion Cell Receptive Fields 
 Most retinal ganglion cells have essentially the same concentric center-
surround  receptive  ﬁ eld  organization  as  bipolar  cells.  ON-center  and 
OFF-center ganglion cells receive input from the corresponding type of 
bipolar  cell.  An  important  difference  is  that,  unlike  bipolar  cells,  gan-
glion cells ﬁ re action potentials. Ganglion cells actually ﬁ re action poten-
tials whether or not they are exposed to light, and light in the receptive 
ﬁ eld center or surround increases or decreases the ﬁ ring rate. Thus, an 
 ON-center ganglion cell will be depolarized and respond with a barrage 
of action potentials when a small spot of light is projected onto the cen-
ter of its receptive ﬁ eld. An OFF-center cell will ﬁ re fewer action poten-
tials when a small spot of light is projected to the center of its receptive 
ﬁ eld;  it  will  ﬁ re  more  action  potentials  if  a  small   dark   spot  covers  the 
receptive ﬁ eld center. In both ON and OFF types of cell, the response to 
stimulation of the center is canceled by the response to stimulation of the 
surround (Figure 9.27). The surprising implication is that most retinal 
 ganglion cells are not particularly responsive to changes in illumination 
that  include both the receptive ﬁ eld center and the receptive ﬁ eld sur-
round. Rather, it appears that the ganglion cells are mainly responsive to 
  differences  in illumination that occur within their receptive ﬁ elds. 

 To illustrate this point, consider the response generated by an OFF-center 
cell as a light–dark edge crosses its receptive ﬁ eld (Figure 9.28). Remember 
that in such a cell, dark in the center of the receptive ﬁ eld causes the cell 
to depolarize, whereas dark in the surround causes the cell to hyperpolar-
ize. In uniform illumination, the center and surround cancel to yield some 
low level of response (Figure 9.28a). When the edge enters the surround 
region of the receptive ﬁ eld without encroaching on the center, the dark 
area has the effect of hyperpolarizing the neuron, leading to a decrease in 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   323
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   323

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

324

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.27
A center-surround ganglion cell receptive field. (a, b) An OFF-center ganglion 
cell responds with a barrage of action potentials when a dark spot is imaged on 
its receptive field center. (c) If the dark spot is enlarged to include the receptive 
field surround, the response is greatly reduced.

the cell’s ﬁ ring rate (Figure 9.28b). As the dark area begins to include the 
center, however, the partial inhibition by the surround is overcome, and 
the cell response increases (Figure 9.28c). To understand why the response 
in Figure 28c is increased, consider that there is 100% excitation of the cell 
because darkness covers the entire receptive ﬁ eld center, but there is only 
partial inhibition from the portion of the surround in darkness. But when 
the dark area ﬁ nally ﬁ lls the entire surround, the center response is can-
celed (Figure 9.28d). Notice that the cell response in this example is only 
slightly different in uniform light and in uniform dark; the response is mod-
ulated mainly by the presence of the light–dark edge in its receptive ﬁ eld. 
 Now let’s consider the output of  all  the OFF-center ganglion cells at 
different positions on the retina that are stimulated by a stationary light–
dark edge. The responses will fall into the same four categories illustrated 
in Figure 9.28. Thus, the cells that will register the presence of the edge 
are those with receptive ﬁ eld centers and surrounds that are differentially 
affected by the light and dark areas. The population of cells with recep-
tive ﬁ eld centers “viewing” the light side of the edge will be inhibited (see 
Figure 9.28b). The population of cells with centers “viewing” the dark side 
of the edge will be excited (see Figure 9.28c). In this way, the  difference 
in illumination at a light–dark edge is not faithfully represented by the 
 difference in the output of ganglion cells on either side of the edge. Instead, 
 the center-surround organization of the receptive ﬁ elds leads to a neural 
response that emphasizes the contrast at light–dark edges . 

▲ FIGURE 9.28
Responses to a light–dark edge crossing an OFF-center ganglion cell recep-
tive field. The response of the neuron is determined by the fraction of the center 
and surround that are filled by light and dark. (See text for details.)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   324
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   324

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

325

▲ FIGURE 9.29
The influence of contrast on the perception of light and dark. The central 
boxes are identical shades of gray, but because the surrounding area is lighter on 
the left, the left central box appears darker. ON-center receptive fields are shown 
on the left and right of the figure. Which would respond more?

 There are many visual illusions involving the perception of light level. 
The  organization  of  ganglion  cell  receptive  ﬁ elds  suggests  an  explana-
tion for the illusion shown in Figure 9.29. Even though the two central 
squares are the same shade of gray, the square on the lighter background 
appears  darker.  Consider  the  two  ON-center  receptive  ﬁ elds  shown  on 
the gray squares. In both cases, the same gray light hits the receptive 
ﬁ eld center. However, the receptive ﬁ eld on the left has more light in its 
surround than the receptive ﬁ eld on the right. This will lead to more inhi-
bition and a lower response and may be related to the darker appearance 
of the left central gray square. 

 Structure-Function  Relationships.  Most  ganglion  cells  in  the  mamma-
lian retina have a center-surround receptive ﬁ eld with either an ON or an 
OFF center. They can be further categorized based on their appearance, 
connectivity, and electrophysiological properties. In the macaque monkey 
retina  and  human  retina,  two  major  types  of  ganglion  cells  are  distin-
guished:  large   M-type  ganglion  cells   and  smaller   P-type   ganglion 
cells . (M stands for  magno , from the Latin for “large”; P stands for  parvo , 
from the Latin for “small.”) Figure 9.30 shows the relative sizes of M and 
P ganglion cells at the same location on the retina. P cells constitute about 
90% of the ganglion cell population, M cells constitute about 5%, and the 
remaining 5% are made up of a variety of  nonM–nonP ganglion cell  
types that are less well characterized. 

 The visual response properties of M cells differ from those of P cells 
in  several  ways.  They  have  larger  receptive  ﬁ elds,  they  conduct  action 
potentials more rapidly in the optic nerve, and they are more sensitive to 
low-contrast stimuli. In addition, M cells respond to stimulation of their 
receptive ﬁ eld centers with a transient burst of action potentials, while 
P cells respond with a sustained discharge as long as the stimulus is on 
(Figure 9.31). We will see in Chapter 10 that the different types of gan-
glion cells appear to play different roles in visual perception. 

 Color-Opponent Ganglion Cells. Another important distinction between 
ganglion  cell  types  is  that  some  P  cells  and  nonM–nonP  cells  are  sen-
sitive  to  differences  in  the  wavelength  of  light.  The  majority  of  these 
 color-sensitive neurons are called  color-opponent cells , reﬂ ecting the 
fact that the response to one color in the receptive ﬁ eld center is  canceled 
by showing another color in the receptive ﬁ eld surround. The two types 
of  opponency  are  red  versus  green  and  blue  versus  yellow.  Consider, 
for  example,  a  cell  with  a  red  ON  center  and  a  green  OFF  surround 

▲ FIGURE 9.30
M-type and P-type ganglion cells in 
the macaque monkey retina. (a) A small 
P cell from the peripheral retina. (b) An M 
cell from a similar retinal location is sig-
nificantly larger. (Source: Watanabe and 
Rodieck, 1989, pp. 437, 439.)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   325
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   325

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

326

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 9.31
Different responses to light of M-type and P-type ganglion cells.

(Figure 9.32). The center of the receptive ﬁ eld is fed by red cones, and the 
surround is fed by green cones via an inhibitory circuit (i.e., the indirect 
horizontal cell path). To understand how the neuron with this receptive 
ﬁ eld responds to light, recall Figure 9.21, which shows that red and green 
cones absorb different, but overlapping, wavelengths of light. 

 If  red  light  bathes  the  receptive  ﬁ eld  center,  the  neuron  responds 
with  a  strong  burst  of  action  potentials  (Fig.  9.32b).  If  the  red  light  is 
extended to cover both the center and the surround of the receptive ﬁ eld, 
the neuron is still excited but much less so (Fig. 9.32c). The reason that 
red light has an effect in the green OFF surround is that, as shown in 
Fig. 9.21, red wavelengths of light are partially absorbed by green cones, 
and their activation inhibits the response of the neuron. To fully activate 
the   inhibitory  surround  of  the  receptive,  green  light  is  needed.  In  this 
case, the red ON center response is canceled by the green OFF surround 
 response  (Fig.  9.32d).  The  shorthand  notation  for  such  a  cell  is  R ⫹ G ⫺ , 
meaning simply that it is optimally excited by red in the receptive ﬁ eld 
center and inhibited by green in the surround. 

▲ FIGURE 9.32
Color opponency in ganglion cells.  (a) A color-opponent center-surround recep-
tive field of a P-type ganglion cell. (b) A strong response is elicited by red light to 
the receptive field center, which receives input from long-wavelength-sensitive (red) 
cones. (c) Extending the red light into the surround inhibits the response because 
the green cones providing input to the surround are also somewhat sensitive to 
long wavelengths of light. (d) Even stronger inhibition is produced by green light in 
the receptive field surround, which optimally drives the green cones.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   326
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   326

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

327

 What would be the response to white light on the entire receptive ﬁ eld? 
Because white light contains all visible wavelengths (including both red 
and green), both center and surround would be equally activated, cancel-
ing each other, and the cell would not respond to the light. 

 Blue–yellow color opponency works the same way. Consider a cell with 
a blue ON center and a yellow OFF surround (B ⫹ Y ⫺ ). The receptive ﬁ eld 
center receives input from blue cones, and the surround gets input from 
 both  red and green cones (hence yellow) via an inhibitory circuit. Blue light 
hitting the receptive ﬁ eld center would give a strong excitatory response 
that could be canceled by yellow light in the surround. Diffuse blue light 
covering both the center and the surround of the receptive ﬁ eld would also 
be an effective stimulus for this cell. Why is diffuse blue light a strong stim-
ulus here, whereas diffuse red light was a much weaker stimulus in R ⫹ G ⫺  
cells? The answer lies in the absorption curves (see Figure 9.21); in the 
R ⫹ G ⫺  cell, red light is absorbed by the “green”  photoreceptors, but in the 
B ⫹ Y ⫺  neuron, very little blue light is absorbed by the “red” and “green” 
photoreceptors that make up the receptive ﬁ eld surround. Diffuse white 
light would not be an effective stimulus because it contains red, blue, and 
green wavelengths, and the center and surround responses would cancel. 
 Finally, note that M ganglion cells lack color opponency. This doesn’t 
mean they won’t respond to colored light; rather, their responses are not 
color-speciﬁ c.  So,  for  example,  red  light  in  the  receptive  ﬁ eld  center  or 
surround  would  have  the  same  effect  as  green  light.  The  lack  of  color 
 opponency in M- cells is accounted for by the fact that both the center and 
the surround of the receptive ﬁ eld receive input from more than one type 
of cone. M-cell receptive ﬁ elds are therefore denoted as simply either ON 
center/OFF  surround  or  OFF  center/ON  surround.  The  color  and  light 
sensitivity of M and P ganglion cells suggest that the overall ganglion cell 
population sends information to the brain about three different spatial 
comparisons: light versus dark, red versus green, and blue versus yellow. 

 Ganglion Cell Photoreceptors 
 The retinal circuit we have described, in which rods and cones project to 
bipolar and then ganglion cells, implies that rods and cones are respon-
sible  for  all  phototransduction  and  that  ganglion  cells  play  a  different 
role relaying visual information to the rest of the brain. But even back in 
the 1980s and 1990s, there were odd ﬁ ndings that were difﬁ cult to rec-
oncile with this view. For example, mutant mice lacking rods and cones 
appeared to synchronize their sleeping and waking with the rise and set-
ting of the sun even though they otherwise behaved as if they were blind. 
A subset of humans who are totally blind also appear to unconsciously 
synchronize their behavior to daily changes in sunlight. 

 The resolution of these mysteries came from the discovery in the 1990s 
that a small percentage of retinal ganglion cells actually transduce light. 
These  few  thousand  neurons,  known  as   intrinsically  photosensitive 
retinal  ganglion  cells  (ipRGCs) ,  use  melanopsin  as  a  photopigment, 
an opsin previously studied in frog skin! The ipRGCs function as normal 
ganglion cells that receive input from rods and cones and send axons out 
the optic nerve; in addition they are photoreceptors. The photosensitivity 
of ipRGCs differs from that of rods and cones in important ways, however. 
Unlike the hyperpolarization that light causes in rods and cones, ipRGCs 
depolarize to light. The ipRGCs also have very large dendritic ﬁ elds; be-
cause the dendrites are photosensitive, this means the cells sum light input 
over much larger areas of the retina than rods and cones (Figure 9.33). 
The small number of ipRGCs and their large receptive ﬁ elds are not ideal 
for, and the ipRGCs are not used in, ﬁ ne pattern vision. As we will see 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   327
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   327

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

328

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Off
On

OS

ONL

OPL

INL

IPL

GCL

100 µm
(b)

(a)
▲ FIGURE 9.33
Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells. (a) Rods (blue) and cones 
(green) project to bipolar cells and then conventional ganglion cells (black) that 
send axons to the thalamus. In addition to receiving rod and cone inputs, ipRGCs 
(red) transduce light themselves. Unlike rods and cones, these photosensitive 
neurons send axons out of the eye without additional neurons and synaptic con-
nections. The dendrites of the ipRGCs spread over a much broader area than 
conventional ganglion cell dendrites, making these neurons sensitive to light over 
a larger area. (b) A micrograph of an ipRGC shows the long winding dendrites 
and the axon (arrow). Note how much larger the dendritic field is compared to 
those of the regular ganglion cells in Figure 9.30. (Source: Berson, 2003, Fig. 1.)

in Chapter 19, an important function of the ipRGCs is providing input to 
subcortical visual areas that synchronize behavior to daily changes in light 
level (circadian rhythms). Since their initial discovery, a spectrum of differ-
ent ipRGCs has been found that vary in their morphology, physiology, and 
connections to other retinal neurons. Research continues to investigate the 
multiple roles of these unusual cells in unconscious and conscious vision. 

 Parallel Processing 
 One  of  the  important  concepts  that  emerge  from  our  discussion  of  the 
retina  is  the  idea  of   parallel  processing  in the visual system. Parallel 
processing means that different visual attributes are processed simultane-
ously using distinct pathways. For example, we view the world with not one 
but two eyes that provide two parallel streams of information. In the cen-
tral visual system, these streams are compared to give information about 
depth , the distance of an object from the observer. A second example of par-
allel processing is the independent streams of information about light and 
dark that arise from the ON-center and OFF-center ganglion cells in each 
retina. Finally, ganglion cells of both ON and OFF varieties have different 
types of receptive ﬁ elds and response properties. M cells can detect subtle 
contrasts over their large receptive ﬁ elds and are likely to contribute to low-
resolution vision. P cells have small receptive ﬁ elds that are well suited for 
the discrimination of ﬁ ne detail. P cells and nonM–nonP cells are special-
ized for the separate processing of red–green and blue–yellow information. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 In  this  chapter,  we  have  seen  how  light  emitted  by  or  reﬂ ected  off  ob-
jects can be imaged by the eye onto the retina. Light energy is ﬁ rst con-
verted into membrane potential changes in the mosaic of photoreceptors. 
Interestingly,  the  transduction  mechanism  in  photoreceptors  is  very 
similar  to  that  in  olfactory  receptor  cells,  both  of  which  involve  cyclic 
nucleotide- gated ion channels. Photoreceptor membrane potential is con-
verted  into  a  chemical  signal  (the  neurotransmitter  glutamate),  which 
is again converted into membrane potential changes in the  postsynaptic 

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   328
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   328

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER 9    THE EYE

329

bipolar and horizontal cells. This process of electrical-to-chemical-to-elec-
trical  signaling  repeats  again  and  again,  until  the  presence  of  light  or 
dark or color is ﬁ nally converted to a change in the action potential ﬁ ring 
frequency of the ganglion cells. 

 Information from 97 million photoreceptors is funneled into 1 million 
ganglion cells. In the central retina, particularly the fovea, relatively few 
photoreceptors feed each ganglion cell, whereas in the peripheral retina, 
thousands  of  receptors  do.  Thus,  the  mapping  of  visual  space  onto  the 
array of optic nerve ﬁ bers is not uniform. Rather, in “neural space,” there 
is an overrepresentation of the central few degrees of visual space, and 
signals from individual cones are more important. This specialization en-
sures high acuity in central vision but also requires that the eye move to 
bring the images of objects of interest onto the fovea. 

 As  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter,  there  is  good  reason  to  believe 
that the different types of information that arise from different types of 
ganglion cells are, at least in the early stages, processed independently. 
Parallel  streams  of  information—for  example,  from  the  right  and  left 
eyes—remain segregated at the ﬁ rst synaptic relay in the lateral genicu-
late nucleus of the thalamus. The same can be said for the M-cell and 
P-cell synaptic relays in the LGN. In the visual cortex, it appears that 
parallel paths may process different visual attributes. For example, the 
distinction in the retina between neurons that do or do not convey infor-
mation about color is preserved in the visual cortex. In general, each of 
the more than two dozen visual cortical areas may be specialized for the 
analysis of different types of retinal output. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
vision (p. 294)
retina (p. 294)

Properties of Light
refraction (p. 296)

The Structure of the Eye
pupil (p. 296)
iris (p. 296)
cornea (p. 296)
sclera (p. 296)
extraocular muscle (p. 296)
conjunctiva (p. 297)
optic nerve (p. 297)
optic disk (p. 297)
macula (p. 297)
fovea (p. 297)
aqueous humor (p. 298)
lens (p. 298)
ciliary muscle (p. 298)
vitreous humor (p. 298)

Image Formation by the Eye
diopter (p. 299)
accommodation (p. 299)

pupillary light reﬂ ex (p. 303)
visual ﬁ eld (p. 304)
visual acuity (p. 304)
visual angle (p. 304)

Microscopic Anatomy of 
the Retina
photoreceptor (p. 304)
bipolar cell (p. 304)
ganglion cell (p. 304)
horizontal cell (p. 305)
amacrine cell (p. 305)
ganglion cell layer (p. 305)
inner nuclear layer (p. 305)
outer nuclear layer (p. 305)
inner plexiform layer (p. 305)
outer plexiform layer (p. 306)
layer of photoreceptor outer 

 segments (p. 306)

rod photoreceptor (p. 306)
cone photoreceptor (p. 306)

Phototransduction
dark current (p. 3012)
cyclic guanosine  monophosphate 

(cGMP) (p. 312)

rhodopsin (p. 313)
transducin (p. 313)
phosphodiesterase (PDE) 

(p. 313)

Young–Helmholtz trichromacy 

theory (p. 316)

dark adaptation (p. 318)
light adaptation (p. 318)

Retinal Processing and Output
receptive ﬁ eld (p. 320)
OFF bipolar cell (p. 321)
ON bipolar cell (p. 322)
center-surround receptive ﬁ eld 

(p. 323)

M-type ganglion cell (p. 325)
P-type ganglion cell (p. 325)
nonM–nonP ganglion cell 

(p. 325)

color-opponent cell (p. 325)
intrinsically photosensitive 

retinal ganglion cell (ipRGC) 
(p. 327)

parallel processing (p. 328)

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   329
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   329

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

330

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What physical property of light is most closely related to the perception of color?
2.  Name eight structures in the eye that light passes through before it strikes the photoreceptors.
3.  Why is a scuba mask necessary for clear vision underwater?
4.  What is myopia, and how is it corrected?
5.  Give three reasons explaining why visual acuity is best when images fall on the fovea.
6.  How does the membrane potential change in response to a spot of light in the receptive ﬁ eld 

 center of a photoreceptor? Of an ON bipolar cell? Of an OFF-center ganglion cell? Why?

7.  What happens in the retina when you “get used to the dark”? Why can’t you see color in the dark?
8.  In what way is retinal output not a faithful reproduction of the visual image falling on the retina?
9.  In retinitis pigmentosa, early symptoms include the loss of peripheral vision and night vision. 

The loss of what type of cells could lead to such symptoms?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   
Arshavsky VY, Lamb TD, Pugh EN. 2002. G pro-
teins and phototransduction. Annual Review of 
Physiology 64:153–187.

Berson DM. 2003. Strange vision: ganglion 

cells as circadian photoreceptors. Trends in 
Neurosciences 26:314–320.

Field GD, Chichilinsky EJ. 2007. Information 

processing in the primate retina: circuitry and 
 coding. Annual Review of Neuroscience 30:1–30.
Nassi JJ, Callaway EM. 2009. Parallel processing 
strategies of the primate visual system. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 10:360–372.

Solomon SG, Lennie P. 2007. The machinery of 
colour vision. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8:
276–286.

Wade NJ. 2007. Image, eye, and retina. Journal 
of the Optical Society of America 24:1229–1249.
Wassle H. 2004. Parallel processing in the mam-
malian retina. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5:
747–757.

293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   330
293–330_Bear_09_revised_final.indd   330

12/20/14   4:26 AM
12/20/14   4:26 AM

CHAPTER TEN

The Central Visual System

INTRODUCTION
THE RETINOFUGAL PROJECTION

The Optic Nerve, Optic Chiasm, and Optic Tract
Right and Left Visual Hemiﬁ elds
Targets of the Optic Tract

 BOX 10.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: David and Goliath
Nonthalamic Targets of the Optic Tract

THE LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS

The Segregation of Input by Eye and by Ganglion Cell Type
Receptive Fields
Nonretinal Inputs to the LGN

ANATOMY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX

Retinotopy
Lamination of the Striate Cortex

The Cells of Different Layers

Inputs and Outputs of the Striate Cortex

Innervation of Other Cortical Layers from Layer IVC
Ocular Dominance Columns
Striate Cortex Outputs

Cytochrome Oxidase Blobs

PHYSIOLOGY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX

Receptive Fields

Binocularity
Orientation Selectivity
 BOX 10.2   BRAIN FOOD: Cortical Organization Revealed by Optical 
and Calcium Imaging
Direction Selectivity
Simple and Complex Receptive Fields
Blob Receptive Fields

Parallel Pathways and Cortical Modules

Parallel Pathways
Cortical Modules

BEYOND THE STRIATE CORTEX

The Dorsal Stream

Area MT
Dorsal Areas and Motion Processing

The Ventral Stream

Area V4
Area IT
 BOX 10.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Finding Faces in the Brain, by Nancy Kanwisher

FROM SINGLE NEURONS TO PERCEPTION

 BOX 10.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Magic of Seeing in 3D

Receptive Field Hierarchy and Perception
Parallel Processing and Perception

CONCLUDING REMARKS

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   331
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   331

331331
33333333333333333 1111113333333333333 111111

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

332

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCCTION

 Although  our  visual  system  provides  us  with  a  uniﬁ ed  picture  of  the 
world  around  us,  this  picture  has  multiple  facets.  Objects  we  see  have 
shape and color. They have a position in space, and sometimes they move. 
For us to see each of these properties, neurons somewhere in the visual 
system must be sensitive to them. Moreover, because we have two eyes, 
we actually have two visual images in our head, and somehow they must 
be merged. 

 In Chapter 9, we saw that in many ways the eye acts like a camera. 
But  starting  with  the  retina,  the  rest  of  the  visual  system  is  far  more 
elaborate, far more interesting, and capable of doing far more than any 
camera. For example, we saw that the retina does not simply pass along 
information about the patterns of light and dark that fall on it. Rather, 
the retina  extracts  information about differences in brightness and color. 
There  are  roughly  100  million  photoreceptors  in  the  retina,  but  only 
1 million axons leave the eye  carrying information to the rest of the brain. 
What we perceive about the world around us, therefore, depends on what 
information is extracted by the output cells of the retina and how this 
information is analyzed and interpreted by the rest of the central ner-
vous system (CNS). An example is color. There is no such thing as color 
in the physical world; there is simply a spectrum of visible wavelengths 
of light that are reﬂ ected by objects around us. Based on the information 
extracted by the three types of cone photoreceptors, however, our brain 
synthesizes a rainbow of colors and ﬁ lls our world with it. 

 In this chapter, we explore how the information extracted by the retina 
is analyzed by the central visual system. The pathway  serving conscious 
visual  perception  includes  the   lateral  geniculate  nucleus  (LGN)   of  the 

(a)  

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 10.1
Perceptual illusions. (a) The two tabletops are of identical dimensions and are 
imaged on similarly sized patches of retina. To prove this to yourself, compare the 
vertical extent of the left table with the horizontal size of the right table. Because 
of the brain’s 3D interpretation of the 2D image, the perceived sizes are quite dif-
ferent. (b) This is an illusory spiral. Try tracing it with your finger. (Source: Part a 
adapted from R. Shepard, 1990, p. 48; part b adapted from J. Fraser, 1908.)

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   332
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   332

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

333

thalamus and the primary visual cortex, also called  area 17 ,  V1 , or the 
striate cortex . We will see that the information funneled through this ge-
niculocortical pathway is processed in parallel by neurons specialized for 
the analysis of different stimulus attributes. The striate cortex then feeds 
this information to more than two dozen extrastriate cortical areas in the 
occipital, temporal, and parietal lobes, and many of these appear to be 
specialized for different types of analysis. 

 Much  of  what  we  know  about  the  central  visual  system  was  ﬁ rst 
worked out in the domestic cat and then extended to the rhesus monkey, 
 Macaca mulatta . The macaque monkey, as it is also called, relies heavily 
on vision for survival in its habitat, as do we humans. In fact, tests of 
the performance of this primate’s visual system show that in virtually all 
respects, it rivals that of humans. Thus, although most of this chapter 
concerns the organization of the macaque visual system most neurosci-
entists agree that it approximates very closely the situation in our own 
brain. 

 Visual  neuroscience  cannot  yet  explain  every  aspect  of  visual  per-
ception (Figure 10.1). However, signiﬁ cant progress has been made in 
answering  a  basic  question:  How  do  neurons  represent  the  different 
facets of the visual world? By examining those stimuli that make dif-
ferent  neurons  in  the  visual  cortex  respond,  and  how  these  response 
properties arise, we begin to see how the brain portrays the visual world 
around us. 

 THE RETINOFUGAL PROJECTION 
THE RRETINNOFUGAL PROJECTTION 

 The neural pathway that leaves the eye, beginning with the optic nerve, 
is often referred to as the  retinofugal projection . The sufﬁ x  -fugal  is 
from the Latin word meaning “to ﬂ ee” and is commonly used in neuro-
anatomy to describe a pathway that is directed away from a structure. 
Thus, a centrifugal projection goes away from the center, a corticofugal 
projection goes away from the cortex, and the retinofugal projection goes 
away from the retina. 

 We begin our tour of the central visual system by looking at how the 
retinofugal projection courses from each eye to the brain stem on each 
side, and how the task of analyzing the visual world initially is divided 
among, and organized within, certain structures of the brain stem. Then, 
we  focus  on  the  major  arm  of  the  retinofugal  projection  that  mediates 
 conscious visual perception. 

 The Optic Nerve, Optic Chiasm, and Optic Tract 
 The ganglion cell axons “ﬂ eeing” the retina pass through three structures 
before they form synapses in the brain stem. The components of this reti-
nofugal projection are, in order, the optic nerve, the optic chiasm, and the 
optic tract (Figure 10.2). The  optic nerves  exit the left and right eyes at 
the optic disks, travel through the fatty tissue behind the eyes in their 
bony orbits, then pass through holes in the ﬂ oor of the skull. The optic 
nerves from both eyes combine to form the  optic chiasm  (named for the 
X shape of the Greek letter chi), which lies at the base of the brain, just 
anterior to where the pituitary gland dangles down. 

 At the optic chiasm, the axons originating in the nasal retinas cross 
from one side to the other. The crossing of a ﬁ ber bundle from one side of 
the brain to the other is called a  decussation . Because only the axons 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   333
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   333

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

334

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Eye

Optic nerve

Optic chiasm

Stalk of
pituitary
gland

Optic tract

Cut surface of
brain stem

▲ FIGURE 10.2
The retinofugal projection. This view of the base of the brain shows the optic 
nerves, optic chiasm, and optic tracts.

originating in the nasal retinas cross, we say that a partial decussation 
of  the  retinofugal  projection  occurs  at  the  optic  chiasm.  Following  the 
partial decussation at the optic chiasm, the axons of the retinofugal pro-
jections form the  optic tracts,  which run just under the pia along the 
lateral surfaces of the diencephalon. 

 Right and Left Visual Hemiﬁ elds 
 To understand the signiﬁ cance of the partial decussation of the retinofu-
gal projection at the optic chiasm, let’s review the concept of the visual 
ﬁ eld introduced in Chapter 9. The full visual ﬁ eld is the entire region of 
space (measured in degrees of visual angle) that can be seen with both 
eyes  looking  straight  ahead.  Fix  your  gaze  on  a  point  straight  ahead. 
Now imagine a vertical line passing through the ﬁ xation point, dividing 
the visual ﬁ eld into left and right halves. By deﬁ nition, objects appearing 
to the left of the midline are in the left  visual hemiﬁ eld,  and objects 
appearing  to  the  right  of  the  midline  are  in  the  right  visual  hemiﬁ eld 
(Figure 10.3). 

 By looking straight ahead with both eyes open and then alternately 
closing one eye and then the other, you will see that the central portion 
of both visual hemiﬁ elds is viewed by  both  retinas. This region of space 
is therefore called the  binocular visual ﬁ eld . Notice that objects in the 
binocular region of the left visual hemiﬁ eld will be imaged on the nasal 
retina of the left eye and on the temporal retina of the right eye. Because 
the ﬁ bers from the nasal portion of the left retina cross to the right side 
at the optic chiasm, all the information about the left visual hemiﬁ eld is 
directed to the right side of the brain. Remember this rule of thumb: Optic 
nerve ﬁ bers cross in the optic chiasm, such that  the left visual hemiﬁ eld is 
“viewed” by the right hemisphere and the right visual hemiﬁ eld is “viewed” 
by the left hemisphere.  You may recall from Chapter 7 that there is also 
a decussation in the descending pyramidal tract such that one side of the 
brain controls movement of the opposite side of the body. For reasons we 
do not understand, decussations are common in the sensory and motor 
systems. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   334
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   334

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

335

Binocular visual field

Fixation point

Right visual
hemifield

Left visual
hemifield

Left eye

Left optic nerve

Right eye

Right optic
nerve

Right optic
tract

Left optic tract

Optic
chiasm

▲ FIGURE 10.3
Right and left visual hemifields. Ganglion cells in both retinas that are respon-
sive to visual stimuli in the right visual hemifield project axons into the left optic 
tract. Similarly, ganglion cells “viewing” the left visual hemifield project into the 
right optic tract.

 Targets of the Optic Tract 
 A small number of optic tract axons peel off to form synaptic connections 
with cells in the hypothalamus, and another 10% or so continue past the 
thalamus  to  innervate  the  midbrain.  But  most  of  them  innervate  the 
  lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)  of the dorsal thalamus. The neurons 
in the LGN give rise to axons that project to the primary visual cortex. 
This projection from the LGN to the cortex is called the  optic radiation . 
Lesions anywhere in the retinofugal projection from the eye to the LGN 
to the visual cortex in humans cause blindness in part or all of the visual 
ﬁ eld. Therefore, we know that it is this pathway that mediates conscious 
visual perception (Figure 10.4). 

 From our knowledge of how the visual world is represented in the reti-
nofugal  projection,  we  can  predict  the  types  of  perceptual  deﬁ cits  that 
would result from its destruction at different levels, as might occur from 
a traumatic injury to the head, a tumor, or an interruption of the blood 
supply. As shown in Figure 10.5, while a transection of the left optic  nerve  
would render a person blind in the left eye only, a transection of the left 
optic   tract   would  lead  to  blindness  in  the  right  visual  ﬁ eld  as  viewed 
through either eye. A midline transection of the optic chiasm would affect 
only the ﬁ bers that cross the midline. Because these ﬁ bers originate in 
the nasal portions of both retinas, blindness would result in the regions of 
the visual ﬁ eld viewed by the nasal retinas—that is, the peripheral visual 
ﬁ elds on both sides (Box 10.1). Because unique deﬁ cits result from lesions 
at different sites, neuroophthalmologists and neurologists can locate sites 
of damage by assessing visual ﬁ eld deﬁ cits. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   335
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   335

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

336

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Retina

(a)

LGN

Optic radiation

Primary visual
cortex

Right optic tract

Right LGN

Optic
radiation

(b)

▲ FIGURE 10.4
The visual pathway that mediates conscious visual perception. (a) A side view 
of the brain with the retinogeniculocortical pathway shown inside (blue). (b) A hor-
izontal section through the brain exposing the same pathway.

Primary visual cortex

Transection of
left optic nerve

(a)  

Transection of
left optic tract

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 10.5
Visual field deficits from lesions in the retinofugal projection. (a) If the 
optic nerve on the left side is cut, vision will be lost completely in the left 
eye. Note that the resultant blindness is only in the monocular portion of 
the left hemifield because the right eye still sees most of the left visual 
field. (b) If the optic tract on the left side is cut, vision will be lost in the 
right visual field of each eye. (c) If the optic chiasm is split down the mid-
dle, only the crossing fibers will be damaged, and peripheral vision will be 
lost in both eyes.

Transection of
optic chiasm

(c)  

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   336
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   336

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

337

BOX 10.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

David and Goliath

Many  of  you  are  familiar  with  the  famous  story  of  David 

and  Goliath,  which  appears  in  the  Hebrew  scriptures  (Old 
Testament).  The  armies  of  the  Philistines  and  the  Israelites 
were gathered for battle when Goliath, a Philistine, came forth 
and challenged the Israelites to settle the dispute by sending 
out their best man to face him in a ﬁ ght to the death. Goliath, 
it seems, was a man of great proportions, measuring more 
than “six cubits” in height. If you consider that a cubit is the 
distance from the elbow to the tip of the middle ﬁ nger, about 
20 inches, this guy was more than 10 feet tall! Goliath was 
armed to the teeth with body armor, a javelin, and a sword. 
To face this giant, the Israelites sent David, a young and di-
minutive shepherd, armed only with a sling and ﬁ ve smooth 
stones.  Here’s  how  the  action  is  described  in  the  Revised 
Standard Version of the Bible (1 Samuel 17:48):

When  the  Philistine  arose  and  came  and  drew  near 
to meet David, David ran quickly toward the battle line to 
meet the Philistine. And David put his hand in his bag and 
took out a stone, and slung it, and struck the Philistine on 
his forehead; the stone sank into his forehead, and he fell 
on his face to the ground.

Now  why,  you  might  ask,  are  we  giving  a  theology  les-
son  in  a  neuroscience  textbook?  The  answer  is  that  our 
understanding  of  the  visual  pathway  offers  an  explanation, 
in   addition  to  divine  intervention,  for  why  Goliath  was  at  a 
disadvantage  in  this  battle.  Body  size  is  regulated  by  the 
secretion  of  growth  hormone  from  the  anterior  lobe  of  the 
pituitary  gland.  In  some  cases,  the  anterior  lobe  becomes 
hypertrophied (swollen) and produces excessive amounts of 
the hormone, resulting in body growth to unusually large pro-
portions. Such individuals are called pituitary giants and can 
be well over 8 feet tall.

Pituitary  hypertrophy  also  disrupts  normal  vision.  Recall 
that the optic nerve ﬁ bers from the nasal retinas cross in the 
optic chiasm, which butts up against the stalk of the pituitary. 
Any enlargement of the pituitary compresses these crossing 
ﬁ bers and results in a loss of peripheral vision called bitempo-
ral hemianopia, or tunnel vision. (See if you can ﬁ gure out why 
this is true from what you know about the visual pathway.) 
We  can  speculate  that  David  was  able  to  draw  close  and 
smite Goliath because the pituitary giant had completely lost 
sight of him.

 Nonthalamic Targets of the Optic Tract. As we have said, some retinal 
ganglion  cells  send  axons  to  innervate  structures  other  than  the  LGN. 
Direct projections to part of the hypothalamus play an important role in 
synchronizing a variety of biological rhythms, including sleep and wake-
fulness, with the daily dark–light cycle (see Chapter 19). Direct projec-
tions to part of the midbrain, called the  pretectum , control the size of the 
pupil and certain types of eye movement. And about 10% of the ganglion 
cells  in  the  retina  project  to  a  part  of  the  midbrain  tectum  called  the 
superior colliculus  (Latin for “little hill”) (Figure 10.6). 

Thalamus

Eye

Midbrain

▲ FIGURE 10.6
The superior colliculus. Located in the tectum of the midbrain, 
the superior colliculus is involved in generating saccadic eye 
movements, the quick jumps in eye position used to scan across 
a page while reading.

Superior
colliculus

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   337
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   337

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

338

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 While 10% may not sound like much of a projection, bear in mind that 
in  primates,  this  is  about  100,000  neurons,  which  is  equivalent  to  the 
total  number of retinal ganglion cells in a cat! In fact, the tectum of the 
midbrain is the major target of the retinofugal projection in all nonmam-
malian vertebrates (ﬁ sh, amphibians, birds, and reptiles). In these verte-
brate groups, the superior colliculus is called the  optic tectum . This is 
why the projection from the retina to the superior colliculus is often called 
the  retinotectal projection , even in mammals. 

 In the superior colliculus, a patch of neurons activated by a point of 
light,  via  indirect  connections  with  motor  neurons  in  the  brain  stem, 
commands eye and head movements to bring the image of this point in 
space onto the fovea. This branch of the retinofugal projection is thereby 
 involved in orienting the eyes in response to new stimuli in the visual pe-
riphery. We saw in Chapter 9 that only the fovea has a dense concentra-
tion of cones sufﬁ cient for high-acuity vision. Therefore, it is critical that 
eye movements move our fovea to objects in our environment that might 
be  threatening  or  of  interest.  We  will  return  to  the  superior  colliculus 
when we discuss motor systems in Chapter 14. 

THE LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS 
THE LLATERRAL GENICULATE NNUCLEUS 

 The right and left lateral geniculate nuclei, located in the dorsal thalamus, 
are the major targets of the two optic tracts. Viewed in cross section, each 
LGN appears to be arranged in six distinct layers of cells (Figure 10.7). 

Level of section:

Thalamus

6
5

4

3

2

1

▲ FIGURE 10.7
The LGN of the macaque monkey. The tissue has been stained to show cell 
bodies, which appear as purple dots. Notice particularly the six principal layers 
and the larger size of the cells in the two ventral layers (layers 1 and 2). 
(Source: Adapted from Hubel, 1988, p. 65.)

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   338
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   338

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

339

By convention, the layers are numbered 1 through 6, starting with the 
most ventral layer, layer 1. In three dimensions, the layers of the LGN 
are arranged like a stack of six pancakes, one on top of the other. The 
pancakes do not lie ﬂ at, however; they are bent around the optic tract like 
a  knee  joint.  This  shape  explains  the  name  geniculate,  from  the  Latin 
 geniculatus,  meaning “like a little knee.” 

 The  LGN  is  the  gateway  to  the  visual  cortex  and,  therefore,  to  con-
scious visual perception. Let’s explore the structure and function of this 
thalamic nucleus. 

 The Segregation of Input by Eye and by Ganglion 
Cell Type 
 LGN neurons receive synaptic input from the retinal ganglion cells, and 
most geniculate neurons project an axon to the primary visual cortex via 
the optic radiation. The segregation of LGN neurons into layers suggests 
that different types of retinal information are being kept separate at this 
synaptic relay, and indeed this is the case: Axons arising from M-type, 
P-type, and nonM–nonP ganglion cells in the two retinas synapse on cells 
in different LGN layers. 

 Recall from our rule of thumb that the  right  LGN receives information 
about the  left  visual ﬁ eld. The left visual ﬁ eld is viewed by both the nasal 
left retina and the temporal right retina. At the LGN, input from the two 
eyes is kept separate. In the right LGN, the right eye (ipsilateral) axons 
synapse on LGN cells in layers 2, 3, and 5. The left eye (contralateral) 
axons synapse on cells in layers 1, 4, and 6 (Figure 10.8). 

 A  closer  look  at  the  LGN  in  Figure  10.7  reveals  that  the  two  ven-
tral  layers,  1  and  2,  contain  larger  neurons,  and  the  four  more  dorsal 

Left LGN

6
5
4
3
2
1

Right LGN

6

5
4
3
2
1

Left
nasal
retina

Left
temporal
retina

Right 
temporal
retina

Right 
nasal
retina

▲ FIGURE 10.8
Retinal inputs to the LGN layers. The retinal axons project such that the LGN is 
excited by light in the contralateral visual field presented to either eye.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   339
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   339

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

340

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 layers, 3 through 6, contain smaller cells. The ventral layers are there-
fore called  magnocellular LGN layers , and the dorsal layers are called 
  parvocellular LGN layers . Recall from Chapter 9 that ganglion cells 
in the retina may also be classiﬁ ed into magnocellular and parvocellular 
groups. As it turns out, P-type ganglion cells in the retina project exclu-
sively to the parvocellular LGN, and M-type ganglion cells in the retina 
project entirely to the magnocellular LGN. 

 In addition to the neurons in the six principal layers of the LGN, it 
was later discovered that there are numerous tiny neurons that lie just 
ventral to each layer. Cells in these  koniocellular LGN layers  ( konio  
is from the Greek for “dust”), sometimes referred to as layers K1–K6, re-
ceive input from the nonM–nonP types of retinal ganglion cells and also 
project to the visual cortex. For the most part, each koniocellular layer 
gets input from the same eye as the overlying M or P layer. For example, 
layer K1 receives input from the contralateral eye just as layer 1 neurons 
do. In Chapter 9, we saw that in the retina, M-type, P-type, and nonM–
nonP ganglion cells respond differently to light and color. In the LGN, 
the different information derived from the three categories of retinal gan-
glion cells from the two eyes remains largely segregated. 

 The  anatomical  organization  of  the  LGN  supports  the  idea  that  the 
retina gives rise to streams of information that are processed in parallel. 
This organization is summarized in Figure 10.9. 

 Receptive Fields 
 In Figure 9.25, we saw how the receptive ﬁ eld of a retinal ganglion cell 
can be mapped out by recording from the neuron while spots of light are 
shone  on  the  retina.  Similarly,  by  inserting  a  microelectrode  into  the 
LGN, it is possible to study the action potential discharges of a genicu-
late neuron in response to visual stimuli and map its receptive ﬁ eld. The 
surprising conclusion of such studies is that the visual  receptive ﬁ elds of 

Retinal output

LGN

Eye

Ganglion cell type

Layer

LGN cell type

Contralateral

Ipsilateral

Contralateral

Ipsilateral

Ipsilateral

Contralateral

Same as overlying
principal layer

(a)  

P-type

M-type

nonM-nonP

6

5

4

3

2

1

6

K6

5

K5

4

K4

3

K3

2

K2

1

K1

Parvocellular

Magnocellular

K1–K6 (ventral
to each principal
layer)

Koniocellular

(b)

▲ FIGURE 10.9
The organization of the LGN. (a) Ganglion cell inputs to the different LGN layers. 
(b) A thin koniocellular layer (shown in pink) is ventral to each of the six principal 
layers.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   340
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   340

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

341

LGN neurons are almost identical to those of the ganglion cells that feed 
them.  For  example,  magnocellular  LGN  neurons  have  relatively  large 
center-surround receptive ﬁ elds, respond to stimulation of their receptive 
ﬁ eld centers with a transient burst of action potentials, and are insensi-
tive to differences in wavelength. All in all, they are just like M-type gan-
glion cells. Likewise, parvocellular LGN cells, like P-type retinal ganglion 
cells, have relatively small center-surround receptive ﬁ elds and respond 
to stimulation of their receptive ﬁ eld centers with a sustained increase in 
the frequency of action potentials; many of them exhibit color opponency. 
Receptive ﬁ elds of cells in the koniocellular layers are center-surround 
and  have  either  light/dark  or  color  opponency.  Within  all  layers  of  the 
LGN, the neurons are activated by only one eye (i.e., they are monocular) 
and ON-center and OFF-center cells are  intermixed. 

 Nonretinal Inputs to the LGN 
 What makes the similarity of LGN and ganglion cell receptive ﬁ elds so 
surprising is that the retina is not the main source of synaptic input to 
the LGN. In addition to the retina, the LGN receives inputs from other 
parts of the thalamus and the brain stem. The major input, constituting 
about  80%  of  the  excitatory  synapses,  comes  from  primary  visual  cor-
tex.  Thus,  one  might  reasonably  expect  that  this  corticofugal  feedback 
pathway  would  signiﬁ cantly  alter  the  qualities  of  the  visual  responses 
recorded in the LGN. So far, however, a role for this massive input has 
not been clearly identiﬁ ed. One hypothesis is that “top–down” modulation 
from the visual cortex to the LGN gates subsequent “bottom-up” input 
from the LGN back to the cortex. For example, if we want to selectively 
pay attention to a portion of our visual ﬁ eld, we might be able to suppress 
inputs  coming  from  outside  the  attended  area.  We’ll  have  more  to  say 
about this in our discussion of attention in Chapter 21. 

 The LGN also receives synaptic inputs from neurons in the brain stem 
whose activity is related to alertness and attentiveness (see Chapters 15 
and 19). Have you ever “seen” a ﬂ ash of light when you are startled in a 
dark room? This perceived ﬂ ash might be a result of the direct  activation 
of LGN neurons by this pathway. Usually, however, this input does not 
directly evoke action potentials in LGN neurons. But it can powerfully 
modulate the magnitude of LGN responses to visual stimuli. (Recall mod-
ulation from Chapters 5 and 6.) Thus, the LGN is more than a simple 
relay  from  the  retina  to  the  cortex;  it  is  the  ﬁ rst  site  in  the  ascending 
visual pathway where what we see is inﬂ uenced by how we feel. 

ANATOMY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX 
ANATTOMY OF THE STRIATE CCORTEX 

 The LGN has a single major synaptic target: the primary visual cortex. 
Recall  from  Chapter  7  that  the  cortex  may  be  divided  into  a  number 
of  distinct  areas  based  on  their  connections  and  cytoarchitecture.  The 
primary visual cortex  is Brodmann’s  area 17  and is located in the oc-
cipital lobe of the primate brain. Much of area 17 lies on the medial sur-
face of the hemisphere, surrounding the calcarine ﬁ ssure (Figure 10.10). 
Other terms used interchangeably to describe the primary visual cortex 
are  V1  and the  striate cortex . (The term  striate  refers to the fact that 
area V1 has an unusually dense stripe of myelinated axons running par-
allel to the surface that appears white in unstained sections.) 

 We have seen that the axons of different types of retinal ganglion cells 
synapse on anatomically segregated neurons in the LGN. In the  following 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   341
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   341

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

342

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 10.10
The primary visual cortex. Top views 
are lateral; bottom views are medial.

1 cm

Area 17

1 cm

Area 17

Macaque monkey

Human

Calcarine
fissure

sections, we look at the anatomy of the striate cortex and trace the con-
nections different LGN cells make with cortical neurons. Later, we’ll ex-
plore how this information is analyzed by cortical neurons. As we did in 
the LGN, in the striate cortex we’ll see a close correlation between struc-
ture and function. 

 Retinotopy 
 The projection starting in the retina and extending to the LGN and V1 
illustrates a general organizational feature of the central visual system 
called  retinotopy.   Retinotopy   is  an  organization  whereby  neighboring 
cells in the retina feed information to neighboring places in their target 
structures—in this case, the LGN and striate cortex. In this way, the two-
dimensional  surface  of  the  retina  is   mapped   onto  the  two-dimensional 
surface of the subsequent structures (Figure 10.11a). 

 There are three important points to remember about retinotopy. First, 
the mapping of the visual ﬁ eld onto a retinotopically organized structure 
is often distorted because visual space is not sampled uniformly by the 
cells in the retina. Recall from Chapter 9 that there are many more gan-
glion cells with receptive ﬁ elds in or near the fovea than in the periphery. 
Corresponding to this, the representation of the visual ﬁ eld is distorted in 
the striate cortex: The central few degrees of the visual ﬁ eld are overrep-
resented, or  magniﬁ ed , in the retinotopic map (Figure 10.11b). In other 
words,  there  are  many  more  neurons  in  the  striate  cortex  that  receive 
input from the central retina than from the peripheral retina. 

 The second point to remember is that a discrete point of light can ac-
tivate many cells in the retina, and often many more cells in the target 
structure, due to the overlap of receptive ﬁ elds. The image of a point of 
light on the retina actually activates a large population of cortical neu-
rons; every neuron that contains that point in its receptive ﬁ eld is poten-
tially activated. Thus, when the retina is stimulated by a point of light, 
the activity in the striate cortex is a broad distribution with a peak at the 
corresponding retinotopic location. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   342
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   342

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

343

Striate cortex
(layer IVC)

LGN

Retina

4
4

5
5

6
6

7
7

8
8

9
9

2
2

3
3

1
1

1
1

8
8

2
2

9
9

Left eye

Retinal
image

LGN (left)

(a)  

(b)  

55

11

99

55

Striate cortex

▲ FIGURE 10.11
The retinotopic map in the striate cortex. (a) Neighboring locations on the ret-
ina project to neighboring locations in the LGN. This retinotopic representation is 
preserved in the LGN projection to V1. (b) The lower portion of V1 represents the 
top half of visual space, and the upper portion of V1 represents the bottom half 
of visual space. Notice also that the map is distorted, with more tissue devoted 
to analysis of the central visual field. Similar maps are found in the superior col-
liculus, LGN, and other visual cortical areas.

 Finally, don’t be misled by the word “map.” There are no pictures in 
the primary visual cortex for a little person in our brain to look at. While 
it’s true that the arrangement of connections establishes a mapping be-
tween the retina and V1, perception is based on the brain’s interpreta-
tion of distributed patterns of activity, not literal snapshots of the world. 
(We  discuss visual perception later in this chapter.) 

 Lamination of the Striate Cortex 
 The neocortex in general, and the striate cortex in particular, have neu-
ronal  cell  bodies  arranged  into  about  a  half-dozen  layers.  These  layers 
can be seen clearly in a Nissl stain of the cortex, which, as described in 
Chapter 2, leaves a deposit of dye (usually blue or violet) in the soma of 
each neuron. Starting at the white matter (containing the cortical input 
and output ﬁ bers), the cell layers are named by Roman numerals VI, V, 
IV, III, and II. Layer I, just under the pia mater, is largely devoid of neu-
rons and consists almost entirely of axons and dendrites of cells in other 
layers (Figure 10.12). The full thickness of the striate cortex from white 
matter to pia is about 2 mm, the height of the lowercase letter m. 

 As Figure 10.12 shows, describing the lamination of the striate cortex 
as a six-layer scheme is somewhat misleading. There are actually at least 
nine distinct layers of neurons. To maintain Brodmann’s convention that 
the  neocortex  has  six  layers,  however,  neuroanatomists  combine  three 
sublayers into layer IV, labeled IVA, IVB, and IVC. Layer IVC is further 
divided into two tiers called IVC ␣  and IVC ␤ . The anatomical segregation 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   343
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   343

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

344

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

I
II

III

A

B

C

V

VI

IV

White
matter

α

β

▲ FIGURE 10.12
The cytoarchitecture of the striate cortex. The tissue has been Nissl stained to 
show cell bodies, which appear as purple dots. (Source: Adapted from Hubel, 
1988, p. 97.)

of  neurons  into  layers  suggests  that  there  is  a  division  of  labor  in  the 
cortex, similar to what we saw in the LGN. We can learn a lot about how 
the  cortex  handles  visual  information  by  examining  the  structure  and 
connections of its different layers. 

I

II
III

IVA

IVB

IVC

V

VI

α
β

▲ FIGURE 10.13
The dendritic morphology of some 
cells in the striate cortex. Pyramidal 
cells are found in layers III, IVB, V, and 
VI, and spiny stellate cells are found in 
layer IVC.

 The Cells of Different Layers. Many different neuronal shapes have been 
identiﬁ ed in striate cortex, but here we focus on two principal types, de-
ﬁ ned  by  the  appearance  of  their  dendritic  trees  (Figure  10.13).   Spiny 
 stellate cells  are small neurons with spine-covered dendrites that radiate 
out from the cell body (recall dendritic spines from Chapter 2). They are 
seen primarily in the two tiers of layer IVC. Outside layer IVC are many 
 pyramidal cells . These neurons are also covered with spines and are char-
acterized  by  a  single  thick  apical  dendrite  that  branches  as  it  ascends 
toward the pia mater and by multiple basal dendrites that extend hori-
zontally. In Figure 10.13, the axon is the single neurite descending from 
the soma of each pyramidal cell. 

 Notice that a pyramidal cell in one layer may have dendrites extend-
ing into other layers. For the most part,  only pyramidal cells send axons 
out of the striate cortex  to form connections with other parts of the brain. 
The axons of stellate cells, which are indistinguishable from dendrites in 
Figure 10.13, generally make local connections only within the cortex. An 
exception to this rule is spiny stellate neurons in layer IVB that project to 
area V5, which we will discuss shortly. 

 In addition to the spiny neurons, inhibitory neurons, which lack spines, 
are sprinkled in all cortical layers as well. These neurons form only local 
connections. 

 Inputs and Outputs of the Striate Cortex 
 The distinct lamination of the striate cortex is reminiscent of the layers 
we saw in the LGN. In the LGN, every layer receives retinal afferents and 
sends efferents to the visual cortex. In the visual cortex, the situation is 
different; only a subset of the layers receives input from the LGN or sends 
output to a different cortical or subcortical area. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   344
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   344

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

345

 Axons  from  the  LGN  terminate  in  several  different  cortical  layers, 
with the largest number going to layer IVC. We’ve seen that the output 
of the LGN is divided into streams of information, for example, from the 
magnocellular and parvocellular layers serving the right and left eyes. 
These streams remain anatomically segregated in layer IVC. 

 Magnocellular LGN neurons project primarily to layer IVC ␣ , and par-
vocellular LGN neurons project to layer IVC ␤ . Imagine that the two tiers 
of layer IVC are pancakes, stacked one ( ␣ ) on top of the other ( ␤ ). Because 
the input from the LGN to the cortex is arranged topographically, we see 
that layer IVC contains two overlapping retinotopic maps, one from the 
magnocellular  LGN  (IVC ␣ )  and  the  other  from  the  parvocellular  LGN 
(IVC ␤ ).  Koniocellular  LGN  axons  follow  a  different  path,  making  syn-
apses primarily in layers I and III. 

 Innervation  of  Other  Cortical  Layers  from  Layer  IVC.  Most  intracorti-
cal connections extend perpendicular to the cortical surface along radial 
lines that run across the layers, from white matter to layer I. This pattern 
of  radial connections  maintains the retinotopic organization established 
in layer IV. Therefore, a cell in layer VI, for example, receives informa-
tion from the same part of the retina as does a cell above it in layer IV 
(Figure 10.14a). However, the axons of some layer III pyramidal cells ex-
tend collateral branches that make  horizontal connections  within layer 
III (Figure 10.14b). Radial and horizontal connections play different roles 
in the analysis of the visual world, as we’ll see later in the chapter. 

 Leaving layer IV, there continues to be considerable anatomical segre-
gation of the magnocellular and parvocellular processing streams. Layer 
IVC ␣ , which receives magnocellular LGN input, projects mainly to cells 
in layer IVB. Layer IVC ␤ , which receives parvocellular LGN input, proj-
ects mainly to layer III. In layers III and IVB, an axon may form synapses 
with the dendrites of pyramidal cells of all layers. 

 Ocular  Dominance  Columns.  How  are  the  left  eye  and  right  eye  LGN 
inputs arranged when they reach the striate cortex? Do they randomly 
intermix,  or  are  they  kept  segregated?  The  answer  was  provided  by  a 
ground-breaking  experiment  performed  in  the  early  1970s  at  Harvard 
Medical School by neuroscientists David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. They 
injected a radioactive amino acid into one eye of a monkey (Figure 10.15). 
This amino acid was incorporated into proteins by the ganglion cells, and 
the proteins were transported down the ganglion cell axons into the LGN 
(recall anterograde transport from Chapter 2). Here, the radioactive pro-
teins spilled out of the ganglion cell axon terminals and were taken up 
by nearby LGN neurons. But not all LGN cells took up the radioactive 
material; only those cells that were postsynaptic to the inputs from the in-
jected eye incorporated the labeled protein. These cells then transported 
the radioactive proteins to their axon terminals in layer IVC of striate 
cortex. The location of the radioactive axon terminals was visualized by 
ﬁ rst placing a piece of ﬁ lm over thin sections of striate cortex and later 
developing the ﬁ lm like a photograph, a process called  autoradiography  
(introduced in Chapter 6). The resulting collection of silver grains on the 
ﬁ lm marked the location of the radioactive LGN inputs. 

 In sections cut perpendicular to the cortical surface, Hubel and Wiesel 
observed  that  the  distribution  of  axon  terminals  relaying  information 
from the injected eye was not continuous in layer IVC, but rather was 
split up into a series of equally spaced patches, each about 0.5 mm wide 
(Figure 10.16a). In later experiments, the cortex was sectioned tangen-
tially, parallel to layer IV. This revealed that the left eye and right eye 

(a)  

Layer III

Layer IVC

Layer VI

Layer III

Layer IVC

Layer VI

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 10.14
Patterns of intracortical connections. 
(a) Radial connections. (b) Horizontal 
connections.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   345
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   345

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

346

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 10.15
Transneuronal autoradiography. Radio-
active proline is ① injected into one eye, 
where it is ② taken up by retinal ganglion 
cells and incorporated into proteins that 
are ③ transported down the axons to the 
LGN. Some radioactivity spills out of the 
retinal terminals and is ④ taken up by LGN 
neurons that then ⑤ transport it to the stri-
ate cortex. The location of radioactivity 
can be determined using autoradiography.

1

2

3

Radioactive
proline

To cortex

5

4

I
II,III
IV
V
VI

(a)  

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 10.16
Ocular dominance columns in layer IV of the striate cortex. (a) The organiza-
tion of ocular dominance columns in layer IV of macaque monkey striate cortex. 
The distribution of LGN axons serving one eye is shaded blue. In cross section 
(looking at layer IV from the side), these eye-specific zones appear as patches, 
each about 0.5 mm wide, in layer IV. Peeled-back layers reveal that the ocular 
dominance columns in layer IV look like zebra stripes. (b) An autoradiograph of a 
histological section of layer IV viewed from above. Two weeks prior to the experi-
ment, one eye of this monkey was injected with radioactive proline. In the autora-
diograph, the radioactive LGN terminals appear bright on a dark background. 
(Source: LeVay et al., 1980.)

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   346
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   346

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

347

inputs to layer IV are laid out as a series of alternating bands, like the 
stripes of a zebra (Figure 10.16b). Rather than randomly mixing, neurons 
connected to the left and right eyes are as distinct in layer IV as they are 
in the LGN. 

 Layer IVC stellate cells project axons radially up mainly to layers IVB 
and III where, for the ﬁ rst time, information from the left eye and right 
eye begins to mix (Figure 10.17). Whereas all layer IVC neurons receive 
input from only one eye, most neurons in layers II, III, V, and VI receive 
some amount of input from each eye. For example, a neuron above a left 
eye patch of neurons in layer IVC receives input from both left eye and 
right  eye  neurons  in  layer  IVC,  but  more  of  the  projections  come  from 
the left eye. It is said that the input to the neuron is “dominated” by the 
left eye. In Figure 10.17, the red and blue patches of cells in layer III are 
dominated by the right and left eye, respectively; the purple patches of 
neurons receive roughly equal input from the two eyes. Because of the 
alternating patches of left eye and right eye input reaching layer IV and 
the overall radial projections, neurons outside layer IV are organized into 
alternating bands dominated by the left and right eye. The bands of cells 
extending through the thickness of the striate cortex are called  ocular 
dominance columns . 

 Striate  Cortex  Outputs.  As  previously  mentioned,  the  pyramidal  cells 
send axons out of the striate cortex into the white matter. The pyrami-
dal cells in different layers innervate different structures. Layer II, III, 
and IVB pyramidal cells send their axons to other cortical areas. Layer V 
 pyramidal cells send axons all the way down to the superior colliculus and 
pons. Layer VI pyramidal cells give rise to the massive axonal projection 
back to the LGN (Figure 10.18). Pyramidal cell axons in all layers also 
branch and form local connections in the cortex. 

 Cytochrome Oxidase Blobs 
 As we have seen, layers II and III play a key role in visual processing, 
providing most of the information that leaves V1 for other cortical areas. 
Anatomical studies suggest that the V1 output comes from two distinct 
populations of neurons in the superﬁ cial layers. When striate cortex tis-
sue  is  stained  to  reveal  the  presence  of   cytochrome  oxidase ,  a  mito-
chondrial  enzyme  used  for  cell  metabolism,  the  stain  is  not  uniformly 
distributed in layers II and III. Rather, the cytochrome oxidase staining 
in cross sections of striate cortex appears as a colonnade, a series of pil-
lars at regular intervals, running the full thickness of layers II and III 
and also in layers V and VI (Figure 10.19a). When the cortex is sliced tan-
gentially through layer III, these pillars appear like the spots of a leopard 
(Figure 10.19b). These pillars of cytochrome oxidase–rich neurons have 
come to be called  blobs . The blobs are in rows, each blob centered on an 
ocular  dominance  stripe  in  layer  IV.  Between  the  blobs  are  “interblob” 
regions. The blobs receive direct LGN input from the koniocellular  layers, 
as well as parvocellular and magnocellular input from layer IVC of striate 
cortex. 

Left eye
ocular

Right eye

ocular

dominance

dominance

column

column

Layer III

Layer IVC

Layer VI

Left eye

input

Right eye

input

▲ FIGURE 10.17
The mixing of information from the two 
eyes. Axons project from layer IVC to 
more superficial layers. Most layer III neu-
rons receive binocular input from both left 
and right eyes. There are layer III neurons 
with responses dominated by the right 
eye (red), left eye (blue), or roughly equally 
responsive to input from the two eyes 
(purple). Because of the radial connectiv-
ity in striate cortex, neurons in layers 
above and below layer IV are dominated 
by the same eye. Ocular dominance col-
umns (between vertical dotted lines) con-
tain neurons with input dominated by one 
eye, and the columns alternate between 
left and right eye dominance.

I
II

III

IVA

IVB

IVC

V

VI

White matter 

 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE STRIATE CORTEX 
PHYSSIOLOGY OF THE STRIATTE CORTEX 

 Beginning  in  the  early  1960s,  Hubel  and  Wiesel  were  the  ﬁ rst  to  sys-
tematically  explore  the  physiology  of  the  striate  cortex  with  microelec-
trodes. They were students of Stephen Kufﬂ er, who was then at Johns 

Other
cortical
areas

Pons and
superior
colliculus

LGN

▲ FIGURE 10.18
Outputs from the striate cortex.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   347
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   347

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

348

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Cytochrome 
oxidase
blobs

I
II,III
IV
V
VI

Hopkins  University  and  later  moved  with  them  to  Harvard.  They  ex-
tended  Kufﬂ er’s  innovative  methods  of  receptive  ﬁ eld  mapping  to  the 
central visual pathways. After showing that LGN neurons behave much 
like retinal ganglion cells, they turned their attention to the striate cor-
tex, initially in cats and later in monkeys. (Here we focus on the monkey 
 cortex.) The work that continues today on the physiology of the striate 
cortex is built on the solid foundation provided by Hubel and Wiesel’s pio-
neering studies. Their contributions to our understanding of the cerebral 
cortex were recognized with the Nobel Prize in 1981. 

(a)  

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 10.19
Cytochrome oxidase blobs. (a) The 
 organization of cytochrome oxidase 
blobs in macaque monkey striate cortex. 
The tissue that stains darkly for cyto-
chrome oxidase looks like radial pillars in 
layers II, III, V, and VI. A cross section 
tangential to the surface shows the dis-
crete patches that gave blobs their 
name (underside of layer III). (b) A pho-
tograph of a histological section of layer 
III, stained for cytochrome oxidase and 
viewed from above. The dark spots are 
cytochrome oxidase blobs. (Source: 
Courtesy of Dr. S.H.C. Hendry.)

 Receptive Fields 
 By and large, the receptive ﬁ elds of neurons in layer IVC are similar to 
the magnocellular and parvocellular LGN neurons providing their input. 
This means they are generally small monocular center-surround recep-
tive ﬁ elds. In layer IVC ␣  the neurons are insensitive to the wavelength 
of light, whereas in layer IVC ␤  the neurons exhibit center-surround color 
opponency. Outside layer IVC (and somewhat within), new receptive ﬁ eld 
characteristics, not observed in the retina or LGN, are present. We will 
explore these in some depth because they provide clues about the role V1 
plays in visual processing and perception. 

 Binocularity. There is a direct correspondence between the arrangement 
of connections in V1 and the responses of the neurons to light in the two 
eyes.  Each  neuron  in  layers  IVC ␣   and  IVC ␤   receives  afferents  from  a 
layer of the LGN representing the left or right eye. Physiological record-
ings conﬁ rm that these neurons are monocular, responding to light only 
in one of the eyes. We have already seen that the axons leaving layer IVC 
diverge and innervate more superﬁ cial cortical layers, mixing the inputs 
from the two eyes (see Figure 10.17). Microelectrode recordings conﬁ rm 
this anatomical fact; most neurons in layers superﬁ cial to IVC are bin-
ocular, responding to light in either eye. The ocular dominance columns 
demonstrated with autoradiography are reﬂ ected in the responses of V1 
neurons. Above the centers of ocular dominance patches in layer IVC, the 
layer II and III neurons are more strongly driven by the eye represented 
in  layer  IVC  (i.e.,  their  response  is  dominated  by  one  eye  even  though 
they are binocular). In areas where there is more equal mixing of left eye 
and  right  eye  projections  from  layer  IVC,  the  superﬁ cial  layer  neurons 
respond about the same to light in either eye. 

 We say that the neurons have  binocular receptive ﬁ elds , meaning 
that  they  actually  have  two  receptive  ﬁ elds,  one  in  the  ipsilateral  eye 
and one in the contralateral eye. Retinotopy is preserved because the two 
receptive ﬁ elds of a binocular neuron are precisely placed on the retinas 
such  that  they  are  “looking”  at  the  same  point  in  in  the  contralateral 
visual ﬁ eld. The construction of binocular receptive ﬁ elds is essential in 
binocular animals, such as humans. Without them, we would probably 
be unable to use the inputs from both eyes to form a single image of the 
world around us and perform ﬁ ne motor tasks that require stereoscopic 
vision, such as threading a needle. 

 Orientation Selectivity. Most of the receptive ﬁ elds in the retina, LGN, 
and layer IVC are circular and give their greatest response to a spot of 
light matched in size to the receptive ﬁ eld center. Outside layer IVC, we 
encounter cells that no longer follow this pattern. While small spots can 
elicit a response from many cortical neurons, it is usually possible to pro-
duce  a  much  greater  response  with  other  stimuli.  Rather  by   accident, 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   348
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   348

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

349

Visual
stimulus

Receptive
field

Cell discharge

Screen

Light stimulus

Border of
receptive field

Microelectrode
in striate cortex
recording action
potentials

(a)  

▲ FIGURE 10.20
Orientation selectivity. (a) The responses of an 
orientation-selective neuron are monitored as visual 
stimuli are presented in its receptive field. The vi-
sual stimulus is a bar of light. (b) Light bars of vari-
ous orientations (left) elicit very  different responses 
(right). The optimal orientation for this neuron is 45° 
counterclockwise from vertical.

(b)  

Hubel  and  Wiesel  found  that  many  neurons  in  V1  respond  best  to  an 
elongated bar of light moving across their receptive ﬁ elds. But the orien-
tation of the bar is critical. The greatest response is given to a bar with a 
particular orientation; bars perpendicular to the optimal orientation gen-
erally elicit much weaker responses (Figure 10.20). Neurons having this 
type of response are said to exhibit  orientation selectivity . Most of the 
V1 neurons outside layer IVC (and some within) are orientation selective. 
The optimal orientation for a neuron can be any angle around the clock. 
 If  V1  neurons  can  have  any  optimal  orientation,  you  might  wonder 
whether  the  orientation  selectivity  of  nearby  neurons  is  related.  From 
the earliest work of Hubel and Wiesel, the answer to this question was an 
emphatic yes. As a microelectrode is advanced radially (perpendicular to 
the surface) from one layer to the next, the preferred orientation remains 
the  same  for  all  the  selective  neurons  encountered  from  layer  II  down 
through layer VI. Hubel and Wiesel called such a radial column of cells 
an   orientation column . 

 As an electrode passes tangentially (parallel to the surface) through the 
cortex in a single layer, the preferred orientation progressively shifts. We 
now know, from the use of a technique called optical imaging, that there is 
a mosaic-like pattern of optimal orientations in the striate cortex (Box 10.2). 
If an electrode is passed at certain angles through this mosaic, the preferred 
orientation rotates like the sweep of the minute hand of a clock, from the top 
of the hour to 10 past to 20 past, and so on (Figure 10.21). If the electrode 
is moved at other angles, more sudden shifts in preferred orientation occur. 
Hubel and Wiesel found that a complete 180° shift in preferred orientation 
required a traverse of about 1 mm, on average, within layer III. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   349
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   349

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

350

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 10.2

B R A I N   F O O D

Cortical Organization Revealed by Optical and Calcium Imaging

Most of what we know about the response properties of

neurons in the visual system, and every other system in the 
brain, has been learned from intracellular and extracellular re-
cordings with microelectrodes. These recordings give precise 
information about the activity of one or a few cells. However, 
unless one inserts thousands of electrodes, it is not possible 
to  observe  patterns  of  activity  across  large  populations  of 
neurons.

A view of neural coding at a scale much larger than indi-
vidual neurons is provided by optical imaging of brain activity. 
In  one  version  of  optical  recording,  a  voltage-sensitive  dye 
is applied to the surface of the brain. The molecules in the 
dye bind to cell membranes, and an array of photodetectors 
or a video camera records changes in the optical properties 
that are proportional to variations in membrane potential. A 
second  way  to  optically  study  cortical  activity  is  to  image 
intrinsic  signals.  When  neurons  are  active,  blood  volume 
and oxygenation change to a degree correlated with neural 

 activity. Blood ﬂ ow and oxygenation inﬂ uence the reﬂ ection 
of  light  from  brain  tissue,  and  reﬂ ectance  changes  can  be 
used  to  indirectly  assess  neural  activity.  Light  is  projected 
onto the brain, and a video camera records the reﬂ ected light. 
Thus,  when  intrinsic  signals  are  used  to  study  brain  activ-
ity, membrane potentials for action potentials are not directly 
 measured.

Figure A is a photograph showing the vasculature in a por-
tion  of  primary  visual  cortex.  Figure  B  shows  ocular  domi-
nance columns in the same patch of striate cortex obtained 
by optically imaging areas in which blood ﬂ ow changes oc-
curred during visual stimulation. This ﬁ gure is actually a sub-
traction of two images—one made when only the right eye 
was visually stimulated, minus another when only the left eye 
was  stimulated.  Consequently,  the  dark  bands  represent 
cells dominated by the left eye, and the light bands represent 
cells dominated by the right eye. Figure C is a color-coded 
representation of preferred orientation in the same patch of 

Figure A
 Vasculature on the surface of primary visual cortex. 
(Source: Ts’o et al., 1990, Fig. 1A.)

Figure B
 Intrinsic signal imaging map of ocular dominance 
columns. (Source: Ts’o et al., 1990, Fig. 1B.)

 The analysis of stimulus orientation appears to be one of the most im-
portant functions of the striate cortex. Orientation-selective neurons are 
thus thought to be specialized for the  analysis of object shape . 

 Direction  Selectivity.  Many  V1  receptive  ﬁ elds  also  exhibit   direction 
selectivity ;  they  respond  when  a  bar  of  light  at  the  optimal  orienta-
tion moves perpendicular to the orientation in one direction but not in 
the opposite direction. Direction-selective cells in V1 are a subset of the 
cells that are orientation selective. Figure 10.22 shows how a direction- 
selective cell responds to a moving stimulus. Notice in this example that 
the  cell  responds  to  an  elongated  stimulus  swept  rightward  across  the 
receptive ﬁ eld, but much less with leftward movement. Sensitivity to the 
direction  of  stimulus  motion  is  a  hallmark  of  neurons  receiving  input 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   350
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   350

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

351

 microscopy is used. The top of Figure D shows a map of ori-
entation preference obtained with intrinsic signal optical imag-
ing from cat visual cortex. The bottom of Figure D shows the 
orientation preferences of individual neurons based on two-
photon calcium imaging. Orientation columns are seen in the 
clumping of cells with the same color; the results conﬁ rm that 
the  optical  images  result  from  highly  consistent  cell-to-cell 
preferences for orientation. Cells with progressively different 
orientation preferences are organized in a “pinwheel” fashion, 
conﬁ rmation at the level of single cells of the optical results.

Figure C
 Intrinsic signal imaging map of preferred orientations. 
(Source: Ts’o et al., 1990, Fig. 1C.)

striate  cortex.  Four  different  optical  images  were  recorded 
while  bars  of  light  at  four  different  orientations  were  swept 
across the visual ﬁ eld. Each location in the ﬁ gure is colored 
 according to the orientation that produced the greatest re-
sponse  at  each  location  on  the  brain  (blue  ⫽  horizontal; 
red ⫽ 45°; yellow ⫽ vertical; green ⫽ 135°). Consistent with 
earlier results obtained with electrodes (see Figure 10.21), in 
some  regions,  the  orientation  changes  progressively  along 
a straight line. However, the optical recording technique re-
veals that cortical organization based on orientation is much 
more complex than an idealized pattern of parallel “columns.”
Another  technique,  in  vivo  two-photon  calcium  imaging, 
lets us see the activity of thousands of neurons with single-
cell resolution. When a neuron ﬁ res action potentials, voltage-
sensitive calcium channels open, and calcium concentration 
in  the  soma  increases.  These  concentration  changes  can 
be measured by introducing a calcium-sensitive ﬂ uorescent 
dye into the neurons; the amount of ﬂ uorescent light emitted 
from the neuron is correlated with the amount of calcium in 
the cell body and, thus, the ﬁ ring rate of the neuron. To see 
 neural activity at ﬁ ne spatial and temporal scales, two-photon 

Figure D
 A map of preferred orientation based on intrinsic 
signal optical imaging (top). Two-photo calcium 
imaging shows the orientation preference of indi-
vidual neurons (bottom). (Source: Adapted from 
Ohki and Reid, 2006, Fig. 1.)

from  the  magnocellular  layers  of  the  LGN.  Direction-selective  neurons 
are thought to be specialized for the  analysis of object motion . 

 Simple and Complex Receptive Fields. Neurons in the LGN have antag-
onistic  center-surround  receptive  ﬁ elds,  and  this  organization  accounts 
for the responses of these neurons to visual stimuli. For example, a small 
spot  in  the  center  of  the  receptive  ﬁ eld  may  yield  a  much  stronger  re-
sponse than a larger spot also covering the antagonistic surround. What 
do we know about the inputs to V1 neurons that might account for binocu-
larity, orientation selectivity, and direction selectivity in their receptive 
ﬁ elds? Binocularity is easy; we have seen that binocular neurons receive 
afferents from both eyes. The mechanisms underlying orientation and di-
rection selectivity have proven more difﬁ cult to elucidate. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   351
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   351

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

352

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

)
s
e
e
r
g
e
d
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o
 
d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
P

▲ FIGURE 10.21
Systematic variation of orientation pref-
erences across the striate cortex. As an 
electrode is advanced tangentially across 
layers II and III of striate cortex, the orien-
tation preference of the neurons encoun-
tered is recorded and plotted. In the 
 recording shown, the preferred orientation 
of the neuron first encountered was near 
–70°, and as the electrode moved 0.7 mm,
the preferred orientations rotated clock-
wise. As the electrode moved another mil-
limeter, the preferred orientations rotated 
counterclockwise. (Source: Adapted from 
Hubel and Wiesel, 1968.)

–30

–60

90

60

30

0

–30

–60

90

60

30

Electrode track

1 mm

II, III

IV

V
VI

0

0.5

1

1.5

Track distance (mm)

2

 Many  orientation-selective  neurons  have  a  receptive  ﬁ eld  elongated 
along a particular axis, with an ON-center or OFF-center region ﬂ anked 
on one or both sides by an antagonistic surround (Figure 10.23a). This 
linear arrangement of ON and OFF areas is analogous to the concentric 
antagonistic areas seen in retinal and LGN receptive ﬁ elds. One gets the 
impression that the cortical neurons receive a converging input from LGN 
cells with receptive ﬁ elds that are aligned along one axis (Figure 10.23b). 
Hubel and Wiesel called neurons of this type  simple cells . The segrega-
tion of ON and OFF regions is a deﬁ ning property of simple cells, and it is 
because of this receptive ﬁ eld structure that they are orientation  selective. 
 Other  orientation-selective  neurons  in  V1  do  not  have  distinct  ON 
and  OFF  regions  and  are  therefore  not  considered  simple  cells.  Hubel 
and Wiesel called most of these  complex cells , because their receptive 
ﬁ elds appeared to be more complex than those of simple cells. Complex 
cells  give  ON  and  OFF  responses  to  stimuli  throughout  the  receptive 
ﬁ eld  (Figure  10.24).  Hubel  and  Wiesel  proposed  that  complex  cells  are 
 constructed from the input of several like-oriented simple cells. However, 
this remains a matter of debate. 

Visual stimulus

Receptive

field

Direction of 
movement

Direction of 
movement

Receptive

field

Layer IVB
cell discharge in response
to left-right stimulus movement

Layer IVB
cell discharge in response
to right-left stimulus movement

▲ FIGURE 10.22
Direction selectivity. With a bar stimulus at the optimal orientation, the neuron 
responds strongly when the bar is swept to the right but weakly when it is swept 
to the left.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   352
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   352

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

353

Center-surround receptive fields

of 3 LGN neurons

OFF

ON

OFF
O  N

OFF
ON

Patch of
retina

LGN neurons

Layer IVCα
neuron

Light

ON

OFF

Simple cell receptive field

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 10.23
A simple cell receptive field. (a) The response of a simple cell to optimally oriented 
bars of light at different locations in the receptive field. Notice that the response can 
be ON or OFF depending on where the bar lies in the receptive field. For this neu-
ron, the middle location gives an ON response and the two flanking locations give 
OFF responses. (b) A simple cell receptive field might be built from convergent in-
puts of three LGN neurons with aligned center-surround receptive fields.

 Simple and complex cells are typically binocular and sensitive to stim-
ulus orientation. Different neurons show a range of sensitivities to color 
and direction of motion. 

 Blob  Receptive  Fields.  We  have  seen  repeatedly  in  the  visual  system 
that when two nearby structures label differently with some anatomical 
technique, there is good reason to suspect the neurons in the structures 
are  functionally  different.  For  example,  we  have  seen  how  the  distinc-
tive  layers of the LGN segregate different types of input. Similarly, the 
lamination of striate cortex correlates with differences in the receptive 
ﬁ elds  of  the  neurons.  The  presence  of  the  distinct  cytochrome  oxidase 
blobs outside layer IV of striate cortex immediately raises the question 
of  whether  the  neurons  in  the  blobs  respond  differently  from  interblob 
neurons. The answer is controversial. The neurons in the interblob areas 
have some or all of the properties we discussed above: binocularity, ori-
entation   selectivity,  and  direction  selectivity.  They  include  both  simple 
cells and complex cells; some are wavelength sensitive and some are not. 
The blobs receive input directly from the koniocellular layers of the LGN 
and magnocellular and parvocellular input via layer IVC. Early studies 
reported that blob cells, unlike interblob cells, are generally wavelength 

Visual
stimulus

Receptive
field

Light:

ON

OFF

Record
of action
potentials

▲ FIGURE 10.24
A complex cell receptive field. Like a 
simple cell, a complex cell responds best 
to a bar of light at a particular orientation. 
However, responses occur to both light 
ON and light OFF, regardless of position in 
the receptive field.

Time

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   353
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   353

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

354

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

sensitive and monocular, and they lack orientation and direction selec-
tivity. In other words, they resemble the koniocellular and parvocellular 
input from the LGN. The receptive ﬁ elds of some blob neurons were found 
to be circular. Some have the color-opponent center-surround organization 
observed in the parvocellular and koniocellular layers of the LGN. Other 
blob cell receptive ﬁ elds have red–green or blue–yellow color opponency 
in the center of their receptive ﬁ elds, with no surround regions at all. Still 
other cells have both a color-opponent center and a color-opponent sur-
round; they are called  double-opponent cells . More recent studies of V1 
have quantiﬁ ed the selectivity of blob and interblob cells and somewhat 
surprisingly found that, overall, neurons in blobs and interblobs are simi-
lar, showing selectivity for both orientation and color. 

 What  should  we  conclude  about  the  physiological  properties  of  the 
blob neurons? Despite the distinct cytochrome oxidase labeling, at pres-
ent there is no simple way to distinguish the receptive ﬁ eld properties of 
blob cells from neighboring interblob cells. Corresponding to the greater 
cytochrome oxidase activity in blobs, the ﬁ ring rates of blob cells are on 
average higher than those of interblob cells. We can only speculate that 
future research may discover some receptive ﬁ eld difference that better 
correlates with the anatomical and ﬁ ring rate distinctions. It is generally 
believed that neurons sensitive to wavelength are important for the  anal-
ysis of object color,  but we don’t know if we would be colorblind without 
functional cytochrome oxidase blobs. 

 Parallel Pathways and Cortical Modules 
 We  have  seen  that  neurons  in  area  V1  are  clearly  not  all  the  same. 
Anatomical stains show that neurons in different layers, and even within 
a layer, exhibit a variety of shapes and neurite conﬁ gurations. Coming 
into  V1  are  distinct  projections  from  magnocellular,  parvocellular,  and 
koniocellular layers of the LGN. Within V1, cells are selective for differ-
ent  orientations,  directions  of  motion,  and  colors.  Some  cells  are  mon-
ocular, while others are binocular. A big question is the extent to which 
this smorgasbord of neurons is organized into functional pathways that 
perform unique functions or modules that work cooperatively. 

 Parallel Pathways. Because there is great interest in how the brain makes 
sense  of  our  complex  visual  world,  possible  systems  by  which   visual 
analysis might take place have received considerable research attention. 
An inﬂ uential model is based on the idea that there are three pathways 
within V1 that perform different functions in parallel. These can be called 
the  magnocellular  pathway,  the  parvo-interblob  pathway,  and  the  blob 
pathway (Figure 10.25). The  magnocellular pathway  begins with M-type 
ganglion cells of the retina. These cells send axons to the magnocellular 
layers of the LGN. These layers project to layer IVC ␣  of striate cortex, 
which in turn projects to layer IVB. Because many of these cortical neu-
rons are direction selective, the magnocellular pathway might be involved 
in the  analysis of object motion and the guidance of motor actions . 

 The   parvo-interblob  pathway   originates  with  P-type  ganglion  cells 
of  the  retina,  which  project  to  the  parvocellular  layers  of  the  LGN. 
The  parvocellular LGN sends axons to layer IVC ␣  of striate cortex, which 
projects  to  layer  II  and  III  interblob  regions.  Neurons  in  this  pathway 
have small orientation-selective receptive ﬁ elds, so perhaps they are in-
volved in the  analysis of ﬁ ne object shape . 

 Finally, the  blob pathway  receives input from the subset of ganglion 
cells  that  are  neither  M-type  cells  nor  P-type  cells.  These  nonM–nonP 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   354
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   354

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

355

Extrastriate cortical areas

Layer IVB

Blob

Interblob

V1

Layer IVCα

Layer IVCβ

LGN

Magnocellular

Koniocellular

Parvocellular

Retina

M-type

ganglion cells

nonM-nonP
ganglion cells

P-type

ganglion cells

Magnocellular pathway

Blob pathway

Parvo-interblob pathway

(motion)

(color)

(shape)

▲ FIGURE 10.25
A hypothetical model of parallel pathways in pri-
mary visual cortex. Based on receptive field proper-
ties and the pattern of innervation from LGN affer-
ents, it has been suggested that there are three 
distinct pathways in striate cortex. Below each path-
way, a functional role is suggested. Further research 
demonstrated mixing of magno, parvo, and koniocel-
lular LGN signals and overlap in receptive field prop-
erties, raising questions about the distinctions, par-
ticularly between the blob and interblob pathways.

cells  project  to  the  koniocellular  layers  of  the  LGN.  The  koniocellular 
LGN projects directly to the cytochrome oxidase blobs in layers II and III. 
Many neurons in the blobs are color selective, so they might be involved 
in the  analysis of object color . 

 The description earlier is the simple version of the story; the reality 
is more complicated. Research has shown that the three proposed path-
ways do not keep magnocellular, parvocellular, and koniocellular signals 
separate; instead they mix. Also, receptive ﬁ eld properties such as orien-
tation and color tuning are found across the proposed pathways. Thus, it 
is not the case that magnocellular, parvo-interblob, and blob neurons are 
strictly segregated and have entirely unique receptive ﬁ eld properties. At 
present, it appears that striate cortex input reﬂ ects the magnocellular, 
parvocellular, koniocellular segregation also seen in the LGN, but striate 
cortex  output  has  a  different  form  of  parallel  processing.  For  example, 
layer IVB contains many direction-selective neurons, its output appears 
to be dominated by magnocellular LGN input, and it projects to cortical 
areas thought to be involved in motion perception. Collectively, these ob-
servations are consistent with the notion that this is an output pathway 
particularly involved in navigation and the analysis of motion. The case 
for a distinction between form and color pathways is less compelling. We 
will see later that beyond the striate cortex, there appear to be two major 
pathways handling different types of visual information, one extending 
toward the parietal lobe that deals with motion and the other involved 
with color and form extending toward the temporal lobe. 

 Cortical Modules. Receptive ﬁ elds in primary visual cortex range from a 
fraction of a degree to several degrees across, and nearby cells have recep-
tive ﬁ elds that overlap a great deal. For these reasons, even a small spot of 
light will activate thousands of V1 neurons. Hubel and Wiesel showed that 
the image of a point in the visual ﬁ eld falls within the receptive ﬁ elds of 
neurons in a 2  ⫻  2 mm chunk of macaque striate cortex. Such a block of cor-
tex also contains two complete sets of ocular dominance columns, 16 blobs, 
and a complete sampling (twice over) of all 180° of possible orientations. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   355
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   355

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

356

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Blobs

II

III

IV

V

VI

Ocular dominance columns

Orientation
columns

Ocular dominance
columns

▲ FIGURE 10.26
A cortical module. Each cortical module contains ocular 
dominance columns, orientation columns, and cytochrome 
oxidase blobs to fully analyze a portion of the visual field. 
The idealized cube shown here differs from the actual ar-
rangement, which is not as regular or orderly.

Thus, Hubel and Wiesel argued that a 2  ⫻  2 mm chunk of striate cortex is 
both necessary and sufﬁ cient to analyze the image of a point in space:  neces-
sary  because its removal would leave a blind spot for this point in the visual 
ﬁ eld, and  sufﬁ cient  because it contains all the neural machinery required 
to analyze the form and color of objects viewed through either eye. Such a 
unit of brain tissue has come to be called a  cortical module . Because of 
the ﬁ nite size of receptive ﬁ elds and some scatter in their locations, a corti-
cal module processes information about a small patch of the visual ﬁ eld. 

 The  striate  cortex  is  constructed  from  perhaps  a  thousand  cortical 
modules; one is shown in Figure 10.26. We can think of a visual scene 
being simultaneously processed by these modules, each “looking” at a por-
tion of the scene. Just remember that the modules are an idealization. 
Optical images of V1 activity reveal that the regions of the striate cortex 
responding to different eyes and orientations are not nearly as regular as 
the “ice cube model” in Figure 10.26 suggests. 

BEYOND THE STRIATE CORTEX 
BEYOOND THE STRIATE CORTTEX 

 The striate cortex is called V1, for “visual area one,” because it is the ﬁ rst 
cortical area to receive information from the LGN. Beyond V1 lie another 
two dozen distinct  extrastriate  areas of cortex that have unique receptive 
ﬁ eld  properties.  The  contributions  to  vision  of  these  extrastriate  areas 
are still being vigorously debated. However, it appears that there are two 
large-scale cortical streams of visual processing, one stretching dorsally 
from the striate cortex toward the parietal lobe and the other projecting 
ventrally toward the temporal lobe (Figure 10.27). 

 The  dorsal stream  appears to serve the analysis of visual motion and 
the visual control of action. The  ventral stream  is thought to be involved 
in the perception of the visual world and the recognition of objects. These 
processing streams have primarily been studied in the macaque monkey 
brain, where recordings from single neurons can be made. However, func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) research has identiﬁ ed areas 
in the human brain that have properties analogous to brain areas in the 
macaque. The locations of some of the human visual areas are shown in 
Figure 10.28. 

 The properties of dorsal stream neurons are most similar to those of 
magnocellular neurons in V1, and ventral stream neurons have  properties 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   356
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   356

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

357

MST 

MT (V5) 

V2

V1

Dorsal stream

 V1 V1 V1

(a) 

Ventral stream

(b) 

 V4

 IT

Other dorsal
areas

MST

MT

Other ventral
areas

(c) 

V3

V2

V1

IT

V4

▲ FIGURE 10.27
Beyond the striate cortex in the macaque mon-
key brain. (a) Dorsal and ventral visual processing 
streams. (b) Extrastriate visual areas. (c) The flow of 
information in the dorsal and ventral streams.

V3A

V3

V1

V2

V4

Face and object
recognition areas

▲ FIGURE 10.28
Visual areas in the human brain. (a) Compared to mon-
keys, human visual areas are shifted more to the medial 
wall of the occipital lobe, and many are buried in sulci. 
Early visual areas including V1, V2, V3, V3A, and V4 are 
retinotopically organized. Higher temporal lobe areas in-
volved in face and object recognition are not retinotopic. 
(b) A variety of areas responsive to visual motion are 
found on the lateral aspect of the brain. The most studied 
of these is area V5, also known as MT. (Source: Zeki, 
2003, Fig. 2.)

V5 (motion)

(a)

(b)

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   357
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   357

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

358

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

more like features of parvo-interblob and blob cells in V1. However, each 
extrastriate stream receives some amount of input from all the pathways 
in the primary visual cortex. 

 The Dorsal Stream 
 The  cortical  areas  composing  the  dorsal  stream  are  not  arranged  in  a 
strict serial hierarchy, but there does appear to be a progression of areas 
in  which  more  complex  or  specialized  visual  representations  develop. 
Projections from V1 extend to areas designated V2 and V3, but we will 
skip farther ahead in the dorsal stream. 

 Area MT. In an area known as V5 or MT (because of its location in the 
middle temporal lobe in some monkeys), strong evidence indicates that 
specialized processing of object motion takes place. The location of area 
MT in the human brain is shown in Figure 10.28b.  Area MT  receives 
retinotopically organized input from a number of other cortical areas, 
such as V2 and V3, and it also is directly innervated by cells in layer 
IVB of the striate cortex. Recall that in layer IVB, the cells have rela-
tively large receptive ﬁ elds, transient responses to light, and direction 
selectivity. Neurons in area MT have large receptive ﬁ elds that respond 
to stimulus movement in a narrow range of directions. Area MT is most 
notable  for  the  fact  that  almost  all  the  cells  are  direction  selective, 
unlike areas earlier in the dorsal stream or anywhere in the ventral 
stream. 

 The neurons in MT also respond to types of motion, such as drifting 
spots of light, that are not good stimuli for cells in other areas—it appears 
that  the  motion  of  the  objects  is  more  important  than  their  structure. 
Perhaps you have seen illusory motion in paintings or optical illusions; 
MT  has  been  shown  to  be  activated  by  some  of  these  images  too,  sug-
gesting that its neurons tell us what motion we perceive, not necessarily 
what motion is present. Further specialization for motion processing is 
evident  in  the  organization  of  MT.  This  cortical  area  is  arranged  into 
direction-of-motion columns analogous to the orientation columns in V1. 
Presumably, the perception of movement at any point in space depends 
on a comparison of the activity across columns spanning a full 360° range 
of preferred directions. 

 William  Newsome  and  his  colleagues  at  Stanford  University  have 
shown that weak electrical stimulation in area MT of the macaque mon-
key appears to alter the direction in which small dots of light are per-
ceived to move. For example, if electrical stimulation is applied to cells in 
a direction column preferring rightward movement, the monkey makes 
behavioral decisions suggesting that it has perceived motion in that di-
rection.  The  artiﬁ cial  motion  signal  from  electrical  stimulation  in  MT 
appears to combine with visual motion input. The fact that the monkey 
behaviorally reports a perceived direction of motion based on the com-
bination  suggests  that  MT  activity  plays  an  important  role  in  motion 
perception. 

 Dorsal Areas and Motion Processing. Beyond area MT, in the parietal 
lobe, are areas with additional types of specialized movement sensitivity. 
For example, in an area known as medial superior temporal  (MST) , there 
are cells selective for linear motion (as in MT), radial motion (either in-
ward or outward from a central point), and circular motion (either clock-
wise or counterclockwise). We do not know how the visual system makes 
use of neurons with complex motion-sensitive properties in MST or of the 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   358
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   358

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

359

“simpler”  direction-selective  cells  in V1,  MT,  and  other  areas.  However, 
three roles have been proposed: 
 1.  Navigation:  As we move through our environment, objects stream past 
our eyes, and the direction and speed of objects in our peripheral vision 
provide valuable information that can be used for navigation. 

 2.  Directing eye movements:  Our ability to sense and analyze motion must 
also be used when we follow objects with our eyes and when we quickly 
move our eyes to objects in our peripheral vision that catch our  attention. 
 3.  Motion perception:  We live in a world ﬁ lled with motion, and survival 

sometimes depends on our interpretation of moving objects. 
 Striking evidence that cortical areas in the vicinity of MT and MST are 
critical for motion perception in humans comes from extremely rare cases in 
which brain lesions selectively disrupt the perception of motion. The clear-
est case was reported in 1983 by Josef Zihl and his colleagues at the Max 
Planck Institute for Psychiatry in Munich, Germany. Zihl studied a woman 
who experienced a stroke at the age of 43 years, bilaterally damaging por-
tions  of  extrastriate  visual  cortex  known  to  be  particularly  responsive  to 
motion (Figure 10.28b). Although some ill effects of the stroke were evident, 
such as difﬁ culty naming objects, neuropsychological testing showed the pa-
tient to be generally normal and to have relatively normal vision, except 
for one serious deﬁ cit: She appeared to be incapable of visually perceiving 
motion. Before you decide that not seeing motion would be a minor impair-
ment, imagine what it would be like to see the world in snapshots. Zihl’s pa-
tient complained that when she poured coffee into a cup, it appeared at one 
 moment to be frozen at the bottom of the cup and then suddenly it had over-
ﬁ lled the cup and covered the table. More ominously, she had trouble cross-
ing the street—one moment she would perceive cars to be in the distance, 
and the next moment they would be right next to her. Clearly, this loss of 
motion perception had profound ramiﬁ cations for the woman’s lifestyle. The 
implication of this case is that motion perception may be based on special-
ized mechanisms located beyond the striate cortex in the dorsal stream. 

 The Ventral Stream 
 In parallel with the dorsal stream, a progression of areas from V1, V2, 
and V3 running ventrally toward the temporal lobes appears specialized 
for the analysis of visual attributes other than motion. 

 Area V4. One of the most-studied areas in the ventral stream is  area V4  
(see  Figures  10.27b  and  10.28a  for  the  location  of  V4  in  monkey  and 
human brains). V4 receives input from the blob and interblob regions of 
the striate cortex via a relay in V2. Neurons in area V4 have larger recep-
tive ﬁ elds than cells in the striate cortex, and many of the cells are both 
orientation selective and color selective. Although there is a good deal of 
ongoing research into the function of V4, this area appears to be important 
for both shape perception and color perception. If this area is damaged in 
monkeys, perceptual deﬁ cits involving both shape and color result. 

 A rare clinical syndrome in humans known as  achromatopsia  is char-
acterized  by  a  partial  or  complete  loss  of  color  vision  despite  the  pres-
ence of normal functional cones in the retina. People with this condition 
describe their world as drab, consisting of only shades of gray. Imagine 
how unappetizing a gray banana would look! Because achromatopsia is 
associated with cortical damage in the occipital and temporal lobes, with-
out damage to V1, the LGN, or the retina, the syndrome suggests that 
there  is  specialized  color  processing  in  the  ventral  stream.  Consistent 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   359
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   359

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

360

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 10.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Finding Faces in the Brain
by Nancy Kanwisher

During  my  ﬁ rst  year  in  graduate  school  in  1981,  the  ﬁ rst

functional  images  of  human  visual  cortex  appeared  on  the 
cover  of  Science.  Captivated  by  positron  emission  tomog-
raphy  (PET),  a  remarkable  technology  that  enabled  us  for 
the ﬁ rst time to peer directly into the workings of the normal 
human brain, I wrote a research proposal using this method 
to investigate human vision and sent it to all of the PET labs 
in the world (I think there were ﬁ ve at the time). But it took a 
decade of pounding on the doors before I gained access to a 
PET scanner and got to do my ﬁ rst experiment.

Functional MRI (fMRI) was just starting to catch on then, 
and  a  few  years  later,  in  1995,  I  was  given  the  breathtak-
ing privilege of my own weekly slot on the fMRI scanner at 
Massachusetts  General  Hospital.  Collaborating  with  an  un-
dergraduate, Josh McDermott, and post-doc, Marvin Chun, 
I spent some of the happiest moments of my life lying inside 
the scanner bore, biting on a bite bar, and watching Marvin 
and Josh (upside down) through the mirror over my forehead, 
as they operated the scanner from out in the console room. 
What  astonishing  good  fortune  to  get  to  use  this  amazing 
machine to explore the largely uncharted territory of human 
visual cortex!

We  started  out  by  trying  to  ﬁ nd  brain  regions  engaged 
in the perception of object shape. Although we found some 
intriguing effects, they were weak. As I did not have a grant to 
pay for scan time, I knew that my scanning privileges would 
not continue unless I hit a home run—and quickly.

The  extensive  behavioral  literature  on  normal  and  brain-
damaged individuals strongly suggested that a special part of 
the brain might exist for face perception. We decided to look 

for it. Leslie Ungerleider and Jim Haxby and their colleagues at 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) had already shown strong 
activations on the bottom of the temporal lobes when people 
look at faces. What they had not investigated was whether this 
response was speciﬁ c to faces, or whether the same region 
might  also  be  engaged  during  perception  of  other  complex 
visual  stimuli.  This  speciﬁ city  question  connected  directly  to 
one of the most long-standing and ﬁ erce debates in the his-
tories  of  both  cognitive  science  and  neuroscience:  To  what 
extent are the mind and brain composed of special-purpose 
mechanisms, each processing a speciﬁ c kind of information?
We ﬁ gured that if a special-purpose part of the brain ex-
isted that was selectively involved in face perception, it should 
produce  a  stronger  response  when  people  look  at  faces 
than when they look at objects. To get enough face images, 
Marvin, Josh, and I went to Harvard’s “freshman face cap-
ture,” where the entire incoming class lined up for ID photos; 
we asked if we could use their ID photos in our experiments. 
We then scanned subjects while they looked at these face 
photos and at photos of common objects.

To our delight, we found that in almost everyone the image 
showed a nice clear blob on the lateral side of the fusiform 
gyrus, primarily in the right hemisphere, where the statistics 
told us that the response was higher when people were look-
ing at faces than when they were looking at objects. However, 
it was not in exactly the same place in each subject. To deal 
with  this  anatomical  variability,  plus  to  make  our  statistical 
analyses bulletproof, we split the data for each subject in half, 
using half the data to ﬁ nd the region with our faces-versus-
objects contrast, and the other half to quantify the response 

with  the  coexistence  of  color-sensitive  and  shape-sensitive  cells  in  the 
ventral stream, achromatopsia is usually accompanied by deﬁ cits in form 
perception.  Some  researchers  have  proposed  that  V4  is  a  particularly 
critical area for color and form perception, but the lesions associated with 
achromatopsia are generally not limited to V4, and severe visual deﬁ cits 
 appear to require damage to other cortical areas in addition to V4. 

 Area IT. Beyond V4 in the ventral stream are cortical areas that contain 
neurons with complicated spatial receptive ﬁ elds. A major output of V4 is an 
area in the inferior temporal lobe known as  area IT  (see Figure 10.27b and 
the recognition areas in Figure 10.28a). One reason this area is of particu-
lar interest is that it appears to be the farthest extent of visual  processing 
in the ventral stream. A wide variety of colors and abstract shapes have 
been found to be good stimuli for cells in IT. As we will see in Chapter 24, 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   360
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   360

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

361

of the FFA. After ﬁ nding face-selective patches in monkeys 
with  fMRI,  Doris  Tsao  and  her  colleagues  at  Harvard  went 
on to report that the vast majority of the cells in this region 
respond nearly exclusively to faces. (Not even I had thought 
the faces patches were that selective!) David Pitcher and his 
colleagues  at  University  College  London  brieﬂ y  disrupted  a 
face-selective  region  just  behind  the  FFA  with  transcranial 
magnetic stimulation, showing that this region is necessary 
for face perception (but not for perception of objects or bod-
ies). And Yoichi Sugita at the Japan Science and Technology 
Agency  reported  that  monkeys  reared  for  2  years  without 
ever seeing a face show adult-like face discrimination abilities 
in  the  very  ﬁ rst  behavioral  testing  session,  suggesting  that 
experience with faces may not be necessary to wire the face-
processing system.

Our original decision to work on faces was a pragmatic 
one (we needed a quick result), and it worked out well for us. 
But I am just as proud of the completely unanticipated dis-
coveries we made later, such as the scene-selective parahip-
pocampal place area (PPA) working with Russell Epstein, and 
the body-selective extrastriate body area (EBA) working with 
Paul Downing. Most astonishing to me was Rebecca Saxe’s 
discovery of a brain region that is selective for thinking about 
another person’s thoughts. (My only role was to tell her this 
experiment would never work!)

These ﬁ ndings show that the human mind and brain con-
tain  at  least  a  few  very  specialized  components,  each  of 
which is dedicated to solving a very speciﬁ c computational 
problem.  These  discoveries  open  up  a  vast  landscape  of 
new questions. What computations go on in each of these 
regions? How are those computations implemented in neu-
ral circuits? What other specialized brain regions exist? How 
do these specialized regions develop? Why do some mental 
processes  get  their  own  private  piece  of  real  estate  in  the 
brain, while others do not? Tackling these questions will be a 
challenge and a thrill.

in that region. This “region of interest” method had already 
been used successfully by people studying lower level visual 
areas, and it was not a big leap to extend it to higher-level 
cortical areas.

Of course, demonstrating that a region of the brain is se-
lectively  responsive  to  faces  requires  much  more  than  just 
showing that it responds more strongly to faces than to ob-
jects. Over the next few years, we (and others, notably Greg 
McCarthy  and  Aina  Puce  at  Yale)  tested  the  face  speciﬁ c-
ity  hypothesis  against  numerous  alternative  hypotheses. 
The fusiform face area (FFA) obliged, passing each new test 
(Figure A).

Other labs have used different methods to make breathtak-
ing discoveries that have greatly extended our understanding 

FFA

OFA

(a)
Figure A
 Nancy’s FFA, fusiform face area; 
OFA, occipital face area. (Source: 
Courtesy of N. Kanwisher.)

output from area IT is sent to temporal lobe structures involved in learning 
and memory; IT itself may be important for both visual perception and vi-
sual memory. Recognizing an object clearly involves a combination or com-
parison of incoming sensory information with stored information. 

 One  of  the  most  intriguing  ﬁ ndings  concerning  IT,  as  ﬁ rst  noted  by 
Charles  Gross  and  his  coworkers  then  at  Princeton  University,  is  that 
a  small  percentage  of  IT  neurons  in  monkeys  respond  strongly  to  sur-
prisingly complex objects such as pictures of faces. These cells may also 
respond to stimuli other than faces, but faces produce a particularly vig-
orous response, and some faces are more effective stimuli than others. 

 Human brain studies using fMRI appear to be consistent with the ﬁ nd-
ings in monkeys. Nancy Kanwisher and her colleagues at MIT discovered 
that there is an area in the human brain that is more responsive to faces 
than to other stimuli (Box 10.3). This area is located on the fusiform gyrus 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   361
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   361

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

362

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

(a)  

anterior

AFP2

AFP2

FFA

OFA

(b)  

FFA

OFA

1 cm

▲ FIGURE 10.29
Human brain activity elicited by pictures of faces. Using fMRI, brain activity 
was recorded first in response to faces and second in response to non-face 
 stimuli. (a) In the horizontal brain section to the right, the red and yellow area on 
the left side and the symmetrical red area on the right side, known as the fusi-
form face area, showed significantly greater responses to faces. (b) Modified 
techniques in more recent studies have revealed multiple face-selective areas in-
cluding occipital face area (OFA), anterior face patch 2 (AFP2), and fusiform face 
area (FFA). (Source: Part a courtesy of Drs. I. Gauthier, J.C. Gore, and M. Tarr; 
part b courtesy of Weiner and Grill-Spector, 2012.)

and has come to be called the  fusiform face area  (Figure 10.29a). Might 
this area play a special role in the ability to recognize faces, which are 
of great behavioral signiﬁ cance to humans? The ﬁ nding of face-selective 
cells and the fusiform face area has sparked much interest, in part be-
cause  of  a  syndrome  called   prosopagnosia —difﬁ culty  recognizing  faces 
even though vision is otherwise normal. This rare syndrome usually re-
sults from a stroke and is associated with damage to extrastriate visual 
cortex, perhaps including the fusiform face area. 

 More recent experiments have revealed that there are actually about 
half a dozen patches of cortex within and near IT that are particularly 
sensitive  to  faces,  and  neurons  in  each  patch  have  different  degrees  of 
sensitivity to face identity (Mary versus Sue) and other attributes such 
as the side of the head viewed (left, right, front, back) (Figure 10.29b). 
The implication is that multiple visual areas including portions of area 
IT may compose a system of areas specialized for facial recognition. In 
other human brain imaging studies, groups of patchy brain regions have 
been found that are reportedly involved in representations of color and 
biological objects. 

 FROM SINGLE NEURONS TO PERCEPTION 
FROMM SINGGLE NEURONS TO PERCEPTION 

 Visual   perception —the  task  of  identifying  and  assigning  meaning  to 
objects in space—obviously requires the concerted action of many corti-
cal neurons. But which neurons in which cortical areas determine what 
we perceive? How is the simultaneous activity of widely separated cor-
tical  neurons  integrated,  and  where  does  this  integration  take  place? 
Neuroscience  research  is  just  beginning  to  tackle  these  challenging 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   362
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   362

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

363

 questions. However, sometimes basic observations about receptive ﬁ elds 
can give us insight into how we perceive (Box 10.4). 

 Receptive Field Hierarchy and Perception 
 Comparing the receptive ﬁ eld properties of neurons at different points 
in the visual system might provide insight about the basis of perception. 
The receptive ﬁ elds of photoreceptors are simply small patches on the 
retina, whereas those of retinal ganglion cells have a center-surround 
structure. The ganglion cells are sensitive to variables such as contrast 
and the wavelength of light. In the striate cortex, we encounter simple 
and complex receptive ﬁ elds that have several new properties, including 
orientation selectivity and binocularity. We have seen that in extrastri-
ate  cortical  areas,  cells  are  selectively  responsive  to  more  complex 
shapes, object motion, and even faces. It appears that the visual system 
consists of a hierarchy of areas in which receptive ﬁ elds become increas-
ingly  larger  and  more  complex,  moving  away  from  V1  (Figure  10.30). 
Perhaps our perception of speciﬁ c objects is based on the excitation of a 
small number of specialized neurons in some ultimate perceptual area 
that has not yet been identiﬁ ed. Is a person’s recognition of his or her 
grandmother based on the responses of 5 or 10 cells with receptive ﬁ eld 
properties so highly reﬁ ned that the cells respond only to one person? 
The closest approximation to this is the face-selective neurons in area 
IT.  However,  even  these  fascinating  cells  do  not  respond  to  only  one 
face. 

Location of receptive field

in visual system

Optimal stimulus

ON-center

retinal ganglion

Spot surrounded
by dark annulus

Simple cell in V1

Elongated bar
of light

Inferotemporal
visual cortex

Face

?

Grandmother

▲ FIGURE 10.30
A hierarchy of receptive fields. As one progresses from the retina to extrastriate 
visual cortex, receptive fields become larger and are selective for more complex 
shapes. At present, it seems unlikely that perception is based on undiscovered 
neurons highly selective for every object a person recognizes, such as one’s 
grandmother.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   363
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   363

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

364

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 10.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Magic of Seeing in 3D

You  have  probably  seen  books  or  posters  showing  pat-

terns of dots or splotches of color that supposedly contain 
pictures  in  3D,  if  you  contort  your  eyes  just  the  right  way. 
But  how  is  it  possible  to  see  three  dimensions  on  a  two-
dimensional piece of paper? The answer is based on the fact 
that our two eyes always see slightly different images of the 
world  because  of  the  distance  between  them  in  the  head. 
The  closer  objects  are  to  the  head,  the  greater  the  differ-
ence in the two images. You can easily demonstrate this to 
yourself by holding a ﬁ nger up in front of your eyes and alter-
nately viewing it, at different distances, with the left or right 
eye closed.

Long before anything was known about binocular neurons 
in visual cortex, stereograms were a popular form of recre-
ation.  Two  photographs  were  taken  with  lenses  separated 
by a distance roughly the same as that of human eyes. By 
looking at the left photograph with the left eye and the right 
photograph with the right eye (by relaxing the eye muscles 
or with a stereoscope), the brain combines the images and 
interprets the different views as cues for distance, providing a 
three-dimensional percept (Figure A).

In  1960,  Bela  Julesz,  working  at  the  Bell  Telephone 
Laboratories, invented random-dot stereograms (Figure B). 
These  paired  images  of  random  dots  are,  in  principle,  the 
same  as  the  nineteenth-century  stereograms.  The  big  dif-
ference  is  that  the  object  hidden  in  the  images  cannot  be 
seen with normal binocular viewing. To see the 3D object, 
you must direct your left and right eyes to the left and right 
images. The principle in constructing the stereo images is to 

Figure A
 A nineteenth-century stereogram. (Source: Horibuchi, 1994, 
p. 38.)

create a background of randomly spaced dots, and wher-
ever an area should be closer or farther away in the fused 
image,  the  dots  shown  to  one  eye  are  horizontally  shifted 
relative to those in the other eye. Imagine looking at a white 
index card covered with random black dots while you hold 
it in front of a large piece of white paper covered with simi-
lar  dots.  By  alternately  closing  your  eyes,  the  dots  on  the 
index card will shift horizontally more than those on the more 
distant piece of paper. The pair of stereo images captures 
this difference in viewpoint and erases any other indication 
that there is a square in front, such as the edge of the index 
card.  Random-dot  stereograms  shocked  many  scientists, 

 While it is by no means settled, there are several arguments against 
the idea that perception is based on extremely selective receptive ﬁ elds 
such  as  those  of  hypothetical  “grandmother  cells.”  First,  recordings 
have been made from most parts of the monkey brain, but there is no 
evidence that a portion of cortex has different cells tuned to each of the 
millions of objects that we all recognize. Second, such great selectivity 
appears to be counter to the general principle of broad tuning that ex-
ists throughout the nervous system. Photoreceptors respond to a range 
of wavelengths, simple cells respond to many orientations, cells in MT 
respond  to  motion  in  a  range  of  directions,  and  face  cells  usually  re-
spond to multiple faces. Moreover, cells that are selective for one prop-
erty—orientation, color, or whatever—are always sensitive also to other 
properties. For example, we can emphasize the orientation selectivity 
of  V1  neurons  and  the  way  in  which  this  might  relate  to  the  percep-
tion  of  form,  neglecting  the  fact  that  the  same  cells  might  selectively 
respond to size, direction of motion, and so on. Finally, it might be too 
“risky” for the nervous system to rely on extreme selectivity. A blow to 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   364
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   364

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

365

Figure B
 A random-dot stereogram and the perception that results from 
 binocularly fusing the images. (Source: Julesz, 1971, p. 21.)

because in 1960, it was commonly thought that depth was 
perceived only after the objects in each eye were separately 
recognized.

In  the  1970s,  Christopher  Tyler  at  the  Smith–Kettlewell 
Eye Research Institute created autostereograms. An autoste-
reogram is a single image that, when properly viewed, gives 
the perception of objects in 3D (Figure C). The colorful, and 
sometimes frustrating, autostereograms you see in books are 
based  on  an  old  illusion  called  the  wallpaper  effect.  If  you 
look at wallpaper that contains a repeating pattern, you can 
cross (or diverge) your eyes and view one piece of the pattern 
with one eye and the next cycle of the pattern with the other 
eye. The effect makes the wallpaper appear to be closer (or 
farther away). In an autostereogram, the wallpaper effect is 
combined with random-dot stereograms. To see the 3D skull 
in Figure C, you need to relax your eye muscles so that the 
left eye looks at the left dot on top and the right eye the right 
dot. You will know you are getting close when you see three 
dots at the top of the image. Relax and keep looking, and the 
picture will become visible.

Figure C
 An autostereogram. (Source: Horibuchi, 1994, p. 54.)

One of the fascinating things about stereograms is that 
you  often  must  look  at  them  for  tens  of  seconds  or  even 
minutes, while your eyes become “properly” misaligned and 
your  visual  cortex  “ﬁ gures  out”  the  correspondence  be-
tween the left and right eye views. We do not know what 
is going on in the brain during this period, but presumably 
it involves the activation of binocular neurons in the visual 
cortex.

the head might kill all ﬁ ve grandmother cells, and in an instant, one 
would lose the ability to recognize her. We will have more to say about 
the robustness of recognition when we explore learning and memory in 
Chapters 24 and 25. 

 Parallel Processing and Perception 
 If we do not rely on “grandmother cells,” how does perception work? One 
alternative hypothesis is formulated around the observation that parallel 
processing is used throughout the visual system (and other brain systems). 
We encountered parallel processing in Chapter 9 when we discussed ON 
and OFF and M and P ganglion cells. In this chapter, we saw three paral-
lel channels coming into V1. Extending away from V1 are dorsal and ven-
tral streams of processing, and different areas in these two streams are 
biased, or specialized, for various stimulus properties. Perhaps the brain 
uses a “division of labor” principle for perception. Within a given cortical 
area, many broadly tuned cells may serve to represent features of objects. 

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   365
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   365

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

366

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

At a bigger scale, a group of cortical areas may contribute to perception, 
some dealing more with color or form, others more with motion. In other 
words, perception may be more like the sound produced by an orchestra of 
visual areas, each with different roles, than by a single musician. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 In this chapter, we have outlined the organization of the sensory path-
way  from  the  eye  to  the  thalamus  to  the  cortex.  We  saw  that  vision 
actually  involves  the  perception  of  numerous  different  properties  of 
 objects— including color, form, and movement—and these properties are 
processed in parallel by different cells of the visual system. This process-
ing of information evidently requires a strict segregation of inputs at the 
thalamus,  some  limited  convergence  of  information  in  the  striate  cor-
tex, and ﬁ nally a massive divergence of information as it is passed on to 
higher cortical areas. The distributed nature of the cortical processing of 
visual information is underscored when you consider that the output of a 
million ganglion cells can recruit the activity of well over a billion cortical 
neurons throughout the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes! Somehow, 
this widespread cortical activity is combined to form a single, seamless 
perception of the visual world. 

 Heed  the  lessons  learned  from  the  visual  system.  As  we  shall  see 
in  later  chapters,  the  basic  principles  of  organization  in  this  system— 
parallel  processing,  topographic  mappings  of  sensory  surfaces,  synap-
tic  relays  in  the  dorsal  thalamus,  cortical  modules,  and  multiple  corti-
cal representations— are also features of the sensory systems devoted to 
hearing and touch. 

The Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
magnocellular LGN layer (p. 340)
parvocellular LGN layer (p. 340)
koniocellular LGN layer (p. 340)

Anatomy of the Striate Cortex
primary visual cortex (p. 341)
area 17 (p. 341)
V1 (p. 341)
striate cortex (p. 341)
retinotopy (p. 342)
ocular dominance column (p. 347)
cytochrome oxidase blob (p. 347)

Physiology of the Striate Cortex
binocular receptive ﬁ eld (p. 348)
orientation selectivity (p. 349)
orientation column (p. 349)
direction selectivity (p. 350)
simple cell (p. 352)
complex cell (p. 352)
cortical module (p. 356)

Beyond the Striate Cortex
area MT (p. 358)
area V4 (p. 359)
area IT (p. 360)

K E Y   T E R M S

The Retinofugal Projection
retinofugal projection (p. 333)
optic nerve (p. 333)
optic chiasm (p. 333)
decussation (p. 333)
optic tract (p. 334)
visual hemiﬁ eld (p. 334)
binocular visual ﬁ eld (p. 334)
lateral geniculate nucleus 

(LGN) (p. 335)

optic radiation (p. 335)
superior colliculus (p. 337)
optic tectum (p. 338)
retinotectal projection (p. 338)

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   366
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   366

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER 10    THE CENTRAL VISUAL SYSTEM

367

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1. Following a bicycle accident, you are disturbed to ﬁ nd that you cannot see anything in your left

visual ﬁ eld. Where has the retinofugal pathway been damaged?

2. What is the source of most of the input to the left LGN?
3. A worm has eaten part of one lateral geniculate nucleus. You can no longer perceive motion
in the right visual ﬁ eld of your right eye. What layer(s) of which LGN have most likely been
 damaged?

4. List the chain of connections that link a cone in the retina to a blob cell in the striate cortex.

Is there more than one path by which cones connect to the blob cell?

5. What is meant by the statement that there is a map of the visual world in the striate cortex?
6. What is parallel processing in the visual system? Give two examples.
7. If a child is born cross-eyed and the condition is not corrected before the age of 10 years, binocu-
lar depth perception will be lost forever. This is explained by a modiﬁ cation in the circuitry of
the visual system. From your knowledge of the central visual system, where do you think the
circuitry has been modiﬁ ed?

8. What layers of the striate cortex send efferents to other visual cortex areas?
9. What new receptive ﬁ eld properties are found in the striate cortex and other cortical areas that

are not seen in the retina or LGN?

10. What sort of experiment might you perform to investigate the relationship between visual per-

ception and neural activity in the visual cortex?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G 
De Haan EHF, Cowey A. 2011. On the useful-

ness of “what” and “where” pathways in vision. 
Trends in Cognitive Science 15:460–466.

Gegenfurtner KR. 2003. Cortical mechanisms of 
colour vision. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 4:
563–572.

Grill-Spector K, Malach R. 2004. The human vi-

sual cortex. Annual Reviews of Neuroscience 27:
649–677.

Hendry SHC, Reid RC. 2000. The koniocellular 

pathway in primate vision. Annual Reviews of 
Neuroscience 23:127–153.

Kreiman G. 2007. Single unit approaches to 

human vision and memory. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 17:471–475.

Milner AD, Goodale MA. 2008. Two visual 
 systems reviewed. Neuropsychologia 46:
774–785.

Nasso JJ, Callaway EM. 2009. Parallel process-
ing strategies of the primate visual system. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10:360–372.
Sherman SM. 2012. Thalamocortical interac-
tions. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 22:
575–579.

Tsao DY, Moeller S, Freiwald W. 2008. 

Comparing face patch systems in macaques 
and humans. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science 49:19514–19519.

Zeki S. 2003. Improbable areas in the visual 

brain. Trends in Neuroscience 26:23–26.

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   367
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   367

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   368
331–368_Bear_10_revised_final.indd   368

12/20/14   4:33 AM
12/20/14   4:33 AM

CHAPTER ELEVEN

The Auditory and 
Vestibular Systems

INTRODUCTION
THE NATURE OF SOUND

 BOX 11.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Ultrasound and Infrasound

THE STRUCTURE OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM
THE MIDDLE EAR

Components of the Middle Ear
Sound Force Ampliﬁ cation by the Ossicles
The Attenuation Reﬂ ex

THE INNER EAR

Anatomy of the Cochlea
Physiology of the Cochlea

The Response of the Basilar Membrane to Sound
The Organ of Corti and Associated Structures
 BOX 11.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Deaf Shall Hear: Cochlear Implants
Transduction by Hair Cells
Hair Cells and the Axons of the Auditory Nerve
Ampliﬁ cation by Outer Hair Cells
 BOX 11.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hearing with Noisy Ears

CENTRAL AUDITORY PROCESSES

The Anatomy of Auditory Pathways
Response Properties of Neurons in the Auditory Pathway
ENCODING SOUND INTENSITY AND FREQUENCY

Stimulus Intensity
Stimulus Frequency, Tonotopy, and Phase Locking

Tonotopy
Phase Locking
 BOX 11.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Capturing the Beat, by Donata Oertel

MECHANISMS OF SOUND LOCALIZATION

Localization of Sound in the Horizontal Plane

The Sensitivity of Binaural Neurons to Sound Location

Localization of Sound in the Vertical Plane

AUDITORY CORTEX

Neuronal Response Properties

 BOX 11.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: How Does Auditory Cortex Work? Ask a 
Specialist

The Effects of Auditory Cortical Lesions and Ablation

 BOX 11.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Auditory Disorders and Their Treatments

THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM

The Vestibular Labyrinth
The Otolith Organs
The Semicircular Canals
Central Vestibular Pathways and Vestibular Reﬂ exes

The Vestibulo-Ocular Reﬂ ex (VOR)

Vestibular Pathology

CONCLUDING REMARKS

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   369
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   369

369

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

370

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 In this chapter, we’ll explore two sensory systems that have very  different 
functions but surprising similarities of structure and mechanism: the sense 
of hearing, also known as  audition , and the sense of balance, regulated 
by the  vestibular system . Hearing is a vivid part of our conscious lives, 
while balance is something we experience all day but rarely think about. 
 When  we  cannot  see  something  or  someone,  we  can  often  detect  its 
presence, identify its origin, and even receive a message from it just by 
hearing its sounds. Anyone who has ever hiked through the forest in an 
area where there are bears or snakes knows that the sound of rustling 
leaves  can  be  a  powerful  attention–grabber.  Aside  from  the  ability  to 
detect and locate sound, we can perceive and interpret its nuances. We 
can immediately distinguish the bark of a dog, the voice of a particular 
friend, the crash of an ocean wave. Because humans are able to produce 
a wide variety of sounds as well as hear them, spoken language and its 
reception via the auditory system have become an extremely important 
means of communication. Audition in humans has even evolved beyond 
the  strictly  utilitarian  functions  of  communication  and  survival;  musi-
cians, for  example, explore the sensations and emotions evoked by sound. 
 In contrast to hearing, the sense of balance is strictly a personal, in-
ternalized  process.  The  vestibular  system  informs  our  nervous  system 
where our head and body are and how they are moving. This information 
is  used,  without  conscious  effort,  to  control  muscular  contractions  that 
keep or put our body where we want it to be, to reorient ourselves when 
something moves us, and to move our eyes so that our visual world stays 
ﬁ xed on our retinas even when our head is bouncing around. 

 Here, we will explore the mechanisms within the ear and brain that 
translate the sounds in our environment into meaningful neural signals 
and the movements of our head into a sense of where we are. We will ﬁ nd 
that these transformations are carried out in stages rather than all at 
once. Within the inner ear, neural responses are generated by auditory 
receptors from the mechanical energy in sound and by vestibular recep-
tors  from  the  tilts  and  rotations  of  the  head.  At  subsequent  stages  in 
the brain stem and thalamus, signals from the receptors are integrated 
before they ultimately reach auditory and vestibular cortex. By looking 
at  the  response  properties  of  neurons  at  various  points  in  the  system, 
we begin to understand the relationship between neural activity and our 
perception of sound and balance. 

 THE NATURE OF SOUND 
THE NNATURRE OF SOUND 

 Sounds are audible variations in air pressure. Almost anything that can 
move air molecules can generate a sound, including the vocal cords of the 
human larynx, the vibration of a string on a guitar, and the explosion of 
a ﬁ recracker. When an object moves toward a patch of air, it compresses 
the  air,  increasing  the  density  of  the  molecules.  Conversely,  the  air  is 
 rareﬁ ed (made less dense) when an object moves away. This is particu-
larly easy to visualize in the case of a stereo speaker, in which a paper 
cone attached to a magnet vibrates in and out, alternately rarefying and 
compressing  the  air  (Figure  11.1).  These  changes  in  air  pressure  are 
transferred away from the speaker at the speed of sound, which is about 
343 m/sec (767 mph) for air at room temperature. 

 Many sources of sound, such as vibrating strings or a stereo speaker 
reproducing the sound of a stringed instrument, produce variations in air 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   370
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   370

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

371

Stereo
speaker

Compressed air

Rarefied air

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
r
i

A

One
cycle

Distance

 ▲ FIGURE 11.1 
 The production of sound by variations in air pressure.  When the paper cone of 
a stereo speaker pushes out, it compresses the air; when the cone pulls in, it rar-
efies the air. If the push and pull are rhythmic, there will also be a rhythmic varia-
tion in the air pressure, as shown in the graph. The distance between successive 
compressed (high-pressure) patches of air is one cycle of the sound (indicated by 
the vertical lines). The sound wave propagates away from the speaker at the 
speed of sound. The blue line is a graph of air pressure versus distance. 

pressure that are rhythmic. The  frequency  of the sound is the number of 
compressed or rareﬁ ed patches of air that pass by our ears each second. One 
cycle of the sound is the distance between successive compressed patches; 
the sound frequency, expressed in units called  hertz (Hz) , is the number 
of cycles per second. Because sound waves all propagate at the same speed, 
high-frequency sound waves have more compressed and rareﬁ ed regions 
packed into the same space than low-frequency waves (Figure 11.2a). 

Low frequency

High frequency

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
r
i

A

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
r
i

A

(a)  

Distance

Distance

Low intensity

High intensity

Distance

Distance

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 11.2
 The frequency and intensity of sound waves.   Each graph plots air pressure versus 
distance for a sound of constant frequency and intensity. Note that the X axis also 
represents time because the velocity of sound is constant.  (a)  Frequency is the 
number of sound waves per unit of time or distance. We perceive high- frequency 
waves as having a higher pitch.  (b)  Intensity is the air pressure difference between 
peaks and troughs of the sound waves. We perceive high-intensity waves as louder. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   371
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   371

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

372

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 Our auditory system can respond to pressure waves over the remark-
able range of 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz (although this audible range decreases 
signiﬁ cantly,  especially  at  the  high-frequency  end,  as  we  age  and  ex-
pose ourselves to loud noise). Whether a sound is perceived to have a 
high  or  low  tone,  or   pitch ,  is  determined  by  the  frequency.  In  order 
to  understand  frequency,  realize  that  a  room-shaking  low  note  on  an 
organ is about 20 Hz and an ear-piercing high note on a piccolo is about 
10,000  Hz.  Although  humans  can  hear  a  great  range  of  frequencies, 
there are high and low sound wave frequencies our ears cannot hear, 
just  as  there  are  electromagnetic  waves  of  light  our  eyes  cannot  see 
(Box 11.1). 

 Another important property of a sound wave is its  intensity , or ampli-
tude, which is the difference in pressure between compressed and rareﬁ ed 
patches  of  air  (Figure  11.2b).  Sound  intensity  determines  the   loudness
we perceive, loud sounds having higher intensity. The range of intensi-
ties to which the human ear is sensitive is astonishing: The intensity of 
the  loudest sound that doesn’t damage our ears is about a trillion times 
greater than the intensity of the faintest sound that can be heard. If our 
auditory  system  were  much  more  sensitive,  we  would  hear  a  constant 
roar from the random movement of air molecules. 

 Real-world  sounds  rarely  consist  of  simple  rhythmic  sound  waves 
at  one  frequency  and  intensity.  It  is  the  simultaneous  combination  of 
 different frequency waves at different intensities that gives different mu-
sical instruments and human voices their unique tonal qualities. 

BOX 11.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Ultrasound and Infrasound 

 Most people are familiar with  ultrasound  (sound above the 

20 kHz upper limit of our hearing) because it has everyday 
applications,  from  ultrasonic  cleaners  to  medical  imaging. 
Many animals can hear these high frequencies. For instance, 
ultrasonic dog whistles work because dogs can hear up to 
about 45 kHz. Some bats vocalize at frequencies up to 100 
kHz, then listen to the echoes of their calls in order to locate 
objects  (see  Box  11.5).  Some  ﬁ sh  in  the  shad  and  herring 
family  can  detect  sounds  as  high  as  180  kHz,  thereby  en-
abling  them  to  hear  the  echolocating  ultrasound  generated 
by dolphins that prey on them. Needless to say, the dolphins 
can hear their own ultrasonic calls. Similarly, nocturnal moths 
listen for the ultrasound of hungry bats, so they can evade 
these predators. 

Infrasound  is sound at frequencies lower than humans 
can hear, below about 20 Hz. Some animals can hear in-
frasonic  frequencies;  one  is  the  elephant,  which  can  de-
tect  15  Hz  tones  inaudible  to  humans.  Whales  produce 
low-frequency  sounds,  which  are  thought  to  be  a  means 
of communication over distances of many kilometers. The 
earth  also  produces  low-frequency  vibrations,  and  some 
animals  may  sense  an  impending  earthquake  by  hearing 
such sounds. 

 Even though we usually cannot hear very low frequencies 
with our ears, they are present in the environment and we can 
sometimes feel them as vibrations with our somatosensory 
system (see Chapter 12). Infrasound is produced by such de-
vices  as  air  conditioners,  boilers,  aircraft,  and  automobiles, 
and it can have unpleasant subconscious effects. Although 
even intense infrasound from these machines does not cause 
hearing loss, it can cause dizziness, nausea, and headache. 
Many cars produce low-frequency sound when they’re mov-
ing at highway speeds, making sensitive people carsick. At 
very  high  levels,  low-frequency  sound  may  also  produce 
resonances in body cavities such as the chest and stomach, 
which can damage internal organs. 

 In addition to mechanical equipment, our own bodies gen-
erate inaudible low-frequency sound. When muscle changes 
length, individual ﬁ bers vibrate, producing low-intensity sound 
at about 25 Hz. While we cannot normally hear these sounds, 
you  can  demonstrate  them  to  yourself  by  carefully  putting 
your thumbs in your ears and making a ﬁ st with each hand. 
As you tighten your ﬁ st, you can hear a low rumbling sound 
produced by the contraction of your forearm muscles. Other 
muscles,  including  your  heart,  produce  inaudible  sound  at 
frequencies near 20 Hz. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   372
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   372

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 THE STRUCTURE OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM 
THE SSTRUCCTURE OF THE AUDITORY SYSTEM 

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

373

 Before exploring how variations in air pressure are translated into neural 
activity,  let’s  quickly  survey  the  structure  of  the  auditory  system.  The 
components of the ear are shown in Figure 11.3. The visible portion of 
the ear consists primarily of cartilage covered by skin, forming a sort of 
funnel called the  pinna  (from the Latin for “wing”), which helps collect 
sounds from a wide area. The shape of the pinna makes us more sensi-
tive  to  sounds  coming  from  ahead  than  from  behind.  The  convolutions 
in the pinna play a role in localizing sounds, as we’ll discuss later on. In 
humans, the pinna is more or less ﬁ xed in position, but animals such as 
cats and horses have considerable muscular control over the position of 
their pinna and can orient it toward a source of sound. 

 The entrance to the internal ear is called the  auditory canal , which ex-
tends about 2.5 cm (1 inch) inside the skull before it ends at the   tympanic 
membrane , also known as the  eardrum . Connected to the medial surface 
of the tympanic membrane is a series of bones called  ossicles  (from the 
Latin for “little bones”; the ossicles are indeed the smallest bones in the 
body). Located in a small air-ﬁ lled chamber, the ossicles transfer move-
ments of the tympanic membrane into movements of a second membrane 
covering a hole in the bone of the skull called the  oval window.  Behind 
the oval window is the ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled  cochlea , which contains the apparatus 
for transforming the physical motion of the oval window membrane into 
a neuronal response. Thus, the ﬁ rst stages of the basic  auditory pathway 
look like this: 
 Sound wave moves the tympanic membrane. → 
 Tympanic membrane moves the ossicles. → 

 Ossicles move the membrane at the oval window. → 

 Motion at the oval window moves ﬂ uid in the cochlea. → 

  Movement of ﬂ uid in the cochlea causes a response in sensory 
neurons. 

Outer
ear

Middle

ear

Inner
ear

Ossicles

Oval
window

Auditory-
vestibular
nerve

Cochlea

Pinna

Auditory
canal 

Tympanic
membrane

▲ FIGURE 11.3
 The outer, middle, and inner ear. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   373
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   373

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

374

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Auditory cortex

Visual cortex

MGN

LGN

Brain stem neurons

Other retinal

neurons

Auditory receptors

in cochlea

Photoreceptors

in eye

▲ FIGURE 11.4 
 Auditory and visual pathways 
 compared.  Following the sensory recep-
tors, both systems have early integration 
stages, a thalamic relay, and a projection 
to sensory cortex. 

 All the structures from the pinna inward are considered components of 
the ear, conventionally referenced in three main divisions. The structures 
from the pinna to the tympanic membrane make up the  outer ear , the 
tympanic membrane and the ossicles constitute the  middle ear , and the 
apparatus medial to the oval window is the  inner ear . 

 Once a neural response to sound is generated in the inner ear, the sig-
nal is transferred to and processed by a series of nuclei in the brain stem. 
Output from these nuclei is sent to a relay in the thalamus, the   medial 
geniculate  nucleus  (MGN) .  Finally,  the  MGN  projects  to    primary 
 auditory cortex , or  A1 , located in the temporal lobe. In one sense, the 
auditory pathway is more complex than the visual pathway because there 
are more intermediate stages between the sensory receptors and cortex. 
However,  the  systems  have  analogous  components.  Each  starts  with 
sensory receptors, which connect to early integration stages (located in 
the retina for vision and the brain stem for audition), then to a thalamic 
relay, and then to sensory cortex (Figure 11.4). 

 THE MIDDLE EAR 
 THE MMIDDLLE EAR 

 The outer ear funnels sound to the middle ear, an air-ﬁ lled cavity contain-
ing the ﬁ rst elements that move in response to sound. In the middle ear, 
variations in air pressure are converted into movements of the ossicles. 
In this section, we’ll explore how the middle ear performs an essential 
transformation of sound energy. 

 Components of the Middle Ear 
 The structures within the middle ear are the tympanic membrane, the 
ossicles, and two tiny muscles that attach to the ossicles. The tympanic 
membrane is somewhat conical in shape, with the point of the cone extend-
ing into the cavity of the middle ear. There are three ossicles, each named 
(from the Latin) after an object it slightly resembles (Figure 11.5). The 
ossicle attached to the tympanic membrane is the  malleus   (“hammer”), 
which forms a rigid connection with the  incus  (“anvil”). The incus forms 
a ﬂ exible connection with the  stapes  (“stirrup”). The ﬂ at bottom portion 
of  the  stapes,  the   footplate ,  moves  in  and  out  like  a  piston  at  the  oval 
window. The movements of the footplate transmit sound vibrations to the 
ﬂ uids of the cochlea in the inner ear. 

 The air in the middle ear is continuous with the air in the nasal cavities 
via the  Eustachian tube , although a valve usually keeps this tube closed. 
When you’re in an ascending airplane or a car heading up a mountain, the 
pressure of the surrounding air decreases. However, as long as the valve on 
the Eustachian tube is closed, the air in the middle ear stays at the pressure 
of the air before you started to climb. Because the pressure inside the middle 
ear is higher than the air pressure outside, the tympanic membrane bulges 
out, and you experience unpleasant  pressure or pain in the ear. Yawning 
or swallowing, both of which open the Eustachian tube, can usually equal-
ize the air pressure in the middle ear with the ambient air pressure and so 
relieve the pain. The opposite can happen as you descend. The air pressure 
outside is then higher than the pressure inside the middle ear, and opening 
the Eustachian tube again can relieve the discomfort you may feel. 

 Sound Force Ampliﬁ cation by the Ossicles 
 Sound  waves  move  the  tympanic  membrane,  and  the  ossicles  move 
 another membrane at the oval window. Why isn’t the ear arranged so that 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   374
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   374

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

375

Malleus

Incus

Stapes

Footplate of
stapes at
oval window

Cochlea

Eustachian
tube

Auditory
canal

Tympanic
membrane

▲  FIGURE 11.5 
 The middle ear.  As the arrows indicate, when air pressure pushes the tympanic 
membrane, the bottom of the malleus is pushed inward and the lever action of 
the ossicles makes the footplate of the stapes push inward at the oval window. 
The pressure pushing at the oval window is greater than that at the tympanic 
membrane, in part because the surface area of the footplate of the stapes is 
smaller than the surface area of the tympanic membrane. 

sound  waves  simply  directly  move  the  membrane  at  the  oval   window? 
The problem is that the cochlea is ﬁ lled with ﬂ uid, not air. If sound waves 
impinged directly on the oval window, the membrane would barely move 
and all but about 0.1% of the sound energy would be reﬂ ected away be-
cause of the pressure the cochlear ﬂ uid exerts at the back of the oval win-
dow. If you’ve ever noticed how quiet it is under water, you know how well 
water reﬂ ects sound coming from above. The ﬂ uid in the inner ear resists 
being moved much more than air does (i.e., ﬂ uid has greater inertia), so 
more pressure is needed to vibrate the ﬂ uid than the air can provide. The 
ossicles provide this necessary ampliﬁ cation in pressure. 

 To  understand  the  process,  consider  the  deﬁ nition  of  pressure.  The 
pressure  on  a  membrane  is  deﬁ ned  as  the  force  pushing  it  divided  by 
its  surface  area.  The  pressure  at  the  oval  window  will  become  greater 
than the pressure at the tympanic membrane if (1) the force on the oval 
window membrane is greater than that on the tympanic membrane, or 
(2) the surface area of the oval window is smaller than the area of the 
tympanic membrane. The middle ear uses both mechanisms. It increases 
pressure at the oval window by altering both the force and the surface 
area. The force at the oval window is greater because the ossicles act like 
levers. Sound causes large movements of the tympanic membrane, which 
are transformed into smaller but stronger vibrations of the oval window. 
And the surface area of the oval window is much smaller than that of the 
tympanic membrane. These factors combine to make the pressure at the 
oval window about 20 times greater than at the tympanic membrane, and 
this increase is sufﬁ cient to move the ﬂ uid in the inner ear. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   375
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   375

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

376

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The Attenuation Reﬂ ex 
 Two muscles attached to the ossicles have a signiﬁ cant effect on sound 
transmission to the inner ear. The  tensor tympani muscle  is anchored to 
bone in the cavity of the middle ear at one end and attaches to the mal-
leus  at  the  other  end  (Figure  11.6).  The   stapedius  muscle   also  extends 
from a ﬁ xed anchor of bone and attaches to the stapes. When these mus-
cles contract, the chain of ossicles becomes much more rigid, and sound 
conduction  to  the  inner  ear  is  greatly  diminished.  The  onset  of  a  loud 
sound triggers a neural response that causes these muscles to contract, 
a  response  called  the   attenuation  reﬂ ex .  Sound  attenuation  is  much 
greater at low frequencies than at high frequencies. 

 A number of functions have been proposed for this reﬂ ex. One function 
may  be  to  adapt  the  ear  to  continuous  sound  at  high  intensities.  Loud 
sounds that would otherwise saturate the response of the receptors in the 
inner ear could be reduced to a level below saturation by the attenuation 
reﬂ ex, thus increasing the dynamic range we can hear. The attenuation 
reﬂ ex also protects the inner ear from loud sounds that would otherwise 
damage  it.  Unfortunately,  the  reﬂ ex  has  a  delay  of  50–100  msec  from 
the time that sound reaches the ear, so it doesn’t offer much protection 
from very sudden loud sounds; damage might already be done by the time 
the muscles contract. This is why, despite the best efforts of your atten-
uation  reﬂ ex,  a  loud  explosion  can  still  damage  your  cochlea.  Because 
the   attenuation  reﬂ ex  suppresses  low  frequencies  more  than  high  fre-
quencies, it tends to make high-frequency sounds easier to discern in an 
environment  with  a  lot  of  low-frequency  noise.  This  capability  enables 
us  to  understand  speech  more  easily  in  a  noisy  environment  than  we 
could without the reﬂ ex. It is thought that the attenuation reﬂ ex is also 

Ossicles

Labyrinth

Oval window

Tensor
tympani
muscle

Tympanic
membrane 

Stapedius
muscle

Round
window

Cochlea

▲  FIGURE 11.6 
 The middle and inner ear.  The stapedius muscle and the tensor tympani muscle 
are both attached to the wall of the  middle ear at one end, and to the ossicles at 
the other ends. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   376
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   376

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

377

 activated when we speak, so we don’t hear our own voices as loudly as we 
otherwise would. 

 THE INNER EAR 
THE IINNERR EAR 

 Although considered part of the ear, not all of the inner ear is concerned 
with hearing. The inner ear consists of the cochlea, which is part of the 
 auditory system, and the labyrinth, which is not. The labyrinth is an im-
portant  part  of  the   vestibular  system ,  which  helps  maintain  the  body’s 
equilibrium.  The  vestibular  system  is  discussed  later  in  the  chapter. 
Here,  we  are  concerned  only  with  the  cochlea  and  the  role  it  plays  in 
transforming sound into a neural signal. 

 Anatomy of the Cochlea 
 The cochlea (from the Latin for “snail”) has a spiral shape resembling a 
snail’s shell. Figure 11.6 shows the cochlea cut in half. The structure of 
the cochlea is similar to a drinking straw wrapped two and a half to three 
times around the sharpened tip of a pencil. In the cochlea, the hollow tube 
(represented by the straw) has walls made of bone. The central pillar of 
the cochlea (represented by the pencil) is a conical bony structure. The 
actual  dimensions  are  much  smaller  than  the  straw-and-pencil  model, 
the cochlea’s hollow tube being about 32 mm long and 2 mm in diameter. 
Rolled up, the human cochlea is about the size of a pea. At the base of the 
cochlea are two membrane-covered holes: the oval window, which is below 
the footplate of the stapes, as we have seen, and the  round window . 

 If the cochlea is cut in cross section, we can see that the tube is di-
vided into three ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled chambers: the  scala vestibuli , the  scala media , 
and the  scala tympani  (Figure 11.7). The three scalae wrap around in-
side the cochlea like a spiral staircase ( scala  is from the Latin for “stair-
way”).  Reissner’s membrane  separates the scala vestibuli from the scala 
media, and the  basilar membrane  separates the scala tympani from the 
scala media. Sitting upon the basilar membrane is the  organ of Corti , 

Reissner’s
membrane

Tectorial
membrane

Stria vascularis

Organ of Corti

Basilar
membrane

Scala vestibuli  

Scala media

Scala tympani

▲  FIGURE 11.7 
 The three scalae of the cochlea.  Viewed in cross section, the cochlea contains three 
small parallel chambers. These chambers, the scalae, are separated by Reissner’s 
membrane and the basilar membrane. The organ of Corti contains the auditory 
 receptors; it sits upon the basilar membrane and is covered by the tectorial membrane. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   377
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   377

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

378

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Base

Oval window

Stapes

Uncoiled
cochlea

Apex

Helicotrema

Scala vestibuli

Basilar membrane

Round window

Scala tympani

 ▲ FIGURE 11.8 
 The basilar membrane in an uncoiled cochlea.  Although the cochlea narrows 
from base to apex, the basilar membrane widens toward the apex. Notice that the 
basilar membrane is the narrow blue band only. The helicotrema is a hole at the 
apex of the basilar membrane, which connects the scala  vestibuli and scala tympani. 

which  contains  auditory  receptor  neurons;  hanging  over  this  organ  is 
the   tectorial membrane . At the apex of the cochlea, the scala media is 
closed off, and the scala tympani becomes continuous with the scala ves-
tibuli at a hole in the membranes called the  helicotrema  (Figure 11.8). At 
the base of the cochlea, the scala vestibuli meets the oval window and the 
scala tympani meets the round window. 

 The ﬂ uid in the scala vestibuli and scala tympani, called  perilymph , 
has an ionic content similar to that of cerebrospinal ﬂ uid: relatively low K ⫹  
(7 mM) and high Na ⫹  (140 mM) concentrations. The scala media is ﬁ lled 
with  endolymph , which is an unusual extracellular ﬂ uid in that it has 
ionic concentrations similar to intracellular ﬂ uid, high K ⫹  (150 mM) and 
low Na ⫹  (1 mM). This difference in ion content is generated by active trans-
port processes taking place at the  stria vascularis , the endothelium lining 
one wall of the scala media and contacting the endolymph (see Figure 11.7). 
The stria vascularis absorbs sodium from, and secretes potassium into, the 
endolymph. Because of the ionic concentration differences and the perme-
ability of Reissner’s membrane, the endolymph has an electrical potential 
that is about 80 mV more positive than that of the perilymph; this is called 
the  endocochlear potential . We shall see that the endocochlear potential 
is vital because it enhances auditory transduction. 

 Physiology of the Cochlea 
 The structure of the cochlea is complex, but its basic operation is fairly 
simple. Look at Figure 11.8 and imagine what happens when the ossicles 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   378
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   378

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

379

move the membrane that covers the oval window. They work like a tiny 
piston. Inward motion at the oval window pushes perilymph into the scala 
vestibuli. If the membranes inside the cochlea were completely rigid, then 
the increase in ﬂ uid pressure at the oval window would reach up the scala 
vestibuli, through the helicotrema, and back down the scala tympani to 
the round window. Because the ﬂ uid pressure has nowhere else to escape, 
the membrane at the round window would bulge out in response to the 
inward movement of the membrane at the oval window. Any motion at 
the oval window must be accompanied by a complementary motion at the 
round window. Such movement must occur because the cochlea is ﬁ lled 
with incompressible ﬂ uid held in a solid bony container. The consequence 
of  pushing  in  at  the  oval  window  is  a  bit  like  pushing  in  one  end  of  a 
 tubular water balloon: The other end has to bulge out. 

 This simple description of the events in the cochlea is complicated by one 
additional fact: Some structures inside the cochlea are not rigid. Most im-
portantly, the basilar membrane is ﬂ exible and bends in response to sound. 

 The Response of the Basilar Membrane to Sound.  The basilar membrane 
has two structural properties that determine the way it responds to sound. 
First, the membrane is wider at the apex than at the base by a factor of 
about 5. Second, the stiffness of the membrane decreases from base to apex, 
the base being about 100 times stiffer. Think of it as a ﬂ ipper of the sort 
used for swimming, with a narrow, stiff base and a wide, ﬂ oppy apex. When 
sound pushes the footplate of the stapes at the oval window, perilymph is 
displaced within the scala vestibuli, and endolymph is displaced within 
the scala media because Reissner’s membrane is very  ﬂ exible. Sound can 
also pull the footplate, reversing the pressure  gradient. Sound causes a 
continual push–pull motion of the footplate; again, think of a tiny piston. 
 We owe much of our understanding of the response of the basilar mem-
brane  to  the  research  of  Hungarian–American  biophysicist  Georg  von 
Békésy.  Von  Békésy  determined  that  the  movement  of  the  endolymph 
makes  the  basilar  membrane  bend  near  its  base,  starting  a  wave  that 
propagates toward the apex. The wave that travels up the basilar mem-
brane is similar to the wave that runs along a rope if you hold one end 
in  your  hand  and  give  it  a  snap  (Figure  11.9).  The  distance  the  wave 
travels up the basilar membrane depends on the frequency of the sound. 
If the frequency is high, the stiffer base of the membrane will vibrate a 
good deal, dissipating most of the energy, and the wave will not propa-
gate very far (Figure 11.10a). However, low-frequency sounds generate 

Perilymph

Basilar membrane

Stapes

Round
window

Helicotrema

▲ FIGURE 11.9
 A traveling wave in the basilar membrane.  As the stapes moves in and out, it 
causes perilymph to flow, as shown by the arrows. This generates a traveling 
wave in the basilar membrane. (The size of the wave is magnified about 1 million 
times in this illustration.) At this frequency, 3000 Hz, the fluid and membrane 
movement end abruptly about halfway between the base and apex. Note that the 
scala media is not illustrated here. (Source: Adapted from Nobili, Mammano, and 
Ashmore, 1998, Fig. 1.) 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   379
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   379

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

380

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 11.10
The response of the basilar mem-
brane to sound.  The cochlea is again 
shown uncoiled. (a) High-frequency 
sound produces a traveling wave, which 
dissipates near the narrow and stiff base 
of the basilar membrane. (b) Low- 
frequency sound produces a wave that 
propagates all the way to the apex of 
the basilar membrane before dissipating. 
(The flexing of the basilar membrane is 
greatly  exaggerated for the purpose of 
illustration.) (c) There is a place code on 
the basilar membrane for the frequency 
that produces the maximum amplitude 
 deflection.

Apex: wide
and floppy

Basilar

membrane

500 Hz

1 kHz

2 kHz

4 kHz

8 kHz

16 kHz

Base: narrow

and stiff

(a)  

High frequency

(b)  

Low frequency

(c)   

Frequency producing
maximum amplitude

waves  that  travel  all  the  way  up  to  the  ﬂ oppy  apex  of  the  membrane 
before most of the energy is dissipated (Figure 10.10b). The response of 
the  basilar  membrane  establishes  a   place  code   in  which  different  loca-
tions of membrane are maximally deformed at different sound frequen-
cies (Figure 11.10c). Systematic organization of sound frequency within 
an auditory structure is called  tonotopy , analogous to retinotopy in the 
visual system. Tonotopic maps exist on the basilar membrane and within 
each of the auditory relay nuclei, the MGN, and auditory cortex. 

 As  we  shall  see,  the  differences  in  the  traveling  waves  produced  by 
different sound frequencies are responsible for the neural coding of pitch. 

 The Organ of Corti and Associated Structures.  Everything we have dis-
cussed  to  this  point  involves  the  mechanical  transformations  of  sound 
 energy that occur in the middle and inner ear. Now, we come to the point 
in  the  system  where  neurons  are  ﬁ rst  involved.  The  auditory  recep-
tor cells, which convert mechanical energy into a change in membrane 
 polarization,  are  located  in  the  organ  of  Corti  (named  for  the  Italian 
 anatomist who ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed it). The organ of Corti consists of hair cells, 
the rods of Corti, and various supporting cells. 

 The  auditory  receptors  are  called   hair  cells   because  each  one  has 
10–300 hairy-looking  stereocilia  extending from its top. Hair cells are 
not  neurons.  They  lack  axons,  and  in  mammals,  they  do  not  generate 
action potentials. Hair cells are actually specialized epithelial cells. The 
hair cells and stereocilia are shown in Figure 11.11 as they appear when 
viewed  with  a  scanning  electron  microscope.  The  critical  event  in  the 
transduction of sound into a neural signal is the bending of these cilia. 
For this reason, we will examine the organ of Corti in more detail to see 
how ﬂ exing of the basilar membrane leads to bending of the stereocilia. 

 The hair cells are sandwiched between the basilar membrane and a thin 
sheet of tissue called the  reticular lamina  (Figure 11.12). The  rods of Corti  
span  these  two  membranes  and  provide  structural  support.  Hair  cells 
between the modiolus and the rods of Corti are called  inner hair cells  
(about 4500 form a single row), and cells farther out than the rods of Corti 
are called  outer hair cells  (in humans, there are about 12,000–20,000 
arranged in three rows). The stereocilia at the tops of the hair cells extend 
above the reticular lamina into the endolymph, and their tips end either in 
the gelatinous substance of the tectorial membrane (the outer hair cells) or 
just below the tectorial membrane (the inner hair cells). To keep the mem-
branes within the organ of Corti straight in your mind, remember that the 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   380
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   380

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

Reticular
lamina

Outer hair
cell

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

381

 ▲ FIGURE 11.11 
 Hair cells viewed through the  scanning 
electron microscope.   (a)  Hair cells and their 
stereocilia.  (b)  A higher  resolution view of the 
stereocilia on an outer hair cell. The stereocilia 
are  approximately 5  ␮ m in length. (Source: 
Courtesy of I. Hunter-Duvar and R. Harrison, 
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
 Ontario, Canada.) 

Stereocilia of
outer hair cells

(a)  

Stereocilia of
inner hair cells

(b)  

Outer hair
cell

Stereocilia

Tectorial
membrane

Reticular
lamina

Modiolus

Basilar
membrane

Rods of
Corti

Inner hair
cell

Spiral ganglion

Auditory nerve

▲  FIGURE 11.12 
 The organ of Corti.  The basilar membrane supports tissue that includes the  inner and 
outer hair cells and the stiff rods of Corti. The tectorial membrane extends from the 
bony modiolus to cover the stereocilia that protrude from the tops of the hair cells. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   381
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   381

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

382

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 11.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 The Deaf Shall Hear: Cochlear Implants 

 Hair cell damage or death is the most common cause of

human  deafness  (see  Box  11.6).  In  most  cases,  the  audi-
tory nerve remains intact, making it possible to restore some 
hearing with a  cochlear implant —essentially an artiﬁ cial, elec-
tronic  cochlea.  The  roots  of  this  technology  can  be  traced 
back two centuries to the pioneering work of the Italian physi-
cist Alessandro Volta (after whom the electrical unit called the 
volt was named). In 1800, shortly after he invented the bat-
tery, Volta gamely (some might say foolishly) inserted the two 
contacts from a 50 volt battery into his ears. Here’s how he 
described the result: 

 At  the  moment  when  the  circuit  was  completed, 
I  received  a  shock  in  the  head,  and  some  moments 
after  I  began  to  hear  a  sound,  or  rather  noise  in  the 
ears, which I cannot well deﬁ ne: it was a kind of crack-
ling with shocks, as if some paste or tenacious mat-
ter  had  been  boiling.  .  .  The  disagreeable  sensation, 
which  I  believe  might  be  dangerous  because  of  the 
shock in the brain, prevented me from repeating this 
 experiment. . . .  1  

 We strongly advise you  not  to try this at home. 
 The  art  of  electrically  stimulating  the  ears  has  improved 
considerably since Volta’s singular experiment. In fact, in re-
cent years, cochlear implant systems have revolutionized the 
treatment of inner ear damage for many people. Most of the 

1  Quoted in Zeng F-G. 2004. Trends in cochlear  implants. Trends in 
Ampliﬁ cation 8:1–34.

system is actually external to the body (Figure A). It starts with 
a headpiece containing a microphone, which receives sound 
and converts it to an electrical signal. This signal is sent to a 
battery-powered digital processor. A small radio transmitter 
placed over the scalp transmits the digital code to a receiver 
that  has  been  surgically  implanted  beneath  the  skin,  in  the 
mastoid  bone  behind  the  ear.  The  transmitter  and  receiver 
are  held  close  to  one  another  with  magnets,  and  no  wires 
penetrate the skin. 

 The receiver translates the code into a series of electrical 
impulses that it sends to the cochlear implant itself—a very 
thin, ﬂ exible bundle of wires that has been threaded through 
a tiny hole and into the cochlea (Figure B). The cochlear elec-
trode array has about 22 separate stimulation sites that allow 
it to activate the auditory nerve at various places along the 
cochlea, from the base toward the apex. The most clever fea-
ture of the cochlear implant is that it takes advantage of the 
tonotopic  arrangement  of  auditory  nerve  ﬁ bers;  stimulation 
near  the  base  of  the  cochlea  evokes  a  perception  of  high-
frequency sounds, and stimulation toward the apex evokes 
low-frequency sounds. 

 By 2012, there were more than 340,000 cochlear implant 
users  in  the  world,  and  the  popularity  of  the  devices  is  in-
creasing.  About  38,000  children  have  implants  in  the  U.S. 
alone. Unfortunately, they are very expensive. 

 Cochlear implants can provide an extraordinary  hearing 
capacity  for  many  previously  deaf  people.  With  several 
months  of  training,  people  can  achieve  a  remarkably 
good understanding of conversational speech, even when 
 listening on a telephone. Most can understand more than 
90%  of  spoken  words  when  listening  in  a  quiet  room. 

basilar  is at the  base  of the organ of Corti, the  tectorial  forms a  roof  over 
the structure, and the  reticular  is in the  middle , holding onto the hair cells. 
 Hair cells form synapses on neurons whose cell bodies are located in  
the   spiral  ganglion   within  the  modiolus.  Spiral  ganglion  cells  are  bi-
polar,  with  neurites  extending  to  the  bases  and  sides  of  the  hair  cells, 
where they receive synaptic input. Axons from the spiral ganglion enter 
the   auditory nerve , a branch of the  auditory–vestibular nerve  (cranial 
nerve  VIII),  which  projects  to  the  cochlear  nuclei  in  the  medulla.  It  is 
possible to treat certain forms of deafness by using electronic devices to 
bypass the middle ear and the hair cells, and activate the auditory nerve 
axons directly (Box 11.2). 

 Transduction  by  Hair  Cells.   When  the  basilar  membrane  moves  in 
 response to a motion at the stapes, the entire foundation supporting the 
hair cells moves because the basilar membrane, rods of Corti, reticular 
lamina, and hair cells are all rigidly connected. These structures move 
as  a  unit,  pivoting  up  toward  the  tectorial  membrane  or  away  from  it 
(Figure  11.13).  When  the  basilar  membrane  moves  up,  the  reticular 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   382
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   382

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

383

The success of the implants varies widely, for reasons that 
are  often  unclear.  Researchers  are  working  hard  to  im-
prove the technology of cochlear implants, to reduce their 
size,  and  to  determine  the  best  ways  to  train  patients  in 
their use. 

 The best candidates for cochlear implants are young chil-
dren (optimally as young as one year), and older children or 
adults whose deafness was acquired after they learned some 
speech. For adults whose deafness preceded any experience 

with speech, on the other hand, cochlear implants seem to 
provide  only  a  crude  perception  of  sounds.  It  seems  that 
the auditory system, like other sensory systems in the brain, 
needs to experience normal inputs at a young age in order 
to develop properly. If it is deprived of exposure to sounds 
early  in  life,  the  auditory  system  can  never  develop  com-
pletely normal function even if hearing is restored later. The 
concept of critical periods in brain development is  described 
in Chapter 23.   

Transmitting coil

Processor

Receiver and
stimulator

Wire to cochlear
electrode array

Auditory nerve

Cochlea

Round window

Electrode array

 Figure A 
 The headpiece of a cochlear implant, positioned 
behind the ear. 

 Figure B 
 A cochlear implant in place inside the ear. 

Tectorial
 membrane

Modiolus

Reticular
lamina

Stereocilia
bending out

Stereocilia

(a)  

Outer hair
cells

Basilar
membrane

Rods of
Corti

Inner hair
cell

(b)  

Basilar membrane
deflected up

 ▲ FIGURE 11.13 
 The bending of stereocilia produced by the upward motion of the basilar membrane. 
 (a)  At rest, the hair cells are held between the reticular lamina and the basilar membrane, 
and the tips of the outer hair cell stereocilia are attached to the tectorial membrane. 
 (b)  When sound causes the basilar membrane to deflect upward, the reticular lamina 
moves up and inward toward the modiolus, causing the stereocilia to bend outward. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   383
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   383

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

384

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

4

3

2

1

0

–1

)

V
m

(
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
r
o
t
p
e
c
e
R

–20

–10

0

10

 20

(a)

Displacement of cilia (nm)

Sound
pressure

Hair cell
receptor
potential

Time
(b)
▲  FIGURE 11.14 
 Hair cell receptor potentials.  (a)  The 
hair cell depolarizes or hyperpolarizes, 
depending on the direction in which the 
stereocilia bend.  (b)  The hair cell receptor 
potential closely follows the air pressure 
changes during a low-frequency sound. 

 lamina moves up and in toward the modiolus. Conversely, downward mo-
tion of the basilar membrane causes the reticular lamina to move down 
and away from the modiolus. When the reticular lamina moves inward or 
outward relative to the modiolus, it also moves in or out with respect to 
the tectorial membrane. Because the tectorial membrane holds the tips of 
the outer hair cell stereocilia, the lateral motion of the reticular lamina 
relative to the tectorial membrane bends the stereocilia on the outer hair 
cells  one  way  or  the  other. The  tips  of  stereocilia  from  inner  hair  cells 
are also bent, probably because they are pushed by moving endolymph. 
Aligned actin ﬁ laments make stereocilia rigid rods, and they bend only 
at the base, where they attach to the top of the hair cell. Cross-link ﬁ la-
ments make the stereocilia stick to one another, so all the cilia move as 
a unit. Now imagine a sound wave making the basilar membrane jiggle 
between the two positions shown in parts a and b of Figure 11.13, and it 
will be clear how the hair cell cilia are bent back and forth by the tectorial 
membrane. 

 Determining how hair cells convert the bending of stereocilia into neu-
ral signals was a very challenging problem. Because the cochlea is en-
cased in bone, it is difﬁ cult to record from the hair cells. In the 1980s, 
A.  J.  Hudspeth  and  his  colleagues,  then  at  the  California  Institute  of 
Technology,  pioneered  a  new  approach  in  which  hair  cells  are  isolated 
from the inner ear and studied  in vitro . The  in vitro  technique has re-
vealed  much  about  the  transduction  mechanism.  Recordings  from  hair 
cells  indicate  that  when  the  stereocilia  bend  in  one  direction,  the  hair 
cell depolarizes, and when they bend in the other direction, the cell hy-
perpolarizes (Figure 11.14a). When a sound wave causes the stereocilia 
to bend back and forth, the hair cell generates a receptor potential that 
alternately hyperpolarizes and depolarizes from the resting potential of 
⫺70 mV (Figure 11.14b). 

 To  appreciate  just  how  efﬁ ciently  the  ear  works,  take  a  moment  to 
notice the scale on the X axis of Figure 11.14a. Its unit is nm; recall that 
1 nm equals 10 ⫺9  m. The graph shows that the receptor potential of the 
hair cell is saturated by the time the tips of its stereocilia have moved 
about 20 nm to the side; this is what an extremely loud sound might do. 
But the softest sound you can hear moves the stereocilia only 0.3 nm to 
each side, which is an astoundingly small distance—about the diameter 
of a large atom! Since each stereocilium is about 500 nm (or 0.5  ␮ m) in 
diameter,  a  very  soft  sound  needs  to  wiggle  the  stereocilia  only  about 
1/1000  of  their  diameter  in  order  to  produce  a  perceptible  sound.  How 
does the hair cell transduce such inﬁ nitesimally small amounts of sound 
energy? 

 The  tip  of  each  stereocilium  has  a  special  type  of  ion  channel  that 
is  induced  to  open  and  close  by  the  bending  of  stereocilia.  When  these 
 mechanosensitive  transduction  channels  are  open,  an  inward  ionic 
 current ﬂ ows and generates the hair cell receptor potential. Despite con-
siderable research effort, the molecular identity of the channels is still 
uncertain. One reason the channels have been so difﬁ cult to identify is 
that there are so few of them; the tip of each stereocilium has only one or 
two such channels, and an entire hair cell may have only 100. Some re-
cent experiments suggest that the hair cell transduction channels belong 
to  the   transmembrane   protein-like  (TMC)   family  of  proteins,  but  other 
studies challenge this conclusion. All we know for sure is that energetic 
research on this issue will continue. 

 Figure 11.15 shows how the transduction channels are believed to func-
tion. A stiff ﬁ lament called a  tip link  connects each channel to the upper 
wall of the adjacent cilium. When the cilia are pointing straight up, the 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   384
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   384

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

385

Mechanically gated
channel

K+
K+

Stereocilia

Tip link

K+
K+

K+

(a)  

K+

K+

Endolymph

Reticular
lamina

Depolarization

Voltage-gated
calcium channel

Ca2+

Inner hair
 cell

Vesicle filled
with excitatory
neurotransmitter

Perilymph

Spiral ganglion
neurite

(b)  

▲  FIGURE 11.15 
 Depolarization of a hair cell.  (a)   Ion channels on 
stereocilia tips are opened when the tip links 
 joining the stereocilia are stretched.  (b)  The entry 
of K ⫹  depolarizes the hair cell, which opens 
 voltage-gated calcium channels. Incoming Ca 2  ⫹  
leads to the release of neurotransmitter from 
 synaptic vesicles, which then diffuses to the 
 postsynaptic neurite from the spiral ganglion. 

tension on the tip link causes the channel to spend part of the time in the 
opened state, allowing a small amount of K ⫹  to move from the endolymph 
into  the  hair  cell.  Displacement  of  the  cilia  in  one  direction  increases 
tension on the tip link, increasing the rate of channel  openings and the 
amount of inward K ⫹  current. Displacement in the opposite  direction re-
lieves tension on the tip link, thereby causing the channel to spend more 
time  closed,  reducing  inward  K ⫹   movement.  The  entry  of  K ⫹   into  the 
hair cell causes a depolarization, which in turn activates  voltage-gated 
 calcium channels (Figure 11.15b). The entry of Ca 2  ⫹  triggers the release 
of the neurotransmitter glutamate, which activates the spiral ganglion 
ﬁ bers lying postsynaptic to the hair cell. 

 It is interesting that the opening of K ⫹  channels produces a depolariza-
tion of the hair cell, whereas the opening of K ⫹  channels  hyperpolarizes  
most neurons. The reason that hair cells respond differently from neu-
rons is the unusually high K ⫹  concentration in endolymph, which yields a 
K ⫹  equilibrium potential of 0 mV, compared to the equilibrium potential 
of  ⫺ 80 mV in typical neurons. Another reason that K ⫹  is driven into hair 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   385
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   385

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

386

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Outer hair
cells

cells is the 80 mV endocochlear potential, which helps create a 125 mV 
gradient across the stereocilia membranes. 

Inner hair cell

Spiral
ganglion
cells

Auditory
nerve

 ▲ FIGURE 11.16 
 The innervation of hair cells by 
 neurons from the spiral ganglion. 

 Hair Cells and the Axons of the Auditory Nerve.  The auditory nerve con-
sists of the axons of neurons whose cell bodies are located in the spiral 
ganglion. Thus, the spiral ganglion neurons, which are the ﬁ rst in the au-
ditory pathway to ﬁ re action potentials, provide all the auditory informa-
tion sent to the brain. Curiously, the numbers of auditory axons contacting 
the inner and outer hair cells are enormously different. There are about 
35,000–50,000 neurons altogether in the spiral ganglion. Despite the fact 
that inner hair cells are outnumbered by outer hair cells by a factor of 
3 to 1, more than 95% of the spiral ganglion neurons communicate with 
the relatively small number of inner hair cells, and less than 5% receive 
synaptic input from the more numerous outer hair cells (Figure 11.16). 
Consequently, one spiral ganglion ﬁ ber receives input from only one inner 
hair  cell;  moreover,  each  inner  hair  cell  feeds  about  10  spiral  ganglion 
neurites. The situation is the opposite with outer hair cells. Because they 
outnumber their spiral ganglion cells, one spiral ganglion ﬁ ber synapses 
with numerous outer hair cells. 

 Simply based on these numbers, we can infer that the vast majority 
of the information leaving the cochlea comes from inner hair cells. If it’s 
true that the brain is paying very little attention to the outer hair cells, 
then what are the outer hair cells for? 

 Ampliﬁ cation by Outer Hair Cells.  Given that outer hair cells far outnum-
ber inner hair cells, it seems paradoxical that most of the cochlear output 
is derived from inner hair cells. However, ongoing research suggests that 
outer hair cells play a critical role in sound transduction. Ironically, one 
clue  to  the  nature  of  this  role  was  the  discovery  that  the  ear  not  only 
transduces sound; it can create it, too (Box 11.3). 

 Outer hair cells seem to act like tiny motors that amplify the move-
ment of the basilar membrane during low-intensity sound stimuli. This 
action  of  the  outer  hair  cells  on  the  basilar  membrane  is  called  the 
  cochlear  ampliﬁ er . There are two molecular mechanisms that probably 
 contribute to this ampliﬁ er. The ﬁ rst, and best understood, mechanism 
involves special  motor proteins  found only in the membranes of outer hair 
cells (Figure 11.17a). Motor proteins can change the length of outer hair 
cells, and outer hair cells respond to sound with both a receptor potential 
and a change in length (Figure 11.17b). The motor proteins do not resem-
ble any other system of cellular movement. The hair cells’ motor is driven 
by  the  receptor  potential,  and  it  does  not  use  adenosine  triphosphate 
(ATP) as an energy source. It is also extremely fast, as it must be able to 
keep up with the movements induced by high-frequency sounds. The hair 
cell’s primary motor is an unusual protein called  prestin  (from the musi-
cal notation  presto , meaning “fast”). Prestin molecules are tightly packed 
into the membranes of the outer hair cell bodies, and they are required for 
outer hair cells to move in response to sound. A second possible molecular 
mechanism of the cochlear ampliﬁ er is located right in the hair bundles. 
A special type of the contractile protein  myosin  is attached to the upper 
end  of  the  tip  links.  Myosin  and  other  tip-link  proteins  may  somehow 
rapidly enhance the movement of hairs in response to weak sounds; this 
idea is controversial. 

 Because  outer  hair  cells  are  attached  to  the  basilar  membrane  and 
reticular lamina, when motor proteins change the length of the hair cell, 
the basilar membrane is pulled toward or pushed away from the reticular 
lamina and tectorial membrane. This is why the word “motor” is used; 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   386
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   386

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

387

BOX 11.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Hearing with Noisy Ears 

 Sensory systems are supposed to detect stimulus energy

in  the  environment,  not  generate  it.  Can  you  imagine  eyes 
 glowing in the dark, or noses smelling like roses? How about 
ears  buzzing  loudly?  The  truth  is  that  retinas  don’t  radiate 
light,  and  olfactory  receptors  don’t  emit  odors,  but  some 
ears  can  deﬁ nitely  generate  sounds  loud  enough  for  a  by-
stander to hear! Such sounds are called  otoacoustic emis-
sions . In one early description, a man sitting next to his dog 
realized the animal was humming; after some anxious inves-
tigation, he  discovered that the sound came from one of the 
dog’s ears. 

 The  ears  of  all  vertebrates,  including  humans,  can  emit 
sounds. Presenting a short sound stimulus, such as a click, 
to a normal human ear causes an “echo” that can be picked 
up  with  a  sensitive  microphone  in  the  auditory  canal.  We 
don’t usually notice such echoes because they are too faint 
to be heard over other sounds in the environment. 

 Ears that emit relatively loud sounds spontaneously, in the 
absence of any incoming sound, have usually sustained co-
chlear  damage  as  the  result  of  exposure  to  extremely  loud 
sounds  (from  explosions,  machines,  rock  bands),  drugs, 
or  disease.  If  spontaneous  otoacoustic  emissions  are  loud 
enough, they may cause one form of tinnitus—a ringing in the 
ears (see Box 11.6). 

 The  mechanism  that  causes  the  ear  to  generate  its 
own   sounds—the  cochlear  ampliﬁ er—is  the  same  one  that 

 functions to improve its detection of  environmental  sounds, 
but operating in reverse. Normal outer hair cells, stimulated 
with  a  click,  react  with  a  quick  movement  that  drives  the 
 cochlear  ﬂ uids  and  membranes,  which  move  the  ossicles, 
and  ultimately  vibrate  the  tympanic  membrane  to  produce 
sound in the outside air (the echo). Spontaneous emissions 
occur because the sensitivity of the cochlear ampliﬁ er is very 
high. Most people with normal hearing can perceive them in 
an exceptionally quiet environment. 

 Damaged regions of the cochlea can somehow facilitate 
the spontaneous movement of some outer hair cells, so that 
they vibrate all the time. Strangely enough, most people are 
unaware that their ears are broadcasting sounds. Apparently, 
their central auditory neurons recognize the spontaneous co-
chlear activity as noise and suppress the perception of it. The 
beneﬁ t is that they are spared from an otherwise maddening 
tinnitus, but the cost is a partial hearing loss in the affected 
frequency range. 

 Because  otoacoustic  emissions  are  a  normal  attribute 
of  ears,  they  can  be  used  as  a  quick  and  easy  test  of  ear 
function. A series of sounds is played into the ears, and the 
echoes they evoke are recorded and analyzed. The charac-
teristics of the echoes can tell us a lot about the function of 
the middle and inner ears. This is especially useful for testing 
people  who  are  unable  to  tell  the  examiner  whether  or  not 
they have heard test sounds—newborn babies, for example. 

the outer hair cells actively change the physical relationship between the 
cochlear membranes. 

 The  motor  effect  of  outer  hair  cells  makes  a  signiﬁ cant  contribution 
to the traveling wave that propagates down the basilar membrane. This 
was ﬁ rst demonstrated in 1991 by Mario Ruggero and Nola Rich at the 
University of Minnesota, who administered the chemical furosemide into 
experimental animals. Furosemide temporarily decreases the transduc-
tion that normally results from the bending of stereocilia on hair cells, 
and it was found to signiﬁ cantly reduce the movement of the basilar mem-
brane in response to sound (Figure 11.17c, d). This effect of furosemide is 
believed to result from inactivation of the outer hair cell motor proteins 
and loss of the cochlear ampliﬁ er. When the outer hair cells amplify the 
response of the basilar membrane, the stereocilia on the inner hair cells 
bend more, and the increased transduction process in the inner hair cells 
produces a greater response in the auditory nerve. Through this feedback 
system, therefore, outer hair cells contribute signiﬁ cantly to the output 
of the cochlea. Without the cochlear ampliﬁ er, the peak movement of the 
basilar membrane would be about 100-fold smaller. 

 The  effect  of  outer  hair  cells  on  the  response  of  inner  hair  cells  can 
be  modiﬁ ed  by  neurons  outside  the  cochlea.  In  addition  to  the  spiral 
 ganglion afferents that project from the cochlea to the brain stem, there 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   387
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   387

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

388

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Tectorial membrane

K+

Reticular lamina

Motor proteins
(compressed)

Basilar membrane

Motor proteins
(expanded)

(a)

(b)

Normal response
(with cochlear amplifier)

▲  FIGURE 11.17 
 Amplification by outer hair cells. 
 (a)  Motor proteins in the membranes of 
outer hair cells.  (b)  Bending of the 
 stereocilia causes potassium to enter the 
hair cell, depolarizing it, and triggering 
motor proteins to activate and shorten 
the hair cell.  (c)  The shortening and 
lengthening of the hair cell increase the 
flexing of the basilar membrane. 
 (d)   Furosemide decreases hair cell 
 transduction, consequently reducing the 
flexing of the basilar membrane. 
(Source: Adapted from Ashmore and 
Kolston, 1994, Figs. 2, 3.) 

(c)

Base

Basilar membrane

Response during
furosemide treatment
(without cochlear amplifier)

(d)

Base

Basilar membrane

Apex

Apex

are also about 1000 efferent ﬁ bers projecting  from  the brain stem  toward
the   cochlea.  These  efferents  diverge  widely,  synapsing  onto  outer  hair 
cells and releasing acetylcholine. Stimulation of these efferents changes 
the shape of the outer hair cells, thereby affecting the responses of inner 
hair cells. In this way, descending input from the brain to the cochlea can 
regulate auditory sensitivity. 

 The amplifying effect of outer hair cells explains how certain antibiot-
ics (e.g., kanamycin) that damage hair cells can lead to deafness. After 
 excessive  exposure  to  antibiotics,  many  inner  hair  cells  are  less  sensi-
tive to sound. However, the antibiotic almost exclusively damages outer 
hair  cells,  not  inner  hair  cells.  For  this  reason,  deafness  produced  by 
 antibiotics is thought to be a consequence of damage to the cochlear am-
pliﬁ er (i.e., outer hair cells), demonstrating just how essential a role the 
ampliﬁ er plays. 

 Prestin,  the  protein  that  is  essential  for  the  outer  hair  cells’  motor, 
is also necessary for the cochlear ampliﬁ er to function. When the gene 
that encodes prestin is eliminated from mice, the animals are nearly deaf; 
their ears are more than 100-fold less sensitive to sound than normal. 

 CENTRAL AUDITORY PROCESSES 
CENTTRAL AAUDITORY PROCESSES 

 The  auditory  pathway  appears  more  complex  than  the  visual  pathway 
because there are more nuclei intermediate between the sensory organ 
and  the  cortex.  Also,  in  contrast  to  the  visual  system,  there  are  many 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   388
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   388

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

389

more alternative pathways by which signals can travel from one nucleus 
to  the  next.  Nonetheless,  the  amount  of  information  processing  in  the 
two systems is similar when you consider that the cells and synapses of 
the auditory system in the brain stem are analogous to interactions in 
the layers of the retina. We will now look at auditory circuitry, focusing 
on the transformations of auditory information that occur along the way. 

 The Anatomy of Auditory Pathways 
 Afferents from the spiral ganglion enter the brain stem in the auditory–
vestibular  nerve.  At  the  level  of  the  medulla,  the  axons  innervate  the 
 dorsal cochlear nucleus  and  ventral cochlear nucleus  ipsilateral to 
the  cochlea  where  the  axons  originated.  Each  axon  branches  so  that  it 
synapses on neurons in both cochlear nuclei. From this point on, the sys-
tem gets more complicated, and the connections are less well understood, 
because  there  are  multiple  parallel  pathways.  Rather  than   trying  to 
 describe all of these connections, we will follow one particularly important 
pathway from the cochlear nuclei to auditory cortex (Figure 11.18). Cells 
in the ventral cochlear nucleus send axons that project to the  superior 
olive  (also called the  superior olivary nucleus ) on both sides of the brain 
stem. Axons of the olivary neurons ascend in the  lateral lemniscus  (a lem-
niscus is a collection of axons) and innervate the  inferior colliculus  of 
the midbrain. Many efferents of the dorsal cochlear nucleus follow a route 
similar to the pathway from the ventral cochlear nucleus, but the dorsal 
path bypasses the superior olive. Although there are other routes from the 
cochlear nuclei to the inferior colliculus, with additional intermediate re-
lays,  all ascending auditory pathways converge onto the inferior colliculus . 
The neurons in the inferior colliculus send axons to the medial geniculate 
nucleus (MGN) of the thalamus, which in turn projects to auditory cortex. 
 Before moving on to the response properties of auditory neurons, we 

should make several points: 
 1. Projections and brain stem nuclei other than the ones described con-
tribute to the auditory pathways. For instance, the inferior colliculus
sends axons not only to the MGN but also to the superior colliculus
(where the integration of auditory and visual information occurs) and
to the cerebellum.

 2. There  is  extensive  feedback  in  the  auditory  pathways.  For  instance,
brain stem neurons send axons that contact outer hair cells, and audi-
tory cortex sends axons to the MGN and inferior colliculus.

 3. Each  cochlear  nucleus  receives  input  from  just  the  one  ear  on  the
 ipsilateral  side;  all  other  auditory  nuclei  in  the  brain  stem  receive
input from both ears. This explains the clinically important fact that
the only way by which brain stem damage can produce deafness in one
ear is if a cochlear nucleus (or auditory nerve) on one side is destroyed.

 Response Properties of Neurons in the 
Auditory Pathway 
 To understand the transformations of auditory signals that occur in the 
brain stem, we must ﬁ rst consider the nature of the input from the neu-
rons in the spiral ganglion of the cochlea. Because most spiral ganglion 
cells receive input from a single inner hair cell at a particular location 
on the basilar membrane, they ﬁ re action potentials only in response to 
sound within a limited frequency range. After all, hair cells are excited by 
deformations of the basilar membrane, and each portion of the membrane 
is maximally sensitive to a particular range of frequencies. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   389
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   389

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

390

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

3

3

2

1

1

Auditory
cortex

MGN

Inferior
colliculus

Superior

olive

Ventral
cochlear
nucleus

Spiral 
ganglion

3

Lateral
lemniscus

2

Dorsal cochlear
nucleus

Ventral cochlear
nucleus

MGN

Inferior
colliculus

Lateral
lemniscus

1

Superior
olive

Auditory
cortex

3

2

1

Auditory
nerve

Cochlea

Auditory nerve
fiber

Spiral
ganglion

▲ FIGURE 11.18
Auditory pathways.  Neural signals 
can travel from the spiral ganglion 
to auditory  cortex via numerous 
pathways. Here, a primary pathway 
is shown schematically (at left) and 
through brain stem cross sections. 
Notice that only the connections 
from one side are  illustrated.

 Figure 11.19 shows the results of an experiment in which action poten-
tials were recorded from a single auditory nerve ﬁ ber (i.e., the axon of a 
spiral ganglion cell). The graph represents the ﬁ ring rate in response to 
sounds at different frequencies. The neuron is most responsive to sound at 
one frequency, called the neuron’s  characteristic frequency , and it is 
less responsive at neighboring frequencies. This type of frequency  tuning 
is seen in many neurons in each of the relays from cochlea to  cortex. 

 As one ascends, the auditory pathway in the brain stem, the response 
properties of the cells become more diverse and complex, just as in the 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   390
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   390

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

391

d
n
o
c
e
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
k
p
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

i

150

100

50

0

Characteristic

frequency

Response to high-
intensity sound
Response to low-  
intensity sound

500

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

Frequency (Hz)

▲  FIGURE 11.19 
 The response of an auditory nerve 
 fiber to different sound frequencies. 
This neuron is frequency-tuned and 
has its greatest response at the 
 characteristic frequency. (Source: 
Adapted from Rose, Hind, Anderson, 
and Brugge, 1971, Fig. 2.) 

visual  pathway.  For  instance,  some  cells  in  the  cochlear  nuclei  are  es-
pecially sensitive to sounds varying in frequency over time (think of the 
sound of a trombone as it slides from a low note to a high note). In the 
MGN, there are cells that respond to fairly complex sounds such as vo-
calizations, as well as other cells that show simple frequency selectivity, 
as in the auditory nerve. An important development in the superior olive 
is that cells receive input from cochlear nuclei on both sides of the brain 
stem. As  discussed later, such binaural neurons are probably important 
for sound localization. 

 ENCODING SOUND INTENSITY AND FREQUENCY 
ENCOODINGG SOUND INTENSITTY AND FREQUENCY 

 If you stop reading this book for a moment, you can focus on the many 
sounds  around  you.  You  can  probably  hear  sounds  you  have  been 
 ignoring,  and  you  can  selectively  pay  attention  to  different  sounds  oc-
curring at the same time. We are usually bathed in an amazing diversity 
of sounds—from chattering people to cars to electrical noises to sounds 
generated within our own bodies—and our brain must be able to ana-
lyze just the important sounds while ignoring the noise. We cannot yet 
 account for the perception of each of these sounds by pointing to particu-
lar  neurons  in  the  brain.  However,  most  sounds  have  certain  features 
in common, including intensity, frequency, and the location from which 
they  emanate.  Each  of  these  features  is  represented  differently  in  the 
auditory pathway. 

 Stimulus Intensity 
 Information about sound intensity is coded in two interrelated ways: the 
ﬁ ring rates of neurons and the number of active neurons. As a stimulus 
gets  more  intense,  the  basilar  membrane  vibrates  with  greater  ampli-
tude,  causing  the  membrane  potential  of  the  activated  hair  cells  to  be 
more  depolarized  or  hyperpolarized.  As  a  result,  the  nerve  ﬁ bers  with 
which  the  hair  cells  synapse  ﬁ re  action  potentials  at  greater  rates.  In 
Figure  11.19,  the  auditory  nerve  ﬁ ber  ﬁ res  faster  to  the  same  sound 
frequencies  when  the  intensity  is  increased.  In  addition,  more  intense 
 stimuli produce movements of the basilar membrane over a greater dis-
tance, which leads to the activation of more hair cells. In a single audi-
tory nerve ﬁ ber, this increase in the number of activated hair cells causes 
a  broadening  of  the  frequency  range  to  which  the  ﬁ ber  responds.  The 
loudness we perceive is correlated with the number of active neurons in 
the auditory nerve (and throughout the auditory pathway) and with their 
ﬁ ring rates. 

 Stimulus Frequency, Tonotopy, and Phase Locking 
 From the hair cells in the cochlea through the various nuclei leading to 
auditory cortex, most neurons are sensitive to stimulus frequency. They 
are  most  sensitive  at  their  characteristic  frequency.  How  is  frequency 
represented in the central nervous system? 

 Tonotopy.   Frequency  sensitivity  is  largely  a  consequence  of  the  me-
chanics  of  the  basilar  membrane  because  different  portions  of  the 
membrane  are  maximally  deformed  by  sound  of  different  frequen-
cies.  Moving  from  the  base  to  the  apex  of  the  cochlea,  a  progressive 
decrease  occurs  in  the  frequency  that  produces  a  maximal  deforma-
tion  of  the  basilar  membrane.  This  is  an  example  of  tonotopy,  as  we 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   391
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   391

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

392

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲  FIGURE 11.20 
 Tonotopic maps on the basilar 
 membrane and cochlear nucleus. 
 From the base to the apex of the 
 cochlea, the basilar membrane resonates 
with  increasingly lower frequencies. This 
 tonotopy is preserved in the auditory 
nerve and cochlear nucleus. In the 
 cochlear nucleus, there are bands of 
cells with similar characteristic frequen-
cies; characteristic frequencies increase 
progressively from  anterior to posterior. 

Cochlea

Hair cells

Basilar
membrane

Apex

Characteristic
frequency:

Anterior

1 kHz

4 kHz

16 kHz

 Base 

Spiral
ganglion

Auditory
nerve

Posterior

Cochlear
nucleus

discussed earlier. There is a  corresponding tonotopic representation in 
the auditory nerve; auditory nerve ﬁ bers connected to hair cells near 
the apical basilar membrane have low characteristic frequencies, and 
those  connected  to  hair  cells  near  the  basal  basilar  membrane  have 
high  characteristic frequencies (Figure 11.20). When auditory axons in 
the auditory–vestibular nerve synapse in the cochlear nuclei, they do 
so  in  an  organized  pattern  based  on  characteristic  frequency.  Nearby 
 neurons have similar characteristic frequencies, and a systematic rela-
tionship exists between position in the cochlear nucleus and character-
istic frequency. In other words, there is a map of the basilar membrane 
within the cochlear nuclei. 

 Because of the tonotopy present throughout the auditory system, the 
location  of  active  neurons  in  auditory  nuclei  is  one  indication  of  the 
frequency of the sound. However, frequency must be coded in some way 
other  than  the  site  of  maximal  activation  in  tonotopic  maps,  for  two 
reasons.  One  reason  is  that  these  maps  do  not  contain  neurons  with 
very  low  characteristic  frequencies,  below  about  200  Hz.  As  a  result, 
the site of maximal activation might be the same for a 50 Hz tone as for 
a 200 Hz tone, so there must be some other way to distinguish them. 
The  second reason that something other than tonotopy is needed is that 
the region of the basilar membrane maximally displaced by a sound de-
pends on its intensity in addition to its frequency (see Figure 11.19). At 
a ﬁ xed  frequency, a more intense sound will produce a maximal defor-
mation at a point further up the basilar membrane than a less intense 
sound. 

 Phase Locking.  The timing of neural ﬁ ring provides an additional type 
of information about sound frequency that complements information de-
rived from tonotopic maps. Recordings made from neurons in the auditory 
nerve  show   phase  locking ,  the  consistent  ﬁ ring  of  a  cell  at  the  same 
phase of a sound wave (Figure 11.21). If you think of a sound wave as 
a sinusoidal variation in air pressure, a phase-locked neuron would ﬁ re 
action potentials at the peaks, or the troughs, or some other constant loca-
tion on the wave. At low frequencies, some neurons ﬁ re action potentials 
every time the sound is in a particular phase (Figure 11.21a). This makes 
it easy to determine the frequency of the sound; it is the same as the fre-
quency of the neuron’s action potentials. 

 Phase locking can still occur even if an action potential has not ﬁ red 
on every cycle (Figure 11.21b). For instance, a neuron may respond to a 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   392
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   392

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

Low-frequency sound wave

(a)  

(b)  

High-frequency sound wave

(c)  

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

393

Response
phase-locked
on every
cycle

Response
phase-locked, 
not on every
cycle

Response not
phase-locked

▲  FIGURE 11.21 
 Phase locking in the response of 
 auditory nerve fibers.  Sound at a low 
frequency can elicit a phase-locked 
 response, either  (a)  on every cycle of the 
stimulus or  (b)  on some fraction of the 
 cycles.  (c)  At high frequencies, the 
 response does not have a fixed phase 
 relationship to the stimulus. 

1000 Hz sound with an action potential on only perhaps 25% of the cycles 
of the input, but those action potentials still always occur at the same 
phase of the sound. If you have a group of such neurons, each  responding 
to different cycles of the input signal, it is possible to have a response to 
every cycle (by some member of the group) and thus a measure of sound 
frequency.  It  is  likely  that  intermediate  sound  frequencies  are  repre-
sented by the pooled activity of a number of neurons, each of which ﬁ res 
in  a  phase-locked  manner;  this  is  called  the   volley  principle .  Phase 
 locking occurs with sound waves up to about 5 kHz. Above this point, the 
action potentials ﬁ red by a neuron occur at random phases of the sound 
wave  (Figure  11.21c)  because  the  intrinsic  variability  in  the  timing  of 
the  action  potential  becomes  comparable  to  the  time  interval  between 
 successive  cycles  of  the  sound.  In  other  words,  the  sound  waves  cycle 
too fast for the action potentials of single neurons to accurately repre-
sent their timing. Above 5 kHz, frequencies are represented by tonotopy 
alone. 

 Many  auditory  neurons  in  the  brainstem  have  peculiar  membrane 
properties  that  make  them  uniquely  sensitive  to  the  precise  timing  of 
their synaptic inputs. Adaptations for precise timing are particularly im-
pressive in neurons of the cochlear nuclei, as research by Donata Oertel 
and  her   colleagues  at  the  University  of  Wisconsin  has  demonstrated 
(Box 11.4). 

 To summarize, here is how different sound frequencies are represented 
by brain stem neurons. At very low frequencies, phase locking is used; 
at intermediate frequencies, both phase locking and tonotopy are useful; 
and  at  high  frequencies,  tonotopy  must  be  relied  on  to  indicate  sound 
frequency. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   393
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   393

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

394

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 11.4

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

 Capturing the Beat 
by Donata Oertel

 While  the  timing  of  action  potentials  carries  informa-

tion  everywhere in the brain, the time scales on which neu-
rons  work  vary  dramatically.  Neurons  in  the  auditory  nuclei 
of  the  brain  stem  can  ﬁ re  with  a  temporal  precision  better 
than  200   ␮ sec.  Contrast  this  with  cortical  neurons,  whose 
responses to identical stimuli are a hundred-fold less precise. 
In the auditory system, the timing of ﬁ ring conveys important 
sensory information about the pitch of sounds and whether 
sounds come from the right or left. 

 In  the  mid-1960s,  computers  made  possible  detailed 
analyses  of  the  relationship  between  the  waveforms  of 
sounds and the ﬁ ring of neurons. These studies, some done 
by  my  colleagues  at  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  revealed 
that  auditory  neurons  encode  the  frequency  of  sounds  not 
only by their position in the tonotopic map but also by ﬁ ring 
in phase with the sounds, by phase locking. This temporal 
code breaks down at sound frequencies higher than 5 kHz 
because the ﬁ ring of neurons is not precise enough to resolve 
periods shorter than about 200  ␮ sec. 

 Phase  locking  at  low  frequencies  is  valuable  to  human 
 beings.  First,  our  impressive  ability  to  distinguish  tones  as 
similar as 1000 Hz and 1002 Hz seems to depend on phase 
locking by neurons in the brain stem. Phase-locked neurons 
also detect the relative time of arrival of a sound at the two 
ears with every cycle of the sound, a mechanism important 
for localizing sounds in the horizontal plane. 

 How  can  auditory  neurons  convey  information  with  a 
temporal precision of 200  ␮ sec across multiple synapses—
hair cells to spiral ganglion cells, to neurons of the cochlear 
 nuclear  nucleus,  to  neurons  in  the  superior  olive—using 
 synaptic potentials and action potentials whose durations are 
in the millisecond range? To achieve this, the ﬁ ring of post-
synaptic  neurons  must  follow  the  ﬁ ring  of  the  presynaptic 
neurons rapidly and with an unvarying delay. 

 In 1979, Bill Rhode, Phil Smith, and I began to address 
these  issues  by  making  intracellular  recordings  in  anesthe-
tized cats, but those experiments were terribly difﬁ cult. One of 
the problems was that auditory brain stem nuclei are difﬁ cult 
to reach, being surrounded by cerebellum, the inner ear, and 
the  jaw.  Another  was  that  blood  pulsations  and   respiratory 
movements made the microelectrodes unstable. In 1980, I re-
alized I could eliminate these difﬁ culties by  making recordings 
in brain slices, a technique then being used to study the ro-
dent hippocampus and the chicken brain stem. I developed 
a slice preparation of the mouse cochlear nuclei. There were 
lots of details to work out. I had to learn how to remove the 

brain stem without stretching the auditory nerve, to optimize 
the properties of the saline that bathed the tissue, to gener-
ate a ﬂ ow of saline fast enough to promote  efﬁ cient gas ex-
change but not so turbulent that it yanked the electrodes out 
of cells. One of the ﬁ rst things I discovered is that some au-
ditory neurons have exceptionally low membrane resistance 
and fast time constants. These properties help them sharpen 
and convey precise timing information. Auditory neurons are 
specialized for precision in other ways as well. Their synapses 
deliver exceptionally large currents using the speediest sub-
types of the glutamate receptors to depolarize cells with low 
resistances rapidly. 

 A critical function of some auditory neurons is   coincidence 
detection —detecting  when  two  inputs  arrive  at  the  same 
time. Two groups of auditory neurons, octopus cells of the 
cochlear  nuclei  and  principal  cells  of  the  superior  olivary 
nucleus,  are  truly  exquisite  coincidence  detectors.  Nace 
Golding, Ramazan Bal, and Michael Ferragamo, working in 
my lab, demonstrated that octopus cells have exceptionally 
large, mutually opposing types of voltage-sensitive ion chan-
nels.  These  give  the  cells  short  time  constants  and  allow 
them to detect coincidence in the submillisecond time range. 
 Nace and I puzzled over the fact that synaptic potentials 
sum over a fraction of one millisecond, yet auditory nerve in-
puts to octopus cells are activated by a traveling wave that 
sweeps down the cochlea over multiple milliseconds. Matthew 
McGinley  helped  to  resolve  that  puzzle.  Octopus  cells  earn 
their name by extending dendrites in only one direction; cell 
bodies send dendrites across the tonotopic array of auditory 
nerve ﬁ bers so that the earliest synaptic inputs (tuned to high 
frequencies) impinge on the tips of dendrites while the latest 
synaptic inputs (tuned to low frequencies) terminate near the 
cell body. EPSPs take time to propagate along the dendrites 
of octopus cells; different dendritic delays thus compensate 
for the traveling wave delays in the cochlea, allowing octopus 
cells to signal the occurrence of clicks and onsets of complex 
sounds  with  a  single,  sharply  timed  action  potential.  When 
Nace established his own lab, he studied principal cells of the 
medial superior olive, which compare the timing of inputs to 
the two ears. He found that they were in many ways similar to 
the octopus cells he had worked on as a graduate student. 
Both cells have specialized ion channels that make them fast, 
both use their dendrites for detecting coincident EPSPs, and 
both balance their need to ﬁ re action potentials with their need 
to  integrate  inputs  without  the  interference  of  action  poten-
tials. And both are still devilishly difﬁ cult to record from  in vivo!

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   394
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   394

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

395

 MECHANISMS OF SOUND LOCALIZATION 
MECHANISSMS OF SOUND LOOCALIZATION 

 While the use of frequency information is essential for interpreting sounds 
in our environment, sound localization can be of critical importance for sur-
vival. If a predator is about to eat you, ﬁ nding the source of a sudden sound 
and running away are much more important than analyzing the subtleties 
of  the  sound.  Wild  animals  do  not  eat  humans  very  often  anymore,  but 
there are other situations in which sound localization can be helpful. If you 
are carelessly crossing the street, your localization of a car’s horn may be all 
that saves you. Our current understanding of the mechanisms underlying 
sound localization suggests that we use different techniques for locating 
sources in the horizontal plane (left–right) and vertical plane (up–down). 

 If you close your eyes and plug one ear, you can locate a bird singing 
as it ﬂ ies overhead almost as well as with both ears open. But if you try 
to locate the horizontal position of a duck quacking as it swims across a 
pond, you’ll ﬁ nd that you’re much less able using only one ear. Thus, good 
horizontal localization requires a comparison of the sounds reaching the 
two ears, whereas good vertical localization does not. 

 Localization of Sound in the Horizontal Plane 
 An obvious cue to the location of a sound source is the time at which the 
sound  arrives  at  each  ear.  If  we  aren’t  facing  a  sound’s  source  directly, 
it takes the sound longer to reach one ear than the other. For instance, 
if  a  sudden  noise  comes  at  you  from  the  right,  it  will  reach  your  right 
ear ﬁ rst (Figure 11.22a); it will arrive at your left ear later, after what is 
known as an  interaural time delay.  If the distance between your ears is 
20 cm, sound coming from the right, perpendicular to your head, will reach 
your left ear 0.6 msec after reaching your right ear. If the sound comes 
from straight ahead, there is no interaural delay; and at angles between 
straight ahead and perpendicular, the delay will be between 0 and 0.6 msec 
(Figure 11.22b). Sounds from the left side yield delays opposite to those on 
the right. Thus, there is a simple relationship between location and inter-
aural delay. Detected by specialized neurons in the brain stem, the delay 
enables us to locate the source of the sound in the horizontal plane. The 
interaural delays we can detect are impressively brief. People can discrimi-
nate the direction of a sound source in the horizontal plane with a precision 
of about 2°. This demands that they discriminate the 11  ␮ sec difference 
between the times it takes a sound to reach their two ears. 

 If we don’t hear the onset of a sound because it is a continuous tone 
rather than a sudden noise, however, we cannot know the initial arrival 
times of the sound at the two ears. Thus, continuous tones pose more of 
a problem for sound localization because they are always present at both 
ears. However, we can still use arrival time to localize the sound but in a 
slightly different manner from localizing a sudden sound. The only thing 
that  can  be  compared  with  continuous  tones  is  the  time  at  which  the 
same  phase  of the sound wave reaches each ear. Imagine you are exposed 
to a 200 Hz sound coming from the right. At this frequency, one cycle of 
the sound covers 172 cm, which is much more than the 20 cm distance 
between your ears. After a peak in the sound pressure wave passes the 
right ear, it takes 0.6 msec, the time for sound to travel 20 cm, before you 
detect the peak at the left ear. Of course, if the sound is straight ahead, 
peaks in the continuous tone will reach the ears simultaneously. Because 
the sound wave is much longer than the distance between the ears, we 
can reliably use the interaural delay of the peak in the wave to determine 
sound location. 

Sound
waves

(a)  

0 msec

0.3 msec

0.6 msec

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 11.22
 Interaural time delay as a cue to the 
location of sound. (a)  Sound waves 
coming from the right side will reach the 
right ear first, and there will be a large 
interaural delay before the sound propa-
gates to the left ear.  (b)  If the sound 
comes from straight ahead, there is no 
interaural delay. Delays for three different 
sound directions are shown.  

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   395
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   395

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

396

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Sound
shadow

Sound
waves

(a)  

Sound
waves

Sound
shadow

(b)  

Sound
shadow

Sound
waves

(c)  
 ▲ FIGURE 11.23
   Interaural intensity difference as a cue 
to sound location.  (a)  With high- 
frequency sound, the head will cast a 
sound shadow to the left, when sound 
waves come from the right. Lower inten-
sity sound in the left ear is a cue that 
the sound came from the right.  (b)  If the 
sound comes from straight ahead, a 
sound shadow is cast behind the head, 
but the sound reaches the two ears with 
the same intensity.  (c)  Sound coming 
from an oblique angle will partially 
shadow the left ear.  

 Things are more complicated with continuous tones at high frequen-
cies. Suppose that the sound coming from the right now has a frequency 
of  20,000  Hz,  which  means  that  one  cycle  of  the  sound  covers  1.7  cm. 
After a peak reaches the right ear, does it still take 0.6 msec before a peak 
arrives at the left ear? No! It takes a much shorter time because many 
peaks of such a high-frequency wave will ﬁ t between your ears. No lon-
ger is there a simple relationship between the direction the sound comes 
from and the arrival times of the peaks at the two ears. Interaural arrival 
time  is  simply  not  useful  for  locating  continuous  sounds  with  frequen-
cies so high that one cycle of the sound wave is smaller than the distance 
 between your ears (i.e., greater than about 2000 Hz). 

 Fortunately,  the  brain  has  another  process  for  sound  localization  at 
high frequencies. An  interaural intensity difference  exists between the two 
ears because your head effectively casts a sound shadow (Figure 11.23). 
There is a direct relationship between the direction the sound comes from 
and the extent to which your head shadows the sound to one ear. If sound 
comes directly from the right, the left ear will hear a signiﬁ cantly lower 
intensity  (Figure  11.23a).  With  sound  coming  from  straight  ahead,  the 
same intensity reaches the two ears (Figure 11.23b), and with sound com-
ing from intermediate directions, there are intermediate intensity differ-
ences (Figure 11.23c). Neurons sensitive to differences in intensity can 
use this information to locate the sound. Intensity information cannot be 
used to locate sounds at lower frequencies because sound waves at these 
frequencies diffract around the head, and the intensities at the two ears 
are roughly equivalent. There is no sound shadow at low frequencies. 

 Let’s summarize the two processes for localizing sound in the horizon-
tal plane. With sounds in the range of 20–2000 Hz, the process involves 
 interaural time delay . From 2000–20,000 Hz, interaural intensity differ-
ence is used. Together these two processes constitute the  duplex theory 
of sound localization . 

 The Sensitivity of Binaural Neurons to Sound Location. From our discus-
sion of the auditory pathway, recall that neurons in the cochlear nuclei re-
ceive afferents only from the ipsilateral auditory–vestibular nerve. Thus, 
all of these cells are  monaural neurons , meaning that they only respond 
to  sound  presented  to  one  ear.  At  all  later  stages  of  processing  in  the 
 auditory system, however, there are  binaural neurons  whose responses 
are inﬂ uenced by sound at both ears. The response properties of binaural 
neurons imply that they play an important role in sound localization in 
the horizontal plane. 

 The ﬁ rst structure where binaural neurons are present is the superior 
olive. Although some controversy exists about the relationship between 
the  activity  of  such  neurons  and  the  behavioral  localization  of  sound, 
there are several compelling correlations. Neurons in the superior olive 
receive input from cochlear nuclei on both sides of the brain stem (see 
Figure  11.18).  Cells  in  the  cochlear  nuclei  that  project  to  the  superior 
olive  typically  have  responses  phase  locked  to  lower  frequency  sound 
input.  Consequently,  an  olivary  neuron  receiving  spikes  from  the  left 
and right cochlear nuclei can compute interaural time delay. Recordings 
made  in  the  superior  olive  show  that  each  neuron  typically  gives  its 
greatest  response to a particular interaural delay (Figure 11.24). Because 
 interaural delay varies with sound location, each of these neurons may be 
encoding a particular position in the horizontal plane. 

 How  can  a  neural  circuit  produce  neurons  sensitive  to  interaural 
delay? One possibility is to use axons as  delay lines , and to measure small 
time  differences  precisely.  A  sound  hitting  the  left  ear  triggers  action 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   396
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   396

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

397

 potentials  in  the  left  cochlear  nucleus,  which  propagate  along  afferent 
axons into the superior olive (Figure 11.25). Within 0.6 msec of hitting 
the left ear, that sound reaches the right ear (assuming the sound comes 
 directly  from  the  left)  and  triggers  action  potentials  in  axons  from  the 
right  cochlear nucleus. However, because of the way the axons and neu-
rons are arranged in the olive, the action potentials from each side take 
different  lengths  of  time  to  arrive  at  the  various  postsynaptic  neurons 
in the olive. For example, the axon from the left cochlear nucleus has a 
longer path to travel to neuron 3 in Figure 11.25 than the axon from the 
right cochlear nucleus; therefore, the arrival of the spike from the left side 
is delayed just enough that it coincides with the arrival of the spike from 
the right side. By  arriving at precisely the same time, action potentials 
from  the  two  sides  produce  excitatory  postsynaptic  potentials  (EPSPs) 
that summate, yielding a larger EPSP that more strongly excites olivary 
neuron 3 than an EPSP from each ear could alone. When an interaural 
delay is more or less than 0.6 msec, the spikes do not arrive together, and 
thus the EPSPs they trigger do not summate as much. 

 Other neurons in the superior olive are tuned to other interaural times 
because  of  systematic  differences  in  the  arrangement  of  axonal  delay 

 
d
n
o
c
e
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
k
p
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

i

300

200

100

0

1

2

Interaural time delay (msec)

 ▲ FIGURE 11.24
 Responses of a neuron in the superior 
olive sensitive to interaural time delay. 
This neuron has an optimal delay of 
about 1 msec.  

Auditory-vestibular
nerve

Superior olive

Sound from the left side initiates
activity in the left cochlear nucleus;
activity is then sent to the superior
olive.

Superior olive

1

2

3

Axon from 
left cochlear nucleus

Axon from 
right cochlear nucleus

1

2

3

Very soon, the sound reaches
the right ear, initiating
activity in the right cochlear
nucleus. Meanwhile, the first
impulse has traveled farther
along its axon.

Both impulses reach olivary
neuron 3 at the same time, and
summation of synaptic potentials
generates an action potential.

1

2

3

▲  FIGURE 11.25
 Delay lines and neuronal sensitivity to 
 interaural delay.  

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   397
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   397

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

398

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

lines.  To  measure  timing  differences  as  accurately  as  possible,  many 
 neurons and synapses of the auditory system are specially adapted for 
rapid operation; their action potentials and EPSPs are much faster than 
those  of  most  other  neurons  in  the  brain.  There  are  limits  to  auditory 
time measurement of this type, however. Phase locking is essential for 
a precise comparison of the timing of inputs, and because phase locking 
occurs only at relatively low frequencies, it makes sense that interaural 
delays are useful only for localizing sounds of relatively low frequency. 

 The  mechanism  described  in  Figure  11.25  is  clearly  present  in  bird 
brains,  but  it  is  unlikely  that  mammals  calculate  interaural  delays 
 exactly this way. Studies on gerbils have suggested that synaptic inhibi-
tion, rather than axonal delay lines, generates the sensitivity of superior 
olivary neurons to interaural delay. It is possible that inhibition and axo-
nal delay lines work together for this purpose. 

 In addition to their sensitivity to interaural delay, neurons in the su-
perior olive are sensitive to the other sound location cue, interaural in-
tensity. One type of neuron is moderately excited by sound presented to 
either ear but only gives a maximal response when both ears are stimu-
lated. The other type of neuron is excited by sound in one ear but inhibited 
by sound in the other ear. Presumably, both types of neurons contribute 
to horizontal localization of high-frequency sound by encoding differences 
in interaural intensity. 

 Localization of Sound in the Vertical Plane 
 Comparing inputs to both ears is not very useful for localizing sounds in 
the  vertical  plane  because  as  a  sound  source  moves  up  and  down,  nei-
ther  the  interaural  delay  nor  the  interaural  intensity  changes.  This  is 
why, as discussed earlier, localizing sounds in the vertical plane is much 
less  affected by plugging one ear than localizing sounds in the horizontal 
plane. In order to seriously impair vertical sound localization, one must 
place a tube into the auditory canal to bypass the pinna. The sweeping 
curves of the outer ear are essential for assessing the elevation of a source 
of sound. The bumps and ridges apparently produce reﬂ ections of the en-
tering sound. The delays between the direct path and the reﬂ ected path 
change as a sound source moves vertically (Figure 11.26). The combined 

Pinna

Path 2
direct sound

Path 2
reflected sound

 ▲ FIGURE 11.26
 Vertical sound localization based on reflections from the pinna.  

Path 1
direct sound

Path 1
reflected sound

Path 3
reflected sound

Path 3
direct sound

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   398
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   398

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

399

sound, direct and reﬂ ected, is subtly different when it comes from above or 
below. In addition, the outer ear allows higher frequency sounds to enter 
the  auditory  canal  more  effectively  when  they  come  from  an   elevated 
source. Vertical localization of sound is seriously impaired if the convolu-
tions of the pinna are covered. 

 Some animals are extremely good at vertical sound localization even 
though  they  do  not  have  a  pinna.  For  example,  a  barn  owl  can  swoop 
down on a squeaking mouse in the dark, locating accurately by sound, 
not sight. Although owls do not have a pinna, they can use the same tech-
niques we use for horizontal localization (interaural differences) because 
their two ears are at different heights on their head. Some animals have 
a  more  “active”  system  for  sound  localization  than  humans  and  owls. 
Certain bats emit sounds that are reﬂ ected off objects, and these echoes 
are used to locate objects without sight. Many bats detect and capture in-
sects using reﬂ ected sound, analogous to the sonar used by ships. In 1989, 
James Simmons at Brown University made the startling discovery that 
bats can discriminate time delays that differ by as little as 0.00001 msec. 
This  ﬁ nding  challenges  our  understanding  of  how  the  nervous  system, 
using  action  potentials  lasting  almost  a  millisecond,  can  perform  such 
ﬁ ne temporal discriminations. 

 AUDITORY CORTEX 
AUDIITORYY CORTEX 

 Axons leaving the MGN project to auditory cortex via the internal capsule 
in an array called the  acoustic radiation . Primary auditory cortex (A1) 
corresponds to Brodmann’s area 41 in the temporal lobe (Figure 11.27a). 
The structure of A1 and the secondary auditory areas is in many ways 
similar to corresponding areas of the visual cortex. Layer I contains few 
cell bodies, and layers II and III contain mostly small pyramidal cells. 
Layer IV, where the medial geniculate axons terminate, is composed of 
densely packed granule cells. Layers V and VI contain mostly pyramidal 

 
z
H
0 
50

 
 
z
H
 
0
0
0
  1

 
z
H
0 
0
  20

 
z
H
 
0
0
0

 
 
 
z
H
 
0
0
0
  8

 
z
H
 
0
0

6,0
 1

     4

(b)  

Primary auditory
cortex

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 11.27
 Primary auditory cortex. (a)  Primary auditory cortex (purple) and secondary 
 auditory areas (green) on the superior temporal lobe.  (b)  Tonotopic organization 
within primary auditory cortex. The numbers are characteristic frequencies.  

Secondary auditory
cortex

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   399
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   399

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

400

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

cells that tend to be larger than those in the superﬁ cial layers. Let’s look 
at how these cortical neurons respond to sound. 

 Neuronal Response Properties 
 In  general,  neurons  in  monkey  (and  presumably  human)  A1  are  rela-
tively  sharply  tuned  for  sound  frequency  and  possess  characteristic 
 frequencies covering the audible spectrum of sound. In electrode pene-
trations made perpendicular to the cortical surface in monkeys, the cells 
encountered tend to have similar characteristic frequencies, suggesting 
a columnar organization on the basis of frequency. In the tonotopic rep-
resentation in A1, low frequencies are represented rostrally and later-
ally,  whereas  high  frequencies  are  represented  caudally  and  medially 
(Figure  11.27b).  Roughly  speaking,  there  are   isofrequency  bands   run-
ning  mediolaterally  across  A1.  In  other  words,  strips  of  neurons  run-
ning across A1 contain neurons that have fairly similar characteristic 
frequencies. 

 In the visual system, it is possible to describe large numbers of cortical 
neurons as having some variation on a general receptive ﬁ eld that is ei-
ther simple or complex. So far, it has not been possible to place the diverse 
auditory receptive ﬁ elds into a similarly small number of categories. As 
they do at earlier stages in the auditory pathway, cortical neurons have 

BOX 11.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

How Does Auditory Cortex Work? Ask a Specialist

The function of an animal’s brain is to help it stay alive and

reproduce. Different species have vastly different habits and 
needs,  and  some  animals  have  evolved  a  sensory  system 
specialized  for  processing  its  favorite  stimuli.  The  exagger-
ated  systems  of  the  sensory  specialists,  such  as  owls  and 
bats,  can  help  us  understand  how  we  sensory  generalists 
work.

Barn owls ﬁ nd their prey (a scurrying mouse, for example) 
in  the  dark  by  listening  very  carefully.  They  are  particularly 
adept at identifying and localizing faint sounds, and some of 
the neural mechanisms of sound localization were ﬁ rst under-
stood in owls. Bats have a more unique and active auditory 
technique. They ﬁ nd their food (a ﬂ uttering moth, for example) 
by echolocating it. A bat emits brief calls and listens for the 
faint echoes reﬂ ected from the target. Bats require their cor-
tex for proper echolocation. Studying bat cortex can certainly 
provide insight into how auditory cortex works in bats, but it 
may also enlighten us about the human cortex.

The most interesting stimuli for echolocating bats are their 
own calls and echoes. A bat’s language is very limited. To 
echolocate, most bats scream loudly at ultrasonic frequencies 
(20–100 kHz) using essentially a one-word vocabulary. The 
call of the mustached bat (Pteronotus parnellii) is very brief, 
no more than 20 msec long, and consists of a steady con-
stant frequency (CF) part followed by a sweep of descending 
frequency—the frequency modulated (FM) part. Figure A is a 

graph of the bat’s call and echo, showing the frequencies of 
the sounds plotted against time. As it ﬂ ies, the bat rapidly and 
continually repeats the call. By listening to its own calls and 
their  echoes,  and  carefully  comparing  them  in  many  ways, 
the  bat  builds  a  remarkably  detailed  auditory  image  of  the 
nearby world. For example, the delay between the call and its 
echo depends on the distance to a reﬂ ecting target (1 msec 
of delay for each 17 cm of distance). If the target is moving 
toward or away from the bat, relative to the bat’s own move-
ment, the frequency of the echo is Doppler-shifted higher or 
lower  (think  of  the  shifting  pitch  of  an  ambulance  siren  as 
it  passes  by  you;  a  1  kHz  shift  corresponds  to  a  speed  of 
about 3 m/s). A moth’s beating wings cause a rhythm in the 
echoes, and that helps the bat know there’s a particular kind 
of insect in front of it rather than something less edible. Many 
other subtle changes in the echo’s frequency, timing, loud-
ness, and pattern tell the bat about other features of targets.
The  processing  of  call-echo  information  by  the  auditory 
cortex of the mustached bat has been studied in great de-
tail  by  Nobuo  Suga  at  Washington  University.  Suga  found 
that the bat’s auditory cortex is a mixture of distinct auditory 
areas. Many are specialized for detecting particular features 
important for echolocating, and others seem more general-
ized.  For  example,  a  large  region  is  devoted  to  processing 
Doppler shifts of echoes right around 60 kHz, the CF part of 
the  bat’s  call;  this  area  processes  information  about  target 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   400
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   400

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

401

different temporal response patterns; some have a transient response to 
a brief sound, and others have a sustained response. 

 In  addition  to  the  frequency  tuning  that  occurs  in  most  cells,  some 
neurons are intensity-tuned, giving a peak response to a particular sound 
intensity. Even within a vertical column perpendicular to the cortical sur-
face,  considerable  diversity  can  exist  in  the  degree  of  tuning  to  sound 
frequency.  Some  neurons  are  sharply  tuned  for  frequency,  and  others 
are barely tuned at all; the degree of tuning does not seem to correlate 
well with cortical layers. Other sounds that produce responses in cortical 
neurons include clicks, bursts of noise, frequency-modulated sounds, and 
animal  vocalizations.  Attempting  to  understand  the  role  of  these  neu-
rons that respond to seemingly complex stimuli is one of the challenges 
 researchers currently face (Box 11.5). 

 Given  the  wide  variety  of  response  types  that  neurophysiologists 
 encounter in studying auditory cortex, you can understand why it is reas-
suring to see some sort of organization or unifying principle. One orga-
nizational principle already discussed is the tonotopic representation in 
many auditory areas. A second organizational principle is the presence in 
auditory cortex of columns of cells with similar binaural interaction. As at 
lower levels in the auditory system, one can distinguish cells that respond 
more  to  stimulation  of  both  ears  than  to  either  ear  separately,  as  well 
as cells that are inhibited if both ears are stimulated. As we  discussed 

velocity and location. Three separate areas detect call-echo 
delays and yield information about target distance.

The basic features of a bat’s calls and a human’s spoken 
words  are  similar,  although  human  speech  is  much  slower 
and lower in pitch. Human language syllables consist of par-
ticular combinations of CF periods, FM sweeps, brief pauses, 
and  bursts  of  noise.  For  example,  the  syllable  “ka”  differs 
from “pa” because their initial FM sweeps bend in different 

directions (Figure B). The long “a” and the long “i” sound dif-
ferent because each one uses different combinations of CFs. 
It is very likely that the neuronal circuits that process speech 
sounds in human auditory cortex use principles very similar to 
those in the bat’s cortex. Interpreting those speech sounds 
as words, and understanding the concepts they imply, is the 
realm of language; the brain mechanisms of language will be 
discussed in Chapter 20.

Doppler shift

Call

Echo

CF

FM

Delay

90

60

30

)
z
H
k
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

“ka”

“pa”

FM

CF1

CF2

)
z
H
k
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

2.0

1.2

0.4

0

10

20

Time (msec)

0

0.1
0.2
Time (sec)

0.3

Figure A  
A bat’s call and echo. (Source: Adapted from Suga, 1995, 
p. 302.)

Figure B  
A human’s spoken words. (Source: Adapted from Suga, 
1995, p. 296.)

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   401
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   401

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

402

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 regarding  the  superior  olive,  neurons  sensitive  to  interaural  time  de-
lays  and  interaural  intensity  differences  probably  play  a  role  in  sound 
 localization. 

 In addition to A1, other cortical areas located on the superior surface of 
the temporal lobe respond to auditory stimuli. Some of these higher audi-
tory areas are tonotopically organized, and others do not seem to be. As in 
visual cortex, the stimuli that evoke the strongest responses in higher au-
ditory areas tend to be more complex than those that best excite neurons 
at lower levels in the system. An example of specialization is Wernicke’s 
area, which we will discuss in Chapter 20. Destruction of this area does 
not  interfere  with  the  sensation  of  sound,  but  it  seriously  impairs  the 
ability to interpret spoken language. 

 The Effects of Auditory Cortical Lesions and Ablation 
 Bilateral  ablation  of  auditory  cortex  leads  to  deafness,  but  deafness  is 
more often the consequence of damage to the ears (Box 11.6). A surpris-
ing degree of normal auditory function is retained after unilateral lesions 
in auditory cortex. This outcome is in marked contrast to that of the vi-
sual system, in which a unilateral cortical lesion of striate cortex leads 
to  complete  blindness  in  one  visual  hemiﬁ eld.  The  reason  for  greater 

BOX 11.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Auditory Disorders and Their Treatments 

 Although  the  effects  of  cortical  lesions  provide  important 

information  about  the  role  of  auditory  cortex  in  perception, 
the perceptual deﬁ cit we all associate with the auditory sys-
tem, deafness, usually results from problems in or near the 
cochlea.  Deafness  is  conventionally  considered  in  two  cat-
egories: conduction deafness and nerve deafness. 

 Hearing loss caused by a disturbance in the conduction of 
sound from the outer ear to the cochlea is called  conduction 
deafness .  Causes  of  this  sensory  deﬁ cit  range  from  some-
thing as simple as excessive wax in the ear to more serious 
problems such as rupture of the tympanic membrane or pa-
thology of the ossicles. A number of diseases cause binding 
of the ossicles to the bone of the middle ear, impairing the 
transfer of sound. Fortunately, most of the mechanical prob-
lems in the middle ear that interfere with sound conduction 
can be treated surgically. 

  Nerve deafness  is deafness associated with the loss of ei-
ther neurons in the auditory nerve or hair cells in the cochlea. 
Nerve deafness sometimes results from tumors affecting the 
inner ear. It also can be caused by drugs that are toxic to hair 
cells, such as quinine and certain antibiotics, or exposure to 
loud sounds, such as explosions and loud music. Depending 
on the degree of cell loss, different treatments are possible. 
If  the  cochlea  or  auditory  nerve  on  one  side  is  completely 
destroyed, deafness in that ear will be absolute. However, a 
partial loss of hair cells is more common. In these cases, a 
hearing aid can be used to amplify the sound for the remain-
ing  hair  cells.  In  more  serious  cases  where  hearing  loss  is 

bilateral  and  the  auditory  nerve  is  intact,  cochlear  implants 
are an important option (see Box 11.2). 

With  deafness,  a  person  hears  less  sound  than  normal. 
With a hearing disorder called  tinnitus , a person hears noises 
in the ears even in the absence of any sound stimulus. The 
subjective  sensation  can  take  many  forms,  including  buzz-
ing,  humming,  and  whistling.  You  may  have  experienced  a 
mild,  temporary  form  of  tinnitus  after  being  at  a  party  with 
really loud music; your brain may have had fun, but your hair 
cells  were  in  shock!  Tinnitus  is  a  relatively  common  disor-
der that can seriously interfere with concentration and work 
if it persists. You can imagine how distracting it would be if 
you constantly heard whispering or humming or the crinkling 
of paper. 

 Tinnitus can be a symptom of a number of neurological 
problems.  Although  it  frequently  accompanies  diseases  in-
volving the cochlea or auditory nerve, it may also result from 
exposure to loud sounds, abnormal vasculature of the neck, 
or  simple  aging.  It  now  seems  that  many  of  the  phantom 
sounds of tinnitus are caused by changes in central auditory 
structures, including auditory cortex. Damage to the cochlea 
or  auditory  nerve  may  induce  alterations  in  the  brain,  such 
as a downregulation of synaptic inhibition. Although clinical 
treatment of tinnitus is often only partially successful, using a 
device that produces a constant sound in the affected ear(s) 
can often lessen the annoyance of the noise. For unknown 
reasons, the constant real sound is less annoying than the 
sound of the tinnitus that gets blocked. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   402
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   402

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

403

 preservation of function after lesions in auditory cortex is that both ears 
send output to cortex in both hemispheres. In humans, the primary deﬁ -
cit that results from a unilateral loss of A1 is the inability to localize the 
source of a sound. It may be possible to determine which side of the head 
a sound comes from, but there is little ability to locate the sound more 
precisely. Performance on such tasks as frequency or intensity discrimi-
nation is near normal. 

 Studies in experimental animals indicate that smaller lesions can pro-
duce rather speciﬁ c localization deﬁ cits. Because of the tonotopic organi-
zation of A1, it is possible to make a restricted cortical lesion that  destroys 
neurons with characteristic frequencies within a limited frequency range. 
Interestingly, there is a localization deﬁ cit only for sounds roughly cor-
responding  to  the  characteristic  frequencies  of  the  missing  cells.  This 
 ﬁ nding reinforces the idea that information in different frequency bands 
may be processed in parallel by tonotopically organized structures. 

 THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM 
THE VVESTIBULAR SYSTEM 

 Strangely enough, listening to music and balancing on a bicycle both in-
volve sensations that are transduced by hair cells. The vestibular system 
monitors the position and movement of the head, gives us our sense of 
 balance  and  equilibrium,  and  helps  coordinate  movements  of  the  head 
and  eyes,  as  well  as  adjustments  to  body  posture.  When  the  vestibu-
lar  system  operates  normally,  we  are  usually  unaware  of  it.  When  its 
function is disrupted, however, the results can include the unpleasant, 
stomach-turning  feelings  we  usually  associate  with  motion  sickness— 
vertigo and nausea, plus a sense of disequilibrium and uncontrollable eye 
 movements. 

 The Vestibular Labyrinth 
 The  vestibular  and  auditory  systems  both  use  hair  cells  to  transduce 
movements.  Common  biological  structures  often  have  common  origins. 
In this case, the organs of mammalian balance and hearing both evolved 
from the  lateral line organs  present in aquatic vertebrates, including ﬁ sh 
and some amphibians. Lateral line organs are small pits or tubes along an 
animal’s sides. Each pit contains clusters of hairlike sensory cells whose 
cilia project into a gelatinous substance that is open to the water in which 
the animal swims. The purpose of lateral line organs in many animals is 
to sense vibrations or pressure changes in the water. In some cases, they 
are also sensitive to temperature or electrical ﬁ elds. Lateral line organs 
were lost as reptiles evolved, but the exquisite mechanical sensitivity of 
hair cells was adopted and adapted for use in the structures of the inner 
ear that derived from the lateral line. 

 In mammals, all hair cells are contained within sets of interconnected 
chambers called the  vestibular labyrinth  (Figure 11.28a). We have al-
ready discussed the auditory portion of the labyrinth, the spiraling co-
chlea  (see  Figure  11.6).  The  vestibular  labyrinth  includes  two  types  of 
structures with different functions: the  otolith organs , which detect the 
force of  gravity and tilts of the head, and the  semicircular canals , which 
are sensitive to head rotation. The ultimate purpose of each structure is 
to transmit mechanical energy, derived from head movement, to its hair 
cells. Each is sensitive to different kinds of movement not because their 
hair cells differ but because of the specialized structures within which the 
hair cells reside. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   403
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   403

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

404

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 ▲ FIGURE 11.28
 The vestibular labyrinth.  (a)  Locations of the otolith 
organs (utricle and saccule) and semi circular canals. 
 (b)  A vestibular labyrinth  resides on each side of the 
head, with the semicircular canals arranged in parallel 
planes.  

Semicircular
canals

Vestibular nerve

Scarpa's ganglion

Auditory nerve

Cochlea

(a)

30°

Utricle

Saccule

Otolith
organs

Semicircular
canals

(b)

 The paired otolith organs, called the  saccule  and the  utricle,  are rela-
tively large chambers near the center of the labyrinth. The semicircular 
canals are the three arcing structures of the labyrinth. They lie in ap-
proximately orthogonal planes, which means there is an angle of about 
90° between any pair of them (Figure 11.28b). A set of vestibular organs 
resides on each side of the head, mirror images of each other. 

 Each hair cell of the vestibular organs makes an excitatory synapse 
with the end of a sensory axon from the  vestibular nerve , a branch of the 
auditory–vestibular  nerve  (cranial  nerve  VIII).  There  are  about  20,000 
vestibular nerve axons on each side of the head, and their cell bodies lie 
in  Scarpa’s ganglion . 

 The Otolith Organs 
 The  saccule  and  utricle  detect  changes  of  head  angle,  as  well  as   linear 
 acceleration  of the head. When you tilt your head, the angle between your 
otolith  organs  and  the  direction  of  the  force  of  gravity  changes.  Linear 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   404
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   404

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

405

 acceleration  also  generates  force,  in  proportion  to  the  mass  of  an  object. 
Forces due to linear acceleration are the sort you encounter when you ride 
in an elevator or a car as it starts or stops. In contrast, when a car or elevator 
moves smoothly at constant velocity, acceleration is zero, so there is no force 
(apart from gravitational force). That’s why you can ﬂ y steadily at 600 mph 
in a jet yet feel perfectly still; the sudden bouncing you experience during 
air turbulence, however, is another good example of the forces generated by 
linear acceleration, and of movements detected by your otolith organs. 

 Each  otolith  organ  contains  a  sensory  epithelium  called  a   macula , 
which is vertically oriented within the saccule and horizontally oriented 
within  the  utricle  when  the  head  is  upright.  (Note  that  the  vestibular 
macula  and  the  retinal  macula  are  entirely  different  structures.)  The 
vestibular macula contains hair cells, which lie among a bed of support-
ing cells with their cilia projecting into a gelatinous cap (Figure 11.29). 
Movements are transduced by hair cells in the maculae when the hair 
bundles  are  deﬂ ected.  The  unique  feature  of  the  otolith  organs  is  the 
tiny crystals of calcium carbonate called  otoconia , 1–5  ␮ m in diameter. 
(The word is Greek for “ear stone.”) Otoconia encrust the surface of the 
macula’s gelatinous cap, near the tips of the hair bundles, and they are 

Utricle

 ▲ FIGURE 11.29
 Macular hair cells responding to tilt. When the 
utricular macula is level (the head is straight), the cilia 
from the hair cells also stand straight. When the head 
and macula are tilted, gravity pulls the otoconia, 
which deform the gelatinous cap, and the cilia bend.  

Otoconia

Kinocilium

Gelatinous
cap

Hair cell

Supporting
cells

Vestibular
nerve axons    

Head straight

Head tilted

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   405
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   405

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

406

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

the key to the tilt sensitivity of the macula. The otoconia have a higher 
density than the endolymph that surrounds them. 

 When  the  angle  of  the  head  changes,  or  when  the  head  accelerates, 
a force is exerted on the otoconia; this exerts a force in the same direc-
tion on the gelatinous cap, which moves slightly, and the cilia of the hair 
cells bend. Not just any deﬂ ection will do, however. Each hair cell has 
one  especially  tall  cilium,  called  the   kinocilium .  The  bending  of  hairs 
toward the kinocilium results in a depolarizing, excitatory receptor po-
tential. Bending the hairs away from the kinocilium hyperpolarizes and 
inhibits the cell. The cell is exquisitely direction-selective. If the hairs are 
bent perpendicular to their preferred direction, they barely respond. The 
transduction mechanism of vestibular hair cells is essentially the same as 
that in auditory hair cells (see Figure 11.15). As with auditory hair cells, 
only tiny hair movements are needed. The response saturates when the 
hairs are bent less than 0.5  ␮ m, about the diameter of one cilium. 

 The head can tilt and move in any direction, but the hair cells of the 
utricle and saccule are oriented to transduce all of them effectively. The 
saccular maculae are oriented more or less vertically, while the utricular 
maculae are mostly horizontal (Figure 11.30). On each macula, the direction 
preferences of the hair cells vary in a systematic way. There are enough 
hair  cells  in  each  macula  to  cover  a  full  range  of  directions.  Because  of 
the mirror-image orientation of the saccule and utricle on each side of the 
head, when a given head movement excites hair cells on one side, it will 
tend to inhibit hair cells in the corresponding location on the other. Thus, 
any tilt or acceleration of the head will excite some hair cells, inhibit oth-
ers, and have no effect on the rest. The central nervous system, by simul-
taneously using the information encoded by the full population of otolithic 
hair cells, can unambiguously interpret all possible linear  movements. 

 The Semicircular Canals 
 The semicircular canals detect turning movements of the head, such as 
shaking your head from side to side or nodding up and down. Like the 
otolith organs, the semicircular canals also sense acceleration, but of a 

Direction for
depolarization

 ▲ FIGURE 11.30
 Macular orientation.  (a)  The macula in the 
utricle is horizontal.  (b)  The macula in the 
saccule is vertical. The arrows on each mac-
ula represent how the sheets of hair cells are 
polarized. Hair cells in the vicinity of an arrow 
are all polarized the same way; their stereo-
cilia are all oriented so that bending them in 
the direction of the arrow depolarizes them.  

(a)  Utricular macula

(b) Saccular macula

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   406
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   406

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

407

Ampulla

Cupula

Semicircular
canal

Cilia

Endolymph

(a)

Resting

Hair cells

Vestibular
axons

Endolymph
flow

(b)

Rotating left (clockwise)

 ▲ FIGURE 11.31
 A cross section through the ampulla of a semicircular canal.  (a)  The cilia of 
hair cells penetrate into the gelatinous cupula, which is bathed in the endolymph 
that fills the canals.  (b)  When the canal rotates leftward, the endolymph lags 
 behind and applies force to the cupula, bending the cilia within it.  

different  kind.   Angular  acceleration   is  generated  by  sudden  rotational 
movements, and it is the primary stimulus for the semicircular canals. 

 The hair cells of the semicircular canals are clustered within a sheet of 
cells, the  crista , located within a bulge along the canal called the   ampulla  
(Figure 11.31a). The cilia project into the gelatinous  cupula , which spans 
the lumen of the canal within the ampulla. All the hair cells in an ampulla 
have their kinocilia oriented in the same direction, which means that they 
all get excited or inhibited together. The semicircular canals are ﬁ lled with 
endolymph, the same ﬂ uid that ﬁ lls the scala media of the cochlea. Bending 
of the cilia occurs when the canal is suddenly rotated about its axis like a 
wheel; as the wall of the canal and the cupula begin to spin, the endolymph 
tends to stay behind because of inertia. The sluggish endolymph exerts a 
force upon the cupula, much like wind upon a sail (Figure 11.31b). This 
force bows the cupula, which bends the cilia, which (depending on the di-
rection of the rotation) either excites or inhibits the release of neurotrans-
mitter from the hair cells onto the vestibular nerve axons. 

 If  head  rotation  is  maintained  at  a  constant  velocity,  the  friction  of 
endolymph with the canal walls eventually makes the two move together, 
thereby reducing and then eliminating the bending of the cupula after 
15–30  seconds.  Such  adaptation  to  rotation  can  be  seen  clearly  in  the 
ﬁ ring rates of vestibular axons from the canals (Figure 11.32). (This sort 

d
e
e
p
s
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
R

0

100

e
t
a
r
 
g
n
i
r
i
F

)
c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
s
(

i

0

60

Time (sec)

120

d
e
e
p
s
 

n
o

i
t

a

t

o
R

0

100

e

t

a
r
 

g
n
i
r
i
F

)
c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
s
(

i

0

60

Time (sec)

120

 ▲ FIGURE 11.32
 Push–pull activation of the semi circular 
canals. Head rotation causes the 
 excitation of hair cells in one horizontal 
semicircular canal and the inhibition of 
hair cells in the other. The graphs show 
that long-lasting head rotation leads to 
adaptation of the firing in vestibular  axons. 
When rotation is stopped, the vestibular 
axons from each side begin firing again, 
but with opposite patterns of excitation 
and inhibition.  

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   407
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   407

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

408

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

of  prolonged  head  rotation  is  not  something  you  encounter  very  often, 
unless  you  have  a  taste  for  certain  amusement  park  rides.)  When  ro-
tation  of  the  head  (and  its  canals)  is  ﬁ nally  stopped,  the  inertia  of  the 
endolymph causes the cupula to bend in the other direction, generating 
an  opposite  response  from  the  hair  cells  and  a  temporary  sensation  of 
counter- rotation. This mechanism explains why you felt dizzy and unbal-
anced whenever, as a child, you  stopped  spinning your body like a top; 
your semicircular canals were temporarily sending the message that your 
body was still spinning, but in the opposite direction. 

 Together, the three semicircular canals on one side of the head help 
sense all possible head rotation angles. This is further ensured because 
each canal is paired with another on the opposite side of the head (see 
Figure  11.28b).  Each  member  of  a  pair  sits  within  the  same  orienta-
tion plane as its partner and responds to rotation about the same axis. 
However, while rotation excites the hair cells of one canal, it inhibits the 
hair  cells  of  its  contralateral  partner’s  canal.  Vestibular  axons  ﬁ re  at 
high rates even at rest, so their activity can be driven either up or down 
depending on the direction of rotation. This “push–pull” arrangement—
each rotation causing excitation on one side and inhibition on the other 
(see Figure 11.32)—optimizes the ability of the brain to detect rotational 
movements. 

 Central Vestibular Pathways and Vestibular Reﬂ exes 
 The  central  vestibular  pathways  coordinate  and  integrate  information 
about head and body movement and use it to control the output of motor 
neurons  that  adjust  head,  eye,  and  body  positions.  Primary  vestibular 
axons from cranial nerve VIII make direct connections to the medial and 
lateral  vestibular nuclei  on the same side of the brain stem, as well as 
to the cerebellum (Figure 11.33). The vestibular nuclei also receive inputs 
from other parts of the brain, including the cerebellum, and the visual 
and somatic sensory systems, thereby combining incoming vestibular in-
formation with data about the motor system and other sensory modalities. 
 The vestibular nuclei in turn project to a variety of targets above them 
in the brain stem, and below them into the spinal cord (see Figure 11.33). 
For example, axons from the otolith organs project to the lateral vestibu-
lar  nucleus,  which  then  projects  via  the   vestibulospinal  tract   to  excite 

Cerebellum VP nucleus
of thalamus

Extraocular

motor neurons

(III, IV, VI)

Medial vestibular nucleus

Lateral vestibular nucleus

Cranial 
nerve VIII 

Medial 
longitudinal
fasciculus

 ▲ FIGURE 11.33
 A summary of the central vestibular connections from one side.  

Limb motor 
neurons

Neck motor 
neurons

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   408
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   408

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS   

409

spinal motor neurons controlling muscles in the legs that help maintain 
posture (see Chapter 14). This pathway helps the body stay upright even 
on the rolling deck of a boat. Axons from the semicircular canals project 
to the medial vestibular nucleus, which sends axons via the  medial lon-
gitudinal fasciculus  to excite motor neurons of trunk and neck muscles 
that orient the head. This pathway helps the head stay straight even as 
the body cavorts around below it. 

 Similar to the other sensory systems, the vestibular system makes con-
nections to the thalamus and then to the neocortex. The vestibular nuclei 
send axons into the  ventral posterior (VP) nucleus  of the thalamus, which 
projects to regions close to the representation of the face in the primary 
somatosensory and primary motor areas of cortex (see Chapters 12 and 
14). At the cortical level, there is considerable integration of information 
about movements of the body, the eyes, and the visual scene. It is likely 
that the cortex continually maintains a representation of body position 
and orientation in space, which is essential for our perception of equilib-
rium and for planning and executing complex, coordinated movements. 

 The Vestibulo-Ocular Reﬂ ex (VOR). One very important function of the 
central vestibular system is to keep your eyes pointed in a particular di-
rection,  even  while  you  are  dancing  like  a  fool. The   vestibulo-ocular 
reﬂ ex (VOR)  performs this function. Recall that accurate vision requires 
the image to remain stable on the retinas despite movement of the head 
(see Chapter 9). Each eye can be moved by a set of six extraocular mus-
cles. The VOR works by sensing rotations of the head and immediately 
commanding a compensatory movement of the eyes in the opposite direc-
tion. The movement helps keep your line of sight tightly ﬁ xed on a visual 
target. Because the VOR is a reﬂ ex triggered by vestibular input rather 
than visual input, it works amazingly well even in the dark or when your 
eyes are closed. 

 Imagine driving down a very bumpy road. From constant adjustments 
by the VOR, your view of the world ahead is quite stable because each 
bump, and its consequent movement of your head, is compensated by an 
eye  movement.  To  appreciate  how  effective  your  VOR  is,  compare  the 
stability of a passing object during the bumpy drive as you look at it ﬁ rst 
with your eyes alone, and then with the viewﬁ nder of a simple camera. 
You’ll ﬁ nd that your camera view jumps around hopelessly because your 
arms are not nearly quick or accurate enough to move the camera with 
each bump. Many cameras now have an electromechanical equivalent of 
a VOR that stabilizes an image even when the camera or the photogra-
pher holding it is bumping around. 

 The effectiveness of the VOR depends on complicated connections from 
the semicircular canals to the vestibular nucleus to the cranial nerve nu-
clei that excite the extraocular muscles. Figure 11.34, which shows only 
half of the horizontal component of this circuit, illustrates what happens 
when the head turns to the left and the VOR induces both eyes to turn 
right. Axons from the left horizontal canal innervate the left vestibular 
nucleus,  which  sends  excitatory  axons  to  the  contralateral  (right)  cra-
nial nerve VI nucleus (abducens nucleus). Motor axons from the abducens 
nucleus in turn excite the lateral rectus muscle of the right eye. Another 
excitatory projection from the abducens crosses the midline, back to the 
left  side,  and  ascends  (via  the  medial  longitudinal  fasciculus)  to  excite 
the left cranial nerve III nucleus (oculomotor nucleus), which excites the 
medial rectus muscle of the left eye. 

 Mission accomplished, so it would seem: Both eyes are turning right. 
However,  to  further  ensure  speedy  operation,  the  left  medial  rectus 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   409
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   409

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

410

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Turning motion of head

Direction of eye movements

Lateral rectus
muscle

Medial 

recti

Lateral rectus
muscle

Left eye

Right eye

7

5

7

3

Right medial
longitudinal
fasciculus

+

+

+

4

–
7

+

2

Left oculomotor
(cranial nerve III)
nucleus

Left abducens
(cranial nerve VI)
nucleus

6

Left vestibular
nucleus

+

1

n 
io
t
a
t
o
R

Left horizontal
semicircular canal

 ▲ FIGURE 11.34
 Vestibular connections mediating horizontal eye movements during the VOR. 
These pathways are active when the head suddenly turns to the left, causing the 
eyes to turn to the right. Excitatory connections are denoted by green plus signs; 
the inhibitory connection is denoted by a red minus sign.  

 muscle also gets excited via a projection from the vestibular nucleus di-
rectly to the left oculomotor nucleus. Speed is also maximized by activat-
ing inhibitory connections to the muscles that oppose this movement (the 
left  eye’s  lateral  rectus  and  right  eye’s  medial  rectus,  in  this  case).  In 
order to respond to head rotations in any direction, the complete VOR cir-
cuit includes similar connections between the right horizontal canal, the 
other semicircular canals, and the other extraocular muscles that control 
eye movements. 

 Vestibular Pathology 
 The vestibular system can be damaged in a variety of ways; for exam-
ple, high doses of antibiotics such as streptomycin can be toxic to hair 
cells. People with bilateral lesions of the vestibular labyrinths have enor-
mous  trouble  ﬁ xating  on  visual  targets  as  they  move  about.  Even  the 
minute head pulsations from the blood pressure surges of heartbeats can 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   410
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   410

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

411

be  disturbing in some cases. When people with vestibular disturbances 
cannot  stabilize  an  image  on  their  moving  retinas,  they  may  also  ex-
perience  the  disconcerting  feeling  that  the  world  is  constantly  moving 
around  them.  The  sensation  can  make  walking  and  standing  difﬁ cult. 
Compensatory adjustments come with time, as the brain learns to sub-
stitute  more  visual  and  proprioceptive  cues  to  help  guide  smooth  and 
 accurate movements. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Hearing and balance begin with nearly identical sensory receptors, the 
hair cells, which are exquisitely sensitive to deﬂ ections of their stereo-
cilia.  These  movement  detectors  are  surrounded  by  three  sets  of  inner 
ear structures that give them selectivity for three different kinds of me-
chanical energy: periodic waves of air pressure (sound), rotational forces 
(head turns), and linear forces (head tilt or acceleration). Except for the 
similarity in transduction, and the fact that the hair cells of both systems 
are located in the inner ear, the auditory and vestibular systems are quite 
different. The sound sensed by audition comes mainly from the external 
environment, while the vestibular system senses only the movements of 
itself. Auditory and vestibular pathways are entirely separate except per-
haps  at  the  highest  levels  of  the  cortex.  Auditory  information  is  often 
at the forefront of our consciousness, while vestibular sensation usually 
 operates unnoticed to coordinate and calibrate our every movement. 

 We have followed the auditory pathways from the ear to cerebral cor-
tex and seen the ways in which information about sound is transformed. 
Variations in the density of air are converted to movements of the me-
chanical components of the middle and inner ear, which are transduced 
into neural responses. The structures of the ear and cochlea are highly 
specialized for the transduction of sound. However, this fact should not 
blind us to the considerable similarities between the organization of the 
auditory system and that of other sensory systems. Many analogies can 
be  made  between  the  auditory  and  visual  systems.  In  the  sensory  re-
ceptors of both systems, a spatial code is established. In the visual sys-
tem, the code in the photoreceptors is retinotopic; the activity of a given 
photoreceptor  indicates  light  at  a  particular  location.  The  receptors  in 
the auditory system establish a spatial code that is tonotopic because of 
the unique properties of the cochlea. In each system, the retinotopy or 
tonotopy is preserved as signals are processed in secondary neurons, the 
 thalamus, and ﬁ nally in sensory cortex. 

 The convergence of inputs from lower levels produces neurons at higher 
levels that have more complex response properties. Combinations of LGN 
inputs give rise to simple and complex receptive ﬁ elds in visual cortex; 
similarly in the auditory system, the integration of inputs tuned to dif-
ferent sound frequencies yields higher level neurons that respond to com-
plex combinations of frequencies. Another example of increasing visual 
complexity is the convergence of inputs from the two eyes, which yields 
binocular neurons that are important for depth perception. Analogously, 
in  the  auditory  system,  input  from  the  two  ears  is  combined  to  create 
binaural neurons, which are used for horizontal sound localization. These 
are  just  a  few  of  the  many  similarities  in  the  two  systems.  Principles 
governing one system can often help us understand other systems. Keep 
this in mind while reading about the somatic sensory system in the next 
chapter, and you’ll be able to predict some features of cortical organiza-
tion based on the types of sensory receptors. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   411
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   411

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

412

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

K E Y   T E R M S

 Introduction 
 audition (p. 370) 
 vestibular system (p. 370) 

 The Middle Ear 
 Eustachian tube (p. 374) 
 attenuation reﬂ ex (p. 376) 

 The Nature of Sound 
 frequency (p. 371) 
 hertz (Hz) (p. 371) 
 pitch (p. 372) 
 intensity (p. 372) 

 The Structure of the Auditory 
System 
 pinna (p. 373) 
 auditory canal (p. 373) 
 tympanic membrane (p. 373) 
 ossicle (p. 373) 
 oval window (p. 373) 
 cochlea (p. 373) 
 outer ear (p. 374) 
 middle ear (p. 374) 
 inner ear (p. 374) 
 medial geniculate nucleus 

(MGN) (p. 374) 

 primary auditory cortex (A1) 

(p. 374) 

 The Inner Ear 
 round window (p. 377) 
 basilar membrane (p. 377) 
 organ of Corti (p. 377) 
 tectorial membrane (p. 378) 
 perilymph (p. 378) 
 endolymph (p. 378) 
 stria vascularis (p. 378) 
 endocochlear potential (p. 378) 
 tonotopy (p. 380) 
 hair cells (p. 380) 
 stereocilia (p. 380) 
 inner hair cells (p. 380) 
 outer hair cells (p. 380) 
 spiral ganglion (p. 382) 
 auditory–vestibular nerve (p. 382) 
 cochlear ampliﬁ er (p. 386) 

 Central Auditory Processes 
 dorsal cochlear nucleus (p. 389) 
 ventral cochlear nucleus (p. 389) 

 superior olive (p. 389) 
 inferior colliculus (p. 389) 
 characteristic frequency 

(p. 390) 

 Encoding Sound Intensity and 
Frequency 
 phase locking (p. 392) 
 volley principle (p. 393) 

 Mechanisms of Sound 
Localization 
 duplex theory of sound 
 localization (p. 396) 

 The Vestibular System 
 vestibular labyrinth (p. 403) 
 otolith organs (p. 403) 
 semicircular canals (p. 403) 
 macula (p. 405) 
 ampulla (p. 407) 
 vestibular nuclei (p. 408) 
 vestibulo-ocular reﬂ ex (VOR) 

(p. 409) 

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1. How is the conduction of sound to the cochlea facilitated by the ossicles of the middle ear?
2.  Why is the round window crucial for the function of the cochlea? What would happen to hearing

if it suddenly didn’t exist?

3.  Why is it impossible to predict the frequency of a sound simply by looking at which portion of

the basilar membrane is the most deformed?

4.  Why would the transduction process in hair cells fail if the stereocilia as well as the hair cell

bodies were surrounded by perilymph?

5. If inner hair cells are primarily responsible for hearing, what is the function of outer hair cells?
6. Why doesn’t unilateral damage to the inferior colliculus or MGN lead to deafness in one ear?
7. What mechanisms function to localize sounds in the horizontal and vertical planes?
8.  What symptoms would you expect to see in a person who had recently had a stroke affecting A1
unilaterally? How does the severity of these symptoms compare with the effects of a unilateral
stroke involving V1?

9. What is the difference between nerve deafness and conduction deafness?

 10.  Each macula contains hair cells with kinocilia arranged in all directions. What is the advantage

of this arrangement compared to an arrangement of all the cells in the same direction?

 11.  Imagine a semicircular canal rotating in two different ways: around its axis (like a rolling coin)
or end over end (like a ﬂ ipped coin). How well would its hair cells respond in each case, and why?
 12.  How would you expect the functions of the otolith organs and the semicircular canals to change

in the weightless environment of space?

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   412
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   412

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

 CHAPTER 11    THE AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS

413

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

 Ashida G, Carr CE. 2011. Sound localization: 

Jeffress and beyond.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  21:745–751. 

 Cullen KE. 2012. The vestibular system: multi-

modal integration and encoding of self-motion 
for motor control.  Trends in Neurosciences  
35:185–196. 

 Guinan JJ Jr, Salt A, Cheatham MA. 2012. 

Progress in cochlear physiology after Békésy. 
 Hearing Research  293:12–20. 

 Holt JR, Pan B, Koussa MA, Asai Y. 2014. TMC 

function in hair cell transduction.  Hearing 
Research  311:17–24. 

 Kazmierczak P, Müller U. 2012. Sensing sound: 
molecules that orchestrate mechanotransduc-
tion by hair cells.  Trends in Neurosciences  
35:220–229. 

 Oertel D, Doupe AJ. 2013. The auditory cen-

tral nervous system. In  Principles of Neural 
Science , 5th ed., ed. Kandel ER, Schwartz 
JH, Jessell TM, Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth 
AJ. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 
682–711. 

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   413
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   413

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   414
369–414_Bear_11_revised_final.indd   414

12/20/14   4:37 AM
12/20/14   4:37 AM

CHAPTER TWELVE

The Somatic Sensory 
System

INTRODUCTION
TOUCH

Mechanoreceptors of the Skin

Vibration and the Pacinian Corpuscle
Mechanosensitive Ion Channels
Two-Point Discrimination

Primary Afferent Axons
The Spinal Cord

Segmental Organization of the Spinal Cord
 BOX 12.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Herpes, Shingles, and Dermatomes
Sensory Organization of the Spinal Cord

The Dorsal Column–Medial Lemniscal Pathway
The Trigeminal Touch Pathway

 BOX 12.2   BRAIN FOOD: Lateral Inhibition

Somatosensory Cortex
Cortical Somatotopy
 BOX 12.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Cortical Barrels, by Thomas Woolsey
Cortical Map Plasticity
The Posterior Parietal Cortex

PAIN

 BOX 12.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Misery of Life Without Pain

Nociceptors and the Transduction of Painful Stimuli

Types of Nociceptors
Hyperalgesia and Inﬂ ammation
 BOX 12.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hot and Spicy

Itch
Primary Afferents and Spinal Mechanisms
Ascending Pain Pathways

The Spinothalamic Pain Pathway
The Trigeminal Pain Pathway
The Thalamus and Cortex

The Regulation of Pain

Afferent Regulation
Descending Regulation
The Endogenous Opioids
 BOX 12.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Pain and the Placebo Effect

TEMPERATURE
Thermoreceptors
The Temperature Pathway

CONCLUDING REMARKS

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   415
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   415

415415
44414144144444 555555555444414414444 55555555

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

416

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 The somatic sensory system brings us some of life’s most enjoyable ex-
periences, as well as some of the most aggravating.  Somatic sensation
enables our body to feel, to ache, to sense hot or chill, and to know what 
its parts are doing. It is sensitive to many kinds of stimuli: the pressure 
of objects against the skin, the position of joints and muscles, distension 
of the bladder, and the temperature of the limbs and of the brain itself. 
It is the origin of itch. When stimuli become so strong that they may be 
damaging,  somatic  sensation  is  also  responsible  for  the  feeling  that  is 
most offensive, but vitally important—pain. 

 The  somatic  sensory  system  is  different  from  other  sensory  systems 
in two interesting ways. First, its receptors are distributed throughout 
the body rather than being concentrated at small, specialized locations. 
Second, because it responds to many different kinds of stimuli, we can 
think of it as a group of at least four senses rather than a single one: the 
senses of touch, temperature, pain, and body position. In fact, those four 
can in turn be subdivided into many more. The somatic sensory system 
is really a catch-all name, a collective category for all the sensations that 
are  not  seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and the vestibular sense of bal-
ance.  The  familiar  idea  that  we  have  only  ﬁ ve  senses  is  obviously  too 
simple. 

 If something touches your ﬁ nger, you can accurately gauge the place, 
pressure,  sharpness,  texture,  and  duration  of  the  touch.  If  it  is  a  pin-
prick,  there  is  no  mistaking  it  for  a  hammer.  If  the  touch  moves  from 
your hand to your wrist, and up your arm to your shoulder, you can track 
its speed and position. Assuming you are not looking, this information is 
described entirely by the activity of the sensory nerves in your limb. A 
single sensory receptor can encode stimulus features such as intensity, 
duration, position, and sometimes direction. But a single stimulus usu-
ally activates many receptors. The CNS interprets the activity of the vast 
receptor array and uses it to generate coherent perceptions. 

 In  this  chapter,  we  divide  our  discussion  of  somatic  sensation  into 
two main parts: the sense of touch and the sense of pain. As we shall 
see, these different categories depend on different receptors, different 
axonal pathways, and different regions of the brain. We’ll also describe 
sensations of itch, and how we sense changes in temperature. The sense 
of body position, also called  proprioception , is discussed in Chapter 13, 
where we will explore how this type of somatic sensory information is 
used to control muscle reﬂ exes. 

 TOUCH 
 TOUCCH 

 The sensation of touch begins at the skin (Figure 12.1). The two major 
types of skin are called  hairy  and  glabrous  (hairless), as exempliﬁ ed by 
the backs and palms of your hands. Skin has an outer layer, the   epidermis,  
and  an  inner  layer,  the   dermis.   Skin  performs  an  essential  protective 
function, and it prevents the evaporation of body ﬂ uids into the dry envi-
ronment we live in. But skin also provides our most direct contact with 
the world; indeed, skin is the largest sensory organ we have. Imagine the 
beach without the squish of sand between your toes, or consider  watching
a kiss instead of experiencing it yourself. Skin is sensitive enough that a 
raised dot measuring only 0.006 mm high and 0.04 mm wide can be felt 
when  stroked  by  a  ﬁ ngertip.  In  comparison,  a  Braille  dot  is  167  times 
higher. 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   416
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   416

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

Hairy skin

Glabrous skin

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

417

▲ FIGURE 12.1
Somatic sensory receptors in the skin. 
Hairy skin and glabrous skin have a variety 
of sensory receptors within the dermal and 
epidermal layers. Each receptor has an 
axon and, except for free nerve endings, all 
of them have associated non-neural tissues.

Epidermis

Dermis 

Merkel’s
disk

Free nerve
ending

Epidermal-
dermal border

Meissner’s
corpuscle

Hair follicle
receptor

Pacinian
corpuscle 

Ruffini’s
ending

 In this section, we will see how a touch of the skin is transduced into 
neural signals, how these signals make their way to the brain, and how 
the brain makes sense of them. 

 Mechanoreceptors of the Skin 
 Most of the sensory receptors in the somatic sensory system are  mecha-
noreceptors , which are sensitive to physical distortion such as bending 
or  stretching.  Present  throughout  the  body,  mechanoreceptors  monitor 
skin contact, pressure in the heart and blood vessels, stretching of the 
digestive organs and urinary bladder, and force against the teeth. At the 
heart of all mechanoreceptors are unmyelinated axon branches that are 
sensitive to stretching, bending, pressure, or vibration. 

 The mechanoreceptors of the skin are shown in Figure 12.1. Most of 
them are named after the nineteenth century German and Italian histol-
ogists who discovered them. The largest and best-studied receptor is the 
 Pacinian corpuscle , which lies deep in the dermis and can be as long as 
2 mm and almost 1 mm in diameter. Each human hand has about 2500 
Pacinian corpuscles, with the highest densities in the ﬁ ngers.  Rufﬁ ni’s 
endings , found in both hairy and glabrous skin, are slightly smaller than 
Pacinian  corpuscles.   Meissner’s  corpuscles   are  about  one-tenth  the  size 
of Pacinian corpuscles and are located in the ridges of glabrous skin (the 
raised parts of your ﬁ ngerprints, for example). Located within the epi-
dermis,  Merkel’s disks  each consist of a nerve terminal and a ﬂ attened, 
non-neural epithelial cell (the Merkel cell). In  Krause end bulbs , which lie 
in the border regions of dry skin and mucous membrane (around the lips 
and genitals, for example), the nerve terminals look like knotted balls of 
string. 

 Skin can be vibrated, pressed, pricked, and stroked, and its hairs can 
be bent or pulled. These are quite different kinds of mechanical energy, 
yet we can feel them all and easily tell them apart. Accordingly, we have 
mechanoreceptors that vary in their preferred stimulus frequencies, pres-
sures, and receptive ﬁ eld sizes. Swedish neuroscientist Åke Vallbo and his 
colleagues developed methods to record from single sensory axons in the 
human arm, so that they could simultaneously measure the sensitivity of 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   417
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   417

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

418

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Stimulus
probe

Recording
electrode

Receptive
field

Median
nerve

(a)  

Meissner’s corpuscles
(b)  

Pacinian corpuscles

▲ FIGURE 12.2
Testing the receptive fields of human sensory receptors. (a) By introducing a 
microelectrode into the median nerve of the arm, it is possible to record the ac-
tion potentials from a single sensory axon and map its receptive field on the hand 
with a fine stimulus probe. (b) Results show that receptive fields are either rela-
tively small, as in Meissner’s corpuscles, or large, as in Pacinian corpuscles. 
(Source: Adapted from Vallbo and Johansson, 1984.)

mechanoreceptors in the hand  and  evaluate the perceptions produced by 
various mechanical stimuli (Figure 12.2a). When the stimulus probe was 
touched to the surface of the skin and moved around, the receptive ﬁ eld 
of a single mechanoreceptor could be mapped. Meissner’s corpuscles and 
Merkel’s  disks  had  small  receptive  ﬁ elds,  only  a  few  millimeters  wide, 
while Pacinian corpuscles and Rufﬁ ni’s endings had large receptive ﬁ elds 
that could cover an entire ﬁ nger or half the palm (Figure 12.2b). 

 Mechanoreceptors  also  vary  in  the  persistence  of  their  responses  to 
long-lasting  stimuli.  If  a  stimulus  probe  is  suddenly  pressed  against 
the  skin  within  the  receptive  ﬁ eld,  some  mechanoreceptors,  such  as 
Meissner’s and Pacinian corpuscles, tend to respond quickly at ﬁ rst but 
then stop ﬁ ring even though the stimulus continues; these receptors are 
said to be  rapidly adapting . Other receptors, such as Merkel’s disks and 
Rufﬁ ni’s  endings,  are   slowly  adapting ,  and  generate  a  more  sustained 
response during a long stimulus. Figure 12.3 summarizes the receptive 
ﬁ eld size and adaptation rate for four mechanoreceptors of the skin. 

 Hairs do more than adorn our head and keep a dog warm in winter. 
Many hairs are part of a sensitive receptor system. To demonstrate this, 
brush just a single hair on the back of your arm with the tip of a pencil; 
it  feels  like  an  annoying  mosquito.  For  some  animals,  hair  is  a  major 
sensory system. Imagine a rat slinking conﬁ dently through dark passage-
ways and alleys. The rat navigates in part by waving its facial  vibrissae  
(whiskers) to sense the local environment and derive information about 
the texture, distance, and shape of nearby objects. 

Receptive field size

Small

Large

Meissner’s corpuscle

Pacinian corpuscle

Merkel’s disk

Ruffini’s ending

n
o

i
t

a

t

p
a
d
A

Rapid

Slow

Stimulus probe
movement

Axon firing

▲ FIGURE 12.3
Variations of receptive field size and adap-
tation rate for four somatic sensory skin 
 receptors. (Source: Adapted from Vallbo and 
 Johansson, 1984.)

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   418
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   418

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

419

 Hairs grow from  follicles  embedded in the skin; each follicle is richly 
innervated by free nerve endings—the terminations of single axons—that 
either wrap around the follicle or run parallel to it (see Figure 12.1). There 
are  several  types  of  hair  follicles,  including  some  with  erectile  muscles 
(essential for mediating the strange sensation we call goose bumps), and 
the details of their innervation differ. In all cases, the bending of the hair 
causes a deformation of the follicle and surrounding skin tissues. This, in 
turn, stretches, bends, or ﬂ attens the nearby nerve endings, which then in-
crease or decrease their action potential ﬁ ring frequency. The mechanore-
ceptors of hair follicles may be either slowly adapting or rapidly adapting. 
 The  different  mechanical  sensitivities  of  mechanoreceptors  mediate 
different sensations. Pacinian corpuscles are most sensitive to vibrations 
of  about  200–300  Hz,  while  Meissner’s  corpuscles  respond  best  around 
50  Hz  (Figure  12.4).  Place  your  hand  against  a  speaker  while  playing 
your favorite music loudly; you “feel” the music largely with your Pacinian 
corpuscles. If you stroke your ﬁ ngertips across the coarse screen covering 
the speaker, each point of skin will hit the bumps at frequencies about 
optimal to activate Meissner’s corpuscles. You feel this as a sensation of 
rough texture. Stimulation at frequencies from about 1 to 10 Hz can also 
activate Meissner’s corpuscles, yielding a “ﬂ uttering” feeling. 

 Vibration and the Pacinian Corpuscle.  The selectivity of a mechanore-
ceptive  axon  depends  primarily  on  the  structure  of  its  special  ending. 
For example, the Pacinian corpuscle has a football-shaped capsule with 
20–70 concentric layers of connective tissue, arranged like the layers of 
an onion, with an axon terminal in the middle (see Figure 12.1). When 
the capsule is compressed, energy is transferred to the nerve terminal, 
its membrane is deformed, and mechanosensitive channels open. Current 
ﬂ owing through the channels generates a receptor potential, which is de-
polarizing (Figure 12.5a). If the depolarization is large enough, the axon 

)

i

m
μ
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
d
n
i
 
n
k
s
 
f
o
 
t
n
u
o
m
a
 
d
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

l

1000

100

10

1

Meissner’s corpuscle

Pacinian corpuscle

50 100

10
Stimulus frequency (Hz)

300 1000

▲ FIGURE 12.4
Frequency sensitivity of two rapidly 
adapting skin mechanoreceptors. 
Pacinian corpuscles are most sensitive 
to high-frequency stimuli, and Meiss-
ner’s corpuscles are more sensitive to 
low-frequency stimuli. The skin was 
indented with a pressure probe, at 
various frequencies, while recording 
from the nerve. The amplitude of the 
stimulus was increased until it gener-
ated action potentials; threshold was 
measured as the amount of skin inden-
tation in micrometers (␮m). (Source: 
Adapted from Schmidt, 1978.)

Stimulus
probe
Axon

Capsule

Time

(a)  

Axon

Time

(b)  

Intact
corpuscle

Axon
receptor
potential

Stripped
corpuscle

Axon
receptor
potential

▲ FIGURE 12.5
Adaptation in the Pacinian corpuscle. 
A single Pacinian corpuscle was isolated and stimulated by a 
probe that indented it briefly. The receptor potential was re-
corded from a nearby portion of the axon. (a) In the intact cor-
puscle, a large receptor potential was generated at the onset 
and offset of the stimulus; during maintained indentation, the 
receptor potential disappeared. (b) The onionlike encapsulation 
was dissected away, leaving a bare axon ending. When in-
dented by the probe, a receptor potential was again generated, 
showing the capsule is not necessary for mechanoreception. 
But while the normal corpuscle responded only to the onset or 
offset of a long indentation, the stripped version gave a much 
more prolonged response; its adaptation rate was slowed. Ap-
parently it is the capsule that makes the corpuscle insensitive 
to low-frequency stimuli.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   419
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   419

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

420

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

will ﬁ re an action potential. But the capsule layers are slick, with viscous 
ﬂ uid  between  them.  If  the  stimulus  pressure  is  maintained,  the  layers 
slip  past  one  another  and  transfer  the  stimulus  energy  in  such  a  way 
that the axon terminal is no longer deformed, and the receptor potential 
dissipates. When pressure is released, the events reverse themselves; the 
terminal depolarizes again and may ﬁ re another action potential. 

 In  the  1960s,  Werner  Loewenstein  and  his  colleagues,  working  at 
Columbia  University,  stripped  away  the  capsule  from  single  corpus-
cles and found that the naked nerve terminal became much less sensi-
tive  to  vibrating  stimuli  and  much  more  sensitive  to  steady  pressure 
(Figure 12.5b). Clearly, it is the layered capsule (and not some property 
of the nerve ending itself) that makes the Pacinian corpuscle exquisitely 
sensitive to vibrating, high-frequency stimuli and almost unresponsive to 
steady pressure (see Figure 12.4). In order to communicate information 
about rapid vibrations to the central nervous system (CNS) in a timely 
way, the Pacinian corpuscles have some of the largest and fastest axons 
that originate in the skin. 

 Mechanosensitive Ion Channels.  The mechanoreceptors of the skin all 
have unmyelinated axon terminals, and the membranes of these axons 
have  mechanosensitive ion channels  that convert mechanical force into a 
change of ionic current. Forces applied to these channels alter their gat-
ing and either enhance or decrease channel opening. Force can be applied 
to a channel by the membrane itself when it is stretched or bent, or force 
may be applied through connections between the channels and extracel-
lular proteins or intracellular cytoskeletal components (e.g., actin, micro-
tubules)  (Figure  12.6). Alternatively,  mechanical  stimuli  may  somehow 
trigger the release of second messengers (e.g., DAG, IP 3 ) that secondarily 
regulate ion channels. 

 A variety of ion channel types have been implicated in mechanosen-
sation, but the speciﬁ c types of channels in most of the somatic sensory 
receptors are still unidentiﬁ ed. Recent work on Merkel’s disks, which are 
sensitive to gentle pressure on the skin, suggests how complex some touch 
receptors  are  (see  Figure  12.1).  The  epithelium-like  Merkel  cells  make 
synapses  onto  nerve  terminals,  and  it  seems  that   both   the  Merkel  cell 
and the axon terminal are mechanically sensitive. The Merkel cell has a 
mechanosensitive channel called Piezo2 that opens in response to pres-
sure and depolarizes the cell. Depolarization triggers synaptic release of 
an unknown transmitter from the cell, which in turn excites the nearby 
nerve ending. Surprisingly, the nerve ending is also mechanically sensi-
tive because of a second (unknown) ion channel in its own membranes. 
Thus, the actions of at least two different mechanosensitive channels and 
a synapse cooperate to activate Merkel’s disks and their associated axon. 

 Two-Point Discrimination. Our ability to discriminate the detailed fea-
tures of a stimulus varies tremendously across the body. A simple mea-
sure of spatial resolution is the two-point discrimination test. You can do 
this yourself with a paper clip bent into the shape of a U. Start with the 
ends about an inch apart, and touch them to the tip of a ﬁ nger; you should 
have no problem telling that there are two separate points touching your 
ﬁ nger. Then bend the wire to bring the points closer together, and touch 
them to your ﬁ ngertip again. Repeat, and see how close the points have 
to be before they feel like a single point. (This test is best done with two 
people, one testing and the other being tested without looking.) Now try 
it on the back of your hand, on your lips, on your leg, and any other place 
that interests you. Compare your results with those shown in Figure 12.7. 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   420
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   420

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

421

Outside cell

Na+ Ca2+

Force
Force

Inside cell

(a)  

Extracellular protein

(b)  

Cytoskeletal
protein

(c)  

Na+ Ca2+

Force
Force

Na+ Ca2+

Force
Force

Big toe

Sole

Calf

▲ FIGURE 12.6
Mechanosensitive ion channels. (a) Some membrane ion channels are sensitive 
to stretching of the lipid membrane; tension in the membrane directly induces the 
channel to open and allow cations to flow. (b) Other ion channels open when 
force is applied to extracellular structures linked to the channels by peptides. 
(c) Mechanically sensitive channels may also be linked to intracellular proteins, 
 especially those of the cytoskeleton; deformation of the cell and stress on its 
 cytoskeleton generate forces that regulate channel gating.

Back

42 mm

Lip

Thumb
Index finger

Forearm

 Two-point  discrimination  varies  at  least  twentyfold  across  the  body. 
Fingertips have the highest resolution. The dots of Braille are 1 mm high 
and 2.5 mm apart; up to six dots make a letter. An experienced Braille 
reader can move an index ﬁ nger across a page of raised dots and read 
about 600 letters per minute, which is roughly as fast as someone read-
ing aloud. The Braille reader scans with ﬁ ngertips because touch is most 
sensitive  when  the  skin  and  the  stimuli  move  across  each  other,  com-
pared to simply pressing one against the other. Practice also improves 

▲ FIGURE 12.7
Two-point discrimination on the body 
surface. The pairs of dots show the 
minimum distance necessary to 
 differentiate between two points touch-
ing the body simultaneously. Notice the 
sensitivity of the fingertips compared to 
the rest of the body. All measurements 
are shown at their actual scale.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   421
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   421

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

422

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

performance through a type of learning, and experienced Braille readers 
are particularly adept at discriminating patterns of small dots. 

 Several reasons explain why the ﬁ ngertip is so much better than, 
say, the elbow for Braille reading: (1) There is a much higher density 
of  mechanoreceptors  in  the  skin  of  the  ﬁ ngertip  than  on  other  parts 
of the body, (2) the ﬁ ngertips are enriched in receptor types that have 
small receptive ﬁ elds (e.g., Merkel’s disks), (3) there is more brain tis-
sue (and thus more raw computing power) devoted to the sensory in-
formation of each square millimeter of ﬁ ngertip than elsewhere, and 
(4) there may be special neural mechanisms devoted to high-resolution 
discriminations. 

▲ FIGURE 12.8
The peripheral nerves.

 Primary Afferent Axons 
 The  skin  is  richly  innervated  by  axons  that  course  through  the  vast 
network  of  peripheral  nerves  on  their  way  to  the  CNS  (Figure  12.8). 
Axons bringing information from the somatic sensory receptors to the 
spinal cord or brain stem are the  primary afferent axons  of the somatic 
sensory  system.  The  primary  afferent  axons  enter  the  spinal  cord 
through the dorsal roots; their cell bodies lie in the dorsal root ganglia 
(Figure 12.9). 

 Primary afferent axons have widely varying diameters, and their size 
correlates with the type of sensory receptor to which they are attached. 
Unfortunately,  the  terminology  approaches  absurdity  here  because  the 
different sizes of axons are designated by two sets of names, using Arabic 
 and  Greek letters  and   Roman numerals. As  shown in Figure 12.10, in 
order of decreasing size, axons from skin sensory receptors are usually 
designated  A ␣ ,  A ␤ ,  A ␦ ,  and  C;  axons  of  similar  size,  but  innervating 
the  muscles  and  tendons,  are  called  groups  I,  II,  III,  and  IV.  Group  C 
(or IV) axons are, by deﬁ nition, unmyelinated axons, while all the rest 
are myelinated. 

 An interesting and simple point is hidden in the many axon names. 
Recall that the diameter of an axon, together with its myelin, determines 
its speed of action potential conduction. The smallest axons, the so-called 
C ﬁ bers, have no myelin and are less than about 1  ␮ m in diameter. C ﬁ bers 
mediate pain, temperature sensation, and itch, and they are the slowest 
of axons, conducting at about 0.5–1 m/sec. To see how slow this is, take 
a big step, count to two, and then take another step. That’s about how 
fast the action potentials travel along C ﬁ bers. On the other hand, touch 

Gray matter

White matter

Dorsal root

Dorsal root ganglion

Dorsal root
ganglion cell

Sensory
receptor

▲ FIGURE 12.9
The structure of a segment of the spinal 
cord and its roots.

Ventral
root

Spinal
nerve

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   422
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   422

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

423

Axons
from skin

Axons
from
muscles

Aα

Group I

Aβ

II

Aδ

III

C

IV

Diameter 
(μm)

Speed 
(m/sec)

13–20

6–12

1–5

0.2–1.5

80–120

35–75

5–30

0.5–2

Sensory
receptors

Proprioceptors

of skeletal muscle

Mechanoreceptors

Pain, 

of skin

temperature

Temperature, 

pain, itch

▲ FIGURE 12.10
Various sizes of primary afferent axons. The axons are drawn to scale, but they are 
shown 2000 times larger than life size. The diameter of an axon is correlated with its 
conduction velocity and with the type of sensory receptor to which it is connected.

sensations, mediated by the cutaneous mechanoreceptors, are conveyed 
by the relatively large A ␤  axons, which can conduct at up to 75 m/sec. For 
comparison, consider that an exceptional major league baseball pitcher 
can throw a fastball up to 100 miles per hour, which is about 45 m/sec. 

 The Spinal Cord 
 Most peripheral nerves communicate with the CNS via the spinal cord, 
which is encased in the bony vertebral column. 

 Segmental Organization of the Spinal Cord. The arrangement of paired 
dorsal and ventral roots shown in Figure 12.9 is repeated 30 times down 
the  length  of  the  human  spinal  cord.  Each  spinal  nerve,  consisting  of 
dorsal root and ventral root axons, passes through a notch between the 
vertebrae (the “back bones”) of the spinal column. There are as many 
spinal  nerves  as  there  are  notches  between  vertebrae.  As  shown  in 
Figure 12.11, the 30  spinal segments  are divided into four groups, and 
each segment is named after the vertebra adjacent to where the nerves 
originate: cervical (C) 1–8, thoracic (T) 1–12, lumbar (L) 1–5, and sacral 
(S) 1–5. 

 The segmental organization of spinal nerves and the sensory innerva-
tion of the skin are related. The area of skin innervated by the right and 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   423
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   423

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

424

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Cervical
cord

Thoracic
cord

Lumbar
cord

Sacral
cord

Spinal cord

Vertebra

Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Sacral

C2

T1

L1

S1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12

1

2 

3 

4 

5

1
2
3
4
5

Spinal nerves

▲ FIGURE 12.11
Segmental organization of the spinal cord. The spinal cord is divided into cer-
vical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral divisions (left). The cross-sectional view (right) 
shows the spinal cord within the vertebral column. Spinal nerves are named for 
the level of the  spinal cord from which they exit and are numbered in order from 
rostral to caudal.

left dorsal roots of a single spinal segment is called a  dermatome ; thus, 
there  is  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  dermatomes  and   spinal 
segments.  When  mapped,  the  dermatomes  delineate  a  set  of  bands  on 
the body surface, as shown in Figure 12.12. The organization of the der-
matomes is best revealed when one bends over to stand on both hands 
and feet (Figure 12.13). This organization presumably reﬂ ects our distant 
quadrupedal ancestry. 

 When a dorsal root is cut, the corresponding dermatome on that side 
of the body does not lose all sensation. The residual somatic sensation is 
explained by the fact that the adjacent dorsal roots innervate overlapping 
areas. To lose all sensation in one dermatome, therefore, three adjacent 
dorsal roots must be cut. However, the skin innervated by the axons of 
one dorsal root is plainly revealed by a condition called shingles, in which 
all the neurons of a single dorsal root ganglion become infected with a 
virus (Box 12.1). 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   424
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   424

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

425

C2

C3

C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

C6

C7
C8

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

L5
S1
S2
L3

L4

L5

C2
C3
C4
C5

T1
T2
T3
T4
T5

T6
T7
T8
T9

T10

T11

T12
L1

C5

C6

C7
C8

S2–S4

L2

L3

L4

L5

S1

Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Sacral

▲ FIGURE 12.12
Dermatomes. These illustrations show the mapping of the approximate boundar-
ies of the dermatomes on the body.

 Notice in Figure 12.11 that the spinal cord in the adult ends at about the 
level of the third lumbar vertebra. The bundles of spinal nerves streaming 
down within the lumbar and sacral vertebral column are called the  cauda 
equina  (Latin for “horse’s tail”). The cauda equina courses down the spi-
nal column within a sack of dura ﬁ lled with cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF). In 
a method called  lumbar puncture  (also called a spinal tap), used to collect 
CSF for medical diagnostic tests, a needle is inserted into this CSF-ﬁ lled 
cistern at the midline. If the needle is inserted a little off center, however, 
a nerve can be touched. Not surprisingly, this causes a sensation of sharp 
pain in the dermatome supplied by that nerve. 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   425
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   425

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

426

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Sacral

▲ FIGURE 12.13
Dermatomes on all fours.

 Sensory Organization of the Spinal Cord. The basic anatomy of the spi-
nal cord was introduced in Chapter 7. The spinal cord is composed of an 
inner core of gray matter, surrounded by a thick covering of white matter 
tracts that are often called columns. Each half of the spinal gray matter 
is divided into a  dorsal horn , an  intermediate zone,  and a  ventral horn  
(Figure 12.14). The neurons that receive sensory input from primary af-
ferents are called  second-order sensory neurons . Most of the second-order 
sensory neurons of the spinal cord lie within the dorsal horns. 

 The large, myelinated A ␤  axons conveying information about a touch 
to  the  skin  enter  the  dorsal  horn  and  branch.  One  branch  synapses  in 
the deep part of the dorsal horn on second-order sensory neurons. These 
connections can initiate or modify a variety of rapid and unconscious re-
ﬂ exes. The other branch of the A ␤  primary afferent axon ascends straight 
to the brain. This ascending input is responsible for perception, enabling 
us to form complex judgments about the stimuli touching the skin. 

 The Dorsal Column–Medial Lemniscal Pathway 
 Information about touch or vibration of the skin takes a path to the brain 
that is entirely distinct from that taken by information about pain and 
temperature. The pathway serving touch is called the  dorsal column–
medial lemniscal pathway , for reasons we will see in a moment. The 
organization of this pathway is summarized in Figure 12.15. 

BOX 12.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Herpes, Shingles, and Dermatomes

Many  of  us  were  infected  by  the  varicella  zoster  virus, 

a  type  of  herpes  virus  commonly  known  as  chickenpox, 
when  we  were  children.  After  a  week  or  so  covered  with 
red, itchy spots on our skin, we usually recovered. Out of 
sight is not out of body, however. The virus remains in our 
primary sensory neurons, dormant but viable. Most people 
never notice it again, but in some cases, the virus revives 
decades  later,  wreaking  havoc  with  the  somatic  sensory 
system. The result is shingles, a condition that can be ago-
nizingly  painful  for  periods  of  months  or  even  years.  The 
reactivated  virus  increases  the  excitability  of  the  sensory 
neurons,  leading  to  very  low  thresholds  of  ﬁ ring  as  well 
as  spontaneous  activity.  The  pain  is  a  constant  burning, 
sometimes a stabbing sensation, and the skin is exquisitely 
sensitive to any stimulus. People with shingles often shun 
clothes  because  of  their  hypersensitivity.  The  skin  itself 
becomes  inﬂ amed  and  blistered,  then  scaly—hence,  the 
name  (Figure  A).  Several  useful  treatments  are  available 
that often shorten the outbreak, relieve the pain, and pre-
vent long-term complications.

Fortunately,  the  varicella  zoster  virus  usually  reactivates 
only in the neurons of one dorsal root ganglion. This means 
that the symptoms are restricted to the skin innervated by the 
axons of the affected dorsal root. In effect, the virus performs 
an anatomical labeling experiment for us by clearly marking 

the skin territory of one dermatome. Almost any dermatome 
may be involved, although the thoracic and facial areas are 
most common. Observations of many shingles patients and 
their infected areas were actually useful in mapping the der-
matomes (see Figure 12.12).

Neuroscientists have learned how to use herpes viruses 
and  other  types  of  viruses  to  their  advantage.  Viruses  are 
valuable research tools because they can be used to intro-
duce new genes into neurons.

Figure A
 Skin lesions caused 
by shingles, conﬁ ned 
to the L4 dermatome 
on the left side.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   426
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   426

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

427

Dorsal columns

To
brain

Dorsal
horn

Aβ axon

Intermediate
zone

Ventral horn

▲ FIGURE 12.14
The trajectory of the touch-sensitive A␤ axons in the spinal cord.

Primary
somatosensory
cortex (S1)

3

2

1

3

Dorsal column
nuclei

Thalamus
(VP nucleus)

Large dorsal
root axons

2

Dorsal
column

Medulla

Medial
lemniscus

1

Spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 12.15
The dorsal column–medial lemniscal 
pathway. This is the major route by which 
touch and proprioceptive information as-
cend to the cerebral cortex.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   427
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   427

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

428

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The ascending branch of the large sensory axons (A ␤ ) enters the ipsi-
lateral  dorsal column  of the spinal cord, the white matter tract medial 
to the dorsal horn (see Figure 12.14). The dorsal columns carry informa-
tion about tactile sensation (and limb position) toward the brain. They 
are  composed  of  primary  sensory  axons,  as  well  as  second-order  axons 
from neurons in the spinal gray matter. The axons of the dorsal column 
terminate in the  dorsal column nuclei , which lie at the junction of the 
spinal cord and medulla. Consider that some of the longest axons in your 
body originate in the skin of your big toe and terminate in the dorsal col-
umn nuclei at the base of your head! This is a fast, direct path that brings 
information from the skin to the brain without an intervening synapse. 
 At this point in the pathway, information is still represented ipsilater-
ally; that is, touch information from the  right  side of the body is repre-
sented in the activity of cells in the  right  dorsal column nuclei. However, 
axons from cells of the dorsal column nuclei arch toward the ventral and 
medial medulla, and decussate.  From this point onward, the somatic sen-
sory system of one side of the brain is concerned with sensations originat-
ing from the other side of the body.  

 The  axons  of  the  dorsal  column  nuclei  ascend  within  a  conspicuous 
white matter tract called the  medial lemniscus . The medial lemniscus 
rises  through  the  medulla,  pons,  and  midbrain,  and  its  axons  synapse 
upon neurons of the  ventral posterior (VP) nucleus  of the thalamus. 
Remember that almost no sensory information goes directly into the neo-
cortex without ﬁ rst synapsing in the thalamus (olfaction is the exception). 
Thalamic  neurons  of  the  VP  nucleus  then  project  to  speciﬁ c  regions  of 
 primary somatosensory cortex , or  S1 . 

 It is tempting to assume that sensory information is simply transferred, 
unchanged, through nuclei in the brain stem and thalamus on its way to 
the cortex, with the actual processing taking place only in the cortex. In 
fact, this assumption is demonstrated by the term  relay nuclei , which is 
often used to describe speciﬁ c sensory nuclei of the thalamus such as the 
VP nucleus. Physiological studies prove otherwise, however. In both dorsal 
column and thalamic nuclei, considerable transformation of information 
takes place. As a general rule, information is altered every time it passes 
through a set of synapses in the brain. In particular, inhibitory interac-
tions between adjacent sets of inputs in the dorsal column–medial lemnis-
cal pathway enhance the responses to tactile stimuli (Box 12.2). As we will 
see later, some synapses in these nuclei can also change their strength, 
depending on their recent activity. Neurons of both the thalamus and the 
dorsal column nuclei are also controlled by input from the cerebral cortex. 
Accordingly, the output of the cortex can inﬂ uence the input of the cortex! 

 The Trigeminal Touch Pathway 
 Thus far, we have described only the part of the somatic sensory system that 
enters the spinal cord. If this were the whole story, your face and the top of 
your head would be numb. Somatic sensation of the face is supplied mostly by 
the large  trigeminal nerves  (cranial nerve V), which enter the brain at the 
pons (see Chapter 7). (The word is from the Latin  tria , “three,” and  geminus , 
“twin.”) There are twin trigeminal nerves, one on each side, and each breaks 
up into three peripheral nerves that innervate the face, mouth areas, the outer 
two-thirds of the tongue, and the dura mater covering the brain. Additional 
sensation from the skin around the ears, nasal areas, and pharynx is provided 
by other cranial nerves: the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus (X). 
 The sensory connections of the trigeminal nerve are analogous to those of 
the dorsal roots. The large-diameter sensory axons of the trigeminal nerve 
carry  tactile  information  from  skin  mechanoreceptors.  They  synapse  onto 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   428
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   428

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

429

BOX 12.2

B R A I N   F O O D

Lateral Inhibition

Information is usually transformed as it is passed from one 

neuron to the next in a sensory pathway. One common trans-
formation is the ampliﬁ cation of differences in the activity of 
neighboring neurons, also known as contrast enhancement. 
We  already  saw  this  in  retinal  ganglion  cell  receptive  ﬁ elds 
(see  Chapter  9).  If  all  the  photoreceptors  providing  input 
to a ganglion cell are evenly illuminated, the cell hardly no-
tices.  However,  if  there  is  a  contrast  border—a  difference 
in illumination—within the cell’s receptive ﬁ eld, the cell’s re-
sponse  is  strongly  modulated.  Contrast  enhancement  is  a 
general  feature  of  information  processing  in  sensory  path-
ways,  including  the  somatic  sensory  system.  One  general 
mechanism underlying contrast enhancement is lateral inhibi-
tion, whereby neighboring cells inhibit one another. Let’s see 
how this works, using a simple model.

Consider  the  situation  in  Figure  A.  Dorsal  root  ganglion 
neurons lettered a through g relay information via excitatory 
synapses to dorsal column nucleus neurons A through G. All 
of the neurons ﬁ re with baseline rates of 5 spikes/sec, even 
in the absence of stimulation. Consider what happens when 
a stimulus is applied to the receptive ﬁ eld of just one sensory 
neuron, cell d in Figure A. The ﬁ ring rate of cell d increases to 

10 spikes/sec. Let’s assume the output of the dorsal column 
nucleus cells is simply the presynaptic input multiplied by a 
synaptic gain factor of 1. If the input activity of cell d is 10, 
the output activity of cell D is also 10. This simple relay does 
nothing to enhance the difference between the more active 
neuron, d, and the other neurons. The contrast in activity be-
tween neuron D and its neighbors C and E, for example, is 10 
versus 5 spikes/sec.

Now  consider  the  situation  in  Figure  B,  where  inhibitory 
interneurons have been added that project laterally to inhibit 
each cell’s neighbor. The synaptic gain of the inhibitory syn-
apses  (black  triangles)  is  ⫺1,  and  we’ve  adjusted  the  gain 
of the excitatory synapses, as shown in the ﬁ gure. Calculate 
the activity of each cell by multiplying the input to each syn-
apse  by  its  synaptic  gain,  and  then  summing  the  effect  of 
all  the  synapses  on  the  cell.  If  you  perform  this  calculation 
when the stimulus is again applied to cell d, you will see that 
there is signiﬁ cant contrast enhancement: The difference be-
tween the activity in cell d and its neighbors has been greatly 
ampliﬁ ed in the output of cell D. The contrast in activity be-
tween neuron D and its neighbors C and E is now 20 versus 
0 spikes/sec.

Input in
spikes/sec

Output in
spikes/sec

Input in
spikes/sec

Output in
spikes/sec

Stimulus

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

5

5

5

10

5

5

5

1x

1x

1x

1x

1x

1x

A

B

C

D

E

F

1x

G

5

5

5

10

5

5

5

5

5

5

Stimulus

10

5

5

5

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

3x

1x

3x

1x

3x

1x

3x

1x

3x

1x

3x

1x

3x

-1x
A
-1x

-1x
B
-1x

-1x
C
-1x

-1x
D
-1x

-1x
E
-1x

-1x
F
-1x

-1x
G
-1x

5

5

0

20

0

5

5

Figure A

Figure B

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   429
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   429

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

430

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Primary
somatosensory
cortex (S1)

2

1

2

Principal sensory
trigeminal nucleus

Thalamus
(VP nucleus)

1

Large mechano-
receptor axons
from face

▲ FIGURE 12.16
The trigeminal nerve pathway.

Trigeminal nerve
(cranial nerve V)

second-order neurons in the ipsilateral trigeminal nucleus, which is analo-
gous to a dorsal column nucleus (Figure 12.16). The axons from the trigemi-
nal nucleus decussate and project into the medial part of the VP nucleus of 
the thalamus. From here, information is relayed to the somatosensory cortex. 

 Somatosensory Cortex 
 As with all other sensory systems, the most complex levels of somatosensory 
processing occur in the cerebral cortex. Most of the cortex concerned with 
the somatic sensory system is located in the parietal lobe (Figure 12.17). 
Brodmann’s area 3b, now regarded as the primary somatosensory cortex 
(S1), is easy to ﬁ nd in humans because it lies on the postcentral gyrus (right 
behind the central sulcus). (See also Figure 7.28 showing Brodmann’s areas.) 
Other cortical areas that also process somatic sensory information ﬂ ank S1. 
These include areas 3a, 1, and 2 on the postcentral gyrus, and areas 5 and 7 
on the adjacent  posterior parietal cortex  (see Figure 12.17). 

 Area 3b is the  primary  somatic sensory cortex because (1) it receives 
dense inputs from the VP nucleus of the thalamus; (2) its neurons are 
very responsive to somatosensory stimuli (but not to other sensory stim-
uli); (3) lesions here impair somatic sensation; and (4) when electrically 
stimulated, it evokes somatic sensory experiences. Area 3a also receives 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   430
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   430

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

431

Somatosensory cortex
(areas 1, 2, 3a, 3b)

Central
sulcus

Posterior parietal
cortex (areas 5, 7)

Central
sulcus

Postcentral
gyrus

1

7

2

5

3b

3a

▲ FIGURE 12.17
Somatic sensory areas of the 
 cortex. All of the illustrated areas lie 
in the parietal lobe. The lower draw-
ing shows that the postcentral gyrus 
 contains S1, area 3b.

a dense input from the thalamus; however, this region is concerned with 
the sense of body position rather than touch. 

 Areas 1 and 2 receive dense inputs from area 3b. The projection from 
3b  to  area  1  sends  mainly  texture  information,  while  the  projection  to 
area 2 emphasizes size and shape. Small lesions in area 1 or 2 produce 
predictable deﬁ ciencies in discrimination of texture, size, and shape. 

 Somatic sensory cortex, like other areas of neocortex, is a layered struc-
ture. As is the case for visual and auditory cortex, the thalamic inputs to 
S1 terminate mainly in layer IV. The neurons of layer IV project, in turn, 
to cells in the other layers. Another important similarity with other regions 
of cortex is that S1 neurons with similar inputs and responses are stacked 
vertically into columns that extend across the cortical layers (Figure 12.18). 
In  fact,  the  concept  of  the  cortical  column,  so  beautifully  elaborated  by 
Hubel and Wiesel in visual cortex, was actually ﬁ rst described in somatic 
sensory cortex by Johns Hopkins University scientist Vernon Mountcastle. 

Rapidly
adapting
neurons

D3

D2

Slowly
adapting
neurons

D1

Thalamus

Dorsal
column
nucleus

 Cortical Somatotopy. Electrical stimulation of the S1 surface can cause 
somatic sensations localized to a speciﬁ c part of the body. Systematically, 
moving the stimulator around S1 will cause the sensation to move across 
the  body. American-Canadian  neurosurgeon Wilder  Penﬁ eld,  working  at 
McGill University from the 1930s through the 1950s, actually used this 
method to map the cortex of neurosurgical patients. (It is interesting to 
note that these brain operations can be performed in awake patients, with 
only local anesthesia of the scalp, because the brain tissue itself lacks the 
 receptors of somatic sensation.) Another way to map the somatosensory 
 cortex is to record the activity of a single neuron and determine the site 
of  its  somatosensory  receptive  ﬁ eld  on  the  body.  The  receptive  ﬁ elds  of 
many S1 neurons produce an orderly map of the body on the cortex. The 
mapping of the body’s surface sensations onto a structure in the brain is 

D3

D2

D1

▲ FIGURE 12.18
Columnar organization of S1’s area 
3b. Each finger (D1–D3) is represented 
by an adjacent area of cortex. Within the 
area of each finger representation are al-
ternating columns of cells with rapidly 
adapting (green) and slowly adapting 
(red) sensory responses. (Source: 
Adapted from Kaas et al., 1981, Fig. 8.)

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   431
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   431

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

432

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

F

E

A

o

r

l

b

e

o

r

m

H

r

a

w

a

m

F

i

n

g

n

d

T

h

u

e

r

s

m

b

E

y

e

H
e

a

d

N
e
c
k

G
e
n
i
t
a
l
s

T
r
u
n
k

H
p

i

L
e
g

F
o
ot

Toes

Nose

Face
Upper lip
Lips
Lower lip
Teeth
Gums
Jaw

T o n g u e
P h ary n x
Intra-abdominal

▲ FIGURE 12.19
A somatotopic map of the body surface onto primary somatosensory cortex.  This 
map is a cross section through the postcentral gyrus (shown at top). Neurons in each 
area are most responsive to the parts of the body illustrated above them. (Source: 
Adapted from Penfield and Rasmussen, 1952, and from Kell et al., 2005, Fig. 3.)

called  somatotopy . We have seen previously that the brain has maps of 
other sensory surfaces, such as the light-sensitive retina in the eye ( retino-
topy ) and the sound frequency-sensitive cochlea in the inner ear ( tonotopy ). 
 Somatotopic  maps  generated  by  electrical  stimulation  and  neuronal 
recording methods are similar. The maps roughly resemble a body with 
its legs and feet at the top of the postcentral gyrus and its head at the 
opposite,  lower  end  of  the  gyrus  (Figure  12.19).  A  somatotopic  map  is 
sometimes called a  homunculus  (from the Latin diminutive of “man”; the 
little man in the brain). 

 Several  things  are  obvious  about  the  somatotopic  map  in  S1.  First,  the 
map is not always continuous but can be broken up. Notice in Figure 12.19 
that the representation of the hand separates that of the face and the head. 
Interestingly, Penﬁ eld’s original maps suggested that the male genitals were 
mapped onto the most distant and hidden part of S1, somewhere below the 
toes. However, a recent study using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
demonstrated that the penis is actually represented in a less surprising place 
on the map: in an area between the abdomen and the legs. Unfortunately, 
neither Penﬁ eld nor contemporary researchers have spent much time map-
ping the somatosensory maps of the female body and its unique features (what 
some have called the “ her munculus”). 

 Another obvious feature of the somatotopic map is that it is not scaled 
like the human body. Instead, it looks like a caricature (Figure 12.20): The 
mouth, tongue, and ﬁ ngers are incongruously large, while the trunk, arms, 
and legs are tiny. The relative size of cortex devoted to each body part is 
correlated with the  density  of sensory input received from that part. Size 

▲ FIGURE 12.20
The homunculus.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   432
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   432

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

433

Vibrissae

Follicles

(b)  

2 mm

Vibrissae
region of S1

Barrels
in S1 

(a)  

▲ FIGURE 12.21
A somatotopic map of the facial vibrissae on mouse cerebral cortex. (a) The 
positions of the major vibrissae on the face (dots). (b) A somatotopic map within 
S1 of the mouse brain. (c) Barrel cortex within S1. The cortex has been thinly 
sectioned parallel to the surface and Nissl-stained. The inset shows the pattern of 
barrels, laid out in five rows; compare with the five rows of vibrissae in the photo-
graph in part a. (Source: Adapted from Woolsey and Van der Loos, 1970.)

(c)  

1 mm

on the map is also related to the  importance  of the sensory input from that 
part of the body; information from your index ﬁ nger is more useful than 
that from your elbow. The importance of touch information from our hands 
and ﬁ ngers is obvious, but why throw so much cortical computing power at 
the mouth? Two likely reasons are that tactile sensations are important in 
the production of speech and that your lips and tongue (feeling, as well as 
tasting) are the last line of defense when deciding if a morsel is delicious, 
nutritious food, or something that could choke you, break your tooth, or bite 
back. As we will see in a moment, the importance of an input, and the size 
of its representation in cortex, are also reﬂ ections of how often it is used. 

 The importance of a body part can vary greatly in different species. For 
example, the large facial vibrissae (whiskers) of rodents receive a huge 
share of the territory in S1, while the digits of the paws receive relatively 
little (Figure 12.21). Remarkably, the sensory signals from each vibrissa 
follicle go to one clearly deﬁ ned cluster of S1 neurons; such clusters are 
called  barrels . The somatotopic map of rodent vibrissae is easily seen in 
thin sections of S1; the ﬁ ve rows of cortical barrels precisely match the 
ﬁ ve rows of facial vibrissae (Box 12.3). Studies of the “barrel cortex” in 
rats and mice have revealed much about the functions of sensory cortex. 
 Somatotopy in the cerebral cortex is not limited to a single map. Just 
as the visual system builds multiple retinotopic maps, the somatic sensory 
system has several maps of the body. Figure 12.22 shows the  detailed so-
matotopy of S1 in an owl monkey. Carefully compare the maps in areas 3b 
and 1; they map the same parts of the body, literally in parallel along adja-
cent strips of cortex. The two somatotopic maps are not identical, but mirror 
images, as an enlargement of the hand regions makes clear (Figure 12.22b). 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   433
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   433

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

434

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 12.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Cortical Barrels
by Thomas Woolsey

In the mid-1960s, I completed a physiological study of the 

organization of touch, hearing, and vision in the mouse brain 
for  an  undergraduate  research  project  at  the  University  of 
Wisconsin.  At  Wisconsin,  histology  was  done  routinely  on 
all such brains. After my ﬁ rst year at medical school, I came 
back to look at the sections. There was something odd about 
cortical layer IV just where I had recorded responses to mov-
ing the whiskers: The cell bodies were distributed unevenly. 
This was not new. Several different authors, in nearly forgot-
ten papers written over 50 years earlier, showed this pattern 
of neurons; but that was before recording was possible, so 
no one knew the function of the cortex.

Cortex is usually studied in sections cut perpendicular to 
the brain surface. It occurred to me that cutting the brain par-
allel to its surface, which had only been done rarely, might 
give a view of the entire layer IV. The late H. Van der Loos, 

who taught neuroanatomy, gave me a place to work at Johns 
Hopkins during an elective period. I prepared specimens in 
a way so that I could accurately position them for cutting (I 
knew where I usually got responses to stimulating the face) 
and cut thicker sections than customary. About 10:00 on a 
bright late spring morning, after struggling to mount the ﬁ rst 
sections on slides, I took them down a corridor to the dark 
student  histology  lab,  where  I  had  a  microscope.  That  ﬁ rst 
look showed a stunning pattern of cells in layer IV that ob-
viously  mimicked  the  whiskers.  There  was  no  doubt  about 
what I had seen; I immediately showed the slides to Van der 
Loos, who was the second person in the world to know that 
whiskers are stamped in the mouse brain. We named the cell 
groups barrels. Later, the hypotheses that each barrel is as-
sociated with a single whisker and that each one forms part 
of a functional cortical column were proven.

Leg

Sole

Thigh
Trunk

Arm

Wrist
Palm

Chin

Caudal
vibrissae
Lower lip

Upper lip

Teeth

Area

3b

1

Area

3b

1

(a)  

1 mm

C. vib.
M. vib.

Palmar
pads

Fingers

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 12.22
Multiple somatotopic maps.  
Recordings were made from areas 3b and 
1 of an owl monkey. (a) Results show that 
each area has its own somatotopic map. 
(b) Detailed examination of the hand area 
shows that the two maps are mirror im-
ages. Shaded regions represent the dorsal 
surfaces of the hands and feet, unshaded 
regions the ventral surfaces. (Source: 
Adapted from Kaas et al., 1981.)

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   434
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   434

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

435

 Cortical Map Plasticity. What happens to the somatotopic map in cortex 
when an input, such as the ﬁ nger, is removed? Does the “ﬁ nger area” of 
cortex simply go unused? Does it atrophy? Or is this tissue taken over 
by inputs from other sources? The answers to these questions could have 
important implications for the recovery of function after peripheral nerve 
injury. In the 1980s, neuroscientist Michael Merzenich and his associates 
at the University of California at San Francisco began a series of experi-
ments to test the possibilities. 

 Some key experiments are summarized in Figure 12.23. First, the re-
gions of S1 sensitive to stimulation of the hand in an adult owl monkey 
were  carefully  mapped  with  microelectrodes.  Then,  one  ﬁ nger  (digit  3) 
on  the  hand  was  surgically  removed.  Several  months  later,  the  cortex 

Body

Posterior

Face

Anterior

Primary
somatosensory
cortex

(a) Location of left hand map on

right hemisphere of monkey brain 

Dorsal surface

Digit 5
Digit 4
Digit 3
Digit 2
Digit 1
(thumb)
Dorsal surface

Palm

(b)  Normal hand, palmar surface 

D5

D4

D2

D1

D5
D4
D3
D2
D1

Details of cortical
map

D5

D4

D2

D1

(c)  Reorganization of cortical map
       after surgical removal of third
       finger (D3) 

After reorganization
of somatosensory
cortex

D5

D4

D3

Stimulus
disk

D2

D1

D5
D4
D3

D2
D1

(d)  Reorganization of cortical map
       after discrimination training of
       two fingertips 

▲ FIGURE 12.23
Somototopic map plasticity. (a, b) The fingers of the hand of an owl monkey are 
mapped onto the surface of S1 cortex. (c) If digit 3 is removed, over time, the cor-
tex reorganizes so that the representations of digits 2 and 4 expand. (d) If digits 2 
and 3 are selectively stimulated, their cortical representations also expand.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   435
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   435

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

436

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

was  again  mapped.  The  answer?  The  cortex  originally  devoted  to  the 
amputated  digit  now  responded  to  stimulation  of  the  adjacent  digits 
(Figure  12.23c).  There  clearly  had  been  a  major  rearrangement  of  the 
circuitry underlying cortical somatotopy. 

 In the amputation experiment, the cause of this map rearrangement 
was the absence of input from the missing digit. What happens when the 
input activity from a digit is  increased ? To answer this question, mon-
keys were trained to use selected digits to perform a task for which they 
 received a food reward. After several weeks of this training,  microelectrode 
mapping experiments showed that the representation of the stimulated 
digits had expanded in comparison with the adjacent, unstimulated ones 
(Figure 12.23d). These experiments reveal that cortical maps are dynamic 
and adjust depending on the amount of sensory experience. Subsequent 
experiments in other areas of cortex (visual, auditory, motor) have shown 
that this type of map plasticity is widespread in the brain. 

 The ﬁ ndings of map plasticity in animals have led to a search for simi-
lar  changes  in  the  human  brain.  One  interesting  example  comes  from 
studies of amputees. A common experience among amputees is the per-
ception  of  sensations  coming  from  the  missing  limb  when  other  body 
parts are touched. These “phantom limb” sensations are usually evoked 
by  the  stimulation  of  skin  regions  whose  somatotopic  representations 
border those of the missing limb; for example, feeling can be evoked in a 
phantom arm by stimulating the face. Functional brain imaging reveals 
that the cortical regions originally devoted to the missing limb are now 
activated by stimulating the face. While this plasticity may be adaptive 
in the sense that the cortex does not go unused, the mismatch between 
sensory stimulation and perception in amputees shows that it can lead to 
confusion on how signals from S1 should be interpreted. 

 While  having  more  cortex  devoted  to  a  body  part  may  not  necessar-
ily  be  beneﬁ cial  to  amputees,  it  apparently  is  to  musicians.  Violinists 
and other string instrument players must continually ﬁ nger the strings 
with  their  left  hand;  the  other  hand,  holding  the  bow,  receives  consid-
erably  less  stimulation  of  individual  ﬁ ngers.  Functional  imaging  of  S1 
shows that the amount of cortex devoted to the ﬁ ngers of the left hand is 
greatly enlarged in string musicians. It is likely that this is an exagger-
ated  version of a continuous remapping process that goes on in everyone’s 
brain as each person’s life experiences vary. 

 The mechanisms of these types of map plasticity are not understood. 
However, as we shall see in Chapter 25, they may be related to processes 
involved in learning and memory. 

 The Posterior Parietal Cortex. As we have seen, the segregation of differ-
ent types of information is a general rule for the sensory systems, and the 
somatic sensory system is no exception. However, information of different 
sensory types cannot remain separate forever. When we feel for a key in our 
pocket, we do not ordinarily sense it as a list of traits: a particular size and 
shape, textured and smooth edges, hard and smooth ﬂ at surfaces, a certain 
weight. Instead, without thinking much about it, we simply conﬁ rm with our 
ﬁ ngers “key,” as opposed to “coin” or “wad of old chewing gum.” Separate as-
pects of a stimulus come effortlessly together as a meaningful object. We have 
a very poor understanding of how this occurs biologically within any sensory 
system, much less between sensory systems. After all, many objects have a 
distinct look, sound, feel,  and  smell, and the melding of these sensations is 
necessary for the complete mental image of something like your pet cat. 

 What  we  do  know  is  that  the  character  of  neuronal  receptive  ﬁ elds 
tends to change as information passes through the cortex and receptive 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   436
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   436

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

437

Model

Patient's copy

▲ FIGURE 12.24
Symptoms of a neglect syndrome. 
A patient who had had a stroke in the 
right posterior parietal cortex was asked 
to copy the model drawing but was un-
able to reproduce many of the features 
on the left side of the model. (Source: 
Springer and Deutsch, 1989, p. 193.)

ﬁ elds  enlarge.  For  example,  neurons  below  the  cortex  and  in  cortical 
areas 3a and 3b are not sensitive to the direction of stimulus movement 
across the skin, but cells in areas 1 and 2 are. The stimuli that neurons 
prefer  become  increasingly  complex.  Certain  cortical  areas  seem  to  be 
sites where simple, segregated streams of sensory information converge 
to generate particularly complex neural representations. When we dis-
cussed the visual system, we saw this in the complex receptive ﬁ elds of 
area IT. The posterior parietal cortex is also such an area. Its neurons 
have  large  receptive  ﬁ elds  with  stimulus  preferences  that  are  a  chal-
lenge to characterize because they are so elaborate. Moreover, the area is 
concerned not only with somatic sensation but also with visual stimuli, 
movement planning, and even a person’s state of attentiveness. 

 Damage to posterior parietal areas can yield some bizarre neurologi-
cal disorders. Among these is  agnosia , the inability to recognize objects 
even though simple sensory skills seem to be normal. People with  aste-
reognosia  cannot recognize common objects by feeling them (e.g., a key), 
although their sense of touch is otherwise normal and they may have no 
trouble recognizing the object by sight or sound. Deﬁ cits are often limited 
to the side contralateral to the damage. 

 Parietal cortical lesions may also cause a  neglect syndrome , in which 
a part of the body or a part of the world (the entire visual ﬁ eld left of the 
center of gaze, for example) is ignored or suppressed, and its very exis-
tence is denied (Figure 12.24). Neurologist Oliver Sacks described such 
a patient in his essay, “The Man Who Fell Out of Bed.” After suffering a 
stroke that presumably damaged his cortex, the man insisted that some-
one was playing a macabre joke on him by hiding an amputated leg under 
his blanket. When he tried to remove the leg from his bed, he and the leg 
ended up on the ﬂ oor. Of course, the leg in question was his own, still at-
tached, but he was unable to recognize it as part of his body. A neglect 
syndrome patient may ignore the food on one half of his plate, or attempt 
to dress only one side of his body. Neglect syndromes are most common 
following damage to the right hemisphere, and, fortunately, they usually 
improve or disappear with time. 

 In general, the posterior parietal cortex seems to be essential for the per-
ception and interpretation of spatial relationships, accurate body image, 
and  the  learning  of  tasks  involving  coordination  of  the  body  in  space. 
These functions involve a complex integration of somatosensory informa-
tion with that from other sensory systems, particularly the visual system. 

PAIN 
PAIN

 In addition to the mechanosensitive touch receptors we have described so 
far, somatic sensation depends strongly on  nociceptors , the free, branch-
ing, unmyelinated nerve endings that signal that body tissue is being dam-
aged or is at risk of being damaged. (The word is from the Latin  nocere , “to 
hurt.”) The information from nociceptors takes a path to the brain that is 
largely distinct from the path taken by mechanoreceptors; consequently, 
the subjective experience elicited by activation of these two pathways is 
different. Selective activation of nociceptors can lead to the conscious ex-
perience of pain. Nociception, and pain, are vital to life (Box 12.4). 

 It is important to realize, however, that nociception and pain are not 
always the same thing.  Pain  is the feeling, or the perception, of irritating, 
sore,  stinging,  aching,  throbbing,  miserable,  or  unbearable  sensations 
arising from a part of the body.  Nociception  is the sensory process that 
provides signals that trigger pain. While nociceptors may ﬁ re away wildly 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   437
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   437

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

438

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 12.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Misery of Life Without Pain
Pain teaches us to avoid harmful situations. It elicits with-

drawal reﬂ exes from noxious stimuli. It exhorts us to rest an 
injured part of our body so it can heal. Pain is vital. The most 
convincing arguments for the functional beneﬁ ts of pain are 
the very rare people with a condition called congenital insen-
sitivity to pain. They go through life in constant danger of de-
stroying  themselves  because  they  do  not  realize  the  harm 
they are doing. They often die young.

A Canadian woman, for example, was born with an indif-
ference to painful stimuli, had no other sensory deﬁ cits, and 
was quite intelligent. Despite early training to avoid damaging 
situations,  she  developed  progressive  degeneration  of  her 
joints  and  spinal  vertebrae,  leading  to  skeletal  deformation, 
degeneration, infection, and, ﬁ nally, death at the age of 28. 
Apparently,  low  levels  of  nociceptive  activity  are  important 
during everyday tasks to tell us when a particular movement 
or prolonged posture is putting too much strain on our body. 
Even during sleep, nociception may be the prod that makes 

us  toss  and  turn  enough  to  prevent  bedsores  or  skeletal 
strain.

People  with  congenital  insensitivity  to  pain  reveal  that 
pain is a separate sensation and not simply an excess of the 
other sensations. Such people usually have a normal ability 
to perceive other somatic sensory stimuli. The causes of the 
disorder can include the failure of peripheral nociceptors to 
develop, altered synaptic transmission in the pain-mediating 
pathways of the CNS, and genetic mutations. A study of sev-
eral afﬂ icted families in Pakistan revealed mutations in a gene 
called  SCN9A,  which  codes  for  a  unique  type  of  voltage-
gated  sodium  channel  expressed  only  in  nociceptive  neu-
rons. The mutation leads to nonfunctional sodium channels, 
a selective absence of action potentials in nociceptors, and 
profound insensitivity to pain. Family members with the muta-
tions sustain continual cuts, bruises, bitten lips and tongues, 
and broken bones.

Clearly, life without pain is not a blessing.

and continually, pain may come and go. The opposite may also happen. 
Pain may be agonizing, even without activity in nociceptors. More than 
any  other  sensory  system,  the  cognitive  qualities  of  nociception  can  be 
controlled from within, by the brain itself. 

 Nociceptors and the Transduction of Painful Stimuli 
 Nociceptors are activated by stimuli that have the potential to cause tis-
sue  damage.  Tissue  damage  can  result  from  strong  mechanical  stimu-
lation,  extremes  in  temperature,  oxygen  deprivation,  and  exposure  to 
certain  chemicals,  among  other  causes.  The  membranes  of  nociceptors 
contain ion channels that are activated by these types of stimuli. 

 Consider as an example the events that accompany your stepping on 
a thumbtack (recall Chapter 3). The simple stretching or bending of the 
nociceptor  membrane  activates  mechanically  gated  ion  channels  that 
cause the cell to depolarize and generate action potentials. In addition, 
damaged cells at the site of injury can release a number of substances 
that cause ion channels on nociceptor membranes to open. Examples of 
released substances are proteases (enzymes that digest proteins), adeno-
sine  triphosphate  (ATP),  and  K ⫹ .  Proteases  can  break  down  an  abun-
dant extracellular peptide called kininogen to form another peptide called 
 bradykinin . Bradykinin binds to speciﬁ c receptor molecules that activate 
ionic conductances in some nociceptors. Similarly, ATP causes nocicep-
tors  to  depolarize  by  binding  directly  to  ATP-gated  ion  channels.  And, 
as we learned in Chapter 3, the elevation of extracellular [K ⫹ ] directly 
depolarizes neuronal membranes. 

 Now consider leaning against a hot stove. Heat above 43°C causes tis-
sues  to  burn,  and  heat-sensitive  ion  channels  in  nociceptor  membranes 
open at this temperature. Of course, we also have nonpainful sensations of 
warmth when the skin is heated from 37 to 43°C. These sensations depend 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   438
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   438

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

439

on non-nociceptive thermoreceptors and their CNS connections, which we 
will  discuss  in  a  later  section.  But  for  now,  note  that  the  sensations  of 
warmth and scalding are mediated by separate neural mechanisms. 

 Imagine you are a middle-aged runner on the last mile of a marathon. 
When  your  tissue  oxygen  levels  do  not  meet  the  oxygen  demand,  your 
cells  use  anaerobic  metabolism  to  generate  ATP.  A  consequence  of  an-
aerobic metabolism is the release of lactic acid. The buildup of lactic acid 
leads to an excess of H ⫹  in the extracellular ﬂ uid, and these ions activate 
H ⫹ -gated ion channels on nociceptors. This mechanism causes the excru-
ciating dull ache associated with very hard exercise. 

 A bee stings you. Your skin and connective tissue contain  mast cells , 
a component of your immune system. Mast cells can be activated by ex-
posure to foreign substances (e.g., bee venom), causing them to release 
histamine. Histamine binds to speciﬁ c cell surface receptors on nocicep-
tors and causes membrane depolarization. Histamine also causes blood 
capillaries to become leaky, which leads to swelling and redness at the 
site of an injury. Creams containing drugs that block histamine receptors 
(antihistamines) can be helpful to reduce the pain and the swelling. 

 Types of Nociceptors. The transduction of painful stimuli occurs in the free 
nerve endings of unmyelinated C ﬁ bers and lightly myelinated A ␦  ﬁ bers. The 
majority of nociceptors respond to mechanical, thermal, and chemical stim-
uli, and are therefore called  polymodal nociceptors . However, like the mecha-
noreceptors of touch, many nociceptors show selectivity in their responses to 
different stimuli. Thus, there are also  mechanical nociceptors , showing selec-
tive responses to strong pressure;  thermal nociceptors , showing selective re-
sponses to burning heat or extreme cold (Box 12.5); and  chemical nociceptors , 
showing selective responses to histamine and other chemicals. 

 Nociceptors  are  present  in  most  body  tissues,  including  skin,  bone, 
muscle, most internal organs, blood vessels, and the heart. They are no-
tably absent in the brain itself, except for the meninges. 

 Hyperalgesia and Inﬂ ammation. Nociceptors normally respond only when 
stimuli are strong enough to damage tissue. But we all know that skin, 
joints, or muscles that have  already  been damaged or inﬂ amed are unusu-
ally sensitive. A light, sympathetic mother’s touch to a burned area of her 
child’s skin may elicit howls due to unbearable pain. This phenomenon is 
known as  hyperalgesia , and it is the most familiar example of our body’s 
ability to control its own pain. Hyperalgesia can be a reduced threshold 
for pain, an increased intensity of painful stimuli, or even spontaneous 
pain.  Primary hyperalgesia  occurs within the area of damaged tissue, but 
tissues surrounding a damaged area may become supersensitive as well, 
by the process of  secondary hyperalgesia.  

 Many  different  mechanisms  appear  to  be  involved  in  hyperalgesia, 
some in and around the peripheral receptors and others within the CNS. 
As noted earlier, when skin is damaged, a variety of substances, some-
times called the inﬂ ammatory soup, are released. The soup includes cer-
tain neurotransmitters (glutamate, serotonin, adenosine, ATP), peptides 
(substance P, bradykinin), lipids (prostaglandins, endocannabinoids), pro-
teases, neurotrophins, cytokines, and chemokines, ions such as K ⫹  and H ⫹ , 
and other substances (Figure 12.25). Together, they can trigger  inﬂ am-
mation , which is a natural response of the body’s tissues as they attempt 
to eliminate injury and stimulate the healing process. The cardinal signs 
of inﬂ ammation in skin are pain, heat, redness, and swelling. A number of 
these chemicals can also modulate the excitability of nociceptors, making 
them more sensitive to thermal or mechanical stimuli (see Box 12.5). 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   439
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   439

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

440

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 12.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Hot and Spicy

If you like spicy food, you should know that the active ingre-

dient in a wide variety of hot peppers is capsaicin (Figure A). 
These peppers are “hot” because the capsaicin activates the 
thermal nociceptors that also signal painful elevations in tem-
perature (above about 43°C). Indeed, it was the peculiar fact 
that  these  nociceptive  neurons  are  selectively  activated  by 
capsaicin that led to the discovery of the transduction mech-
anism for the sensation of hot. David Julius at the University of 
California, San Francisco, found that in some dorsal root gan-
glion cells, capsaicin activates a particular ion channel, called 
TRPV1, which is also activated by elevations in temperature 
greater  than  43°C.  This  ion  channel  causes  the  neuron  to 
ﬁ re by admitting Ca2⫹ and Na⫹ and depolarizing it. TRPV1 
is a member of a very large family of related TRP channels, 
originally identiﬁ ed in photoreceptors of the fruit ﬂ y Drosophila 
(TRP  stands  for  transient  receptor  potential).  Different  TRP 
channels contribute to many different types of sensory trans-
duction in organisms from yeast to humans.

Why would a temperature-gated ion channel also be sen-
sitive to hot peppers? Capsaicin appears to mimic the effect 
of endogenous chemicals released by tissue damage. These 
chemicals (and capsaicin) cause the TRPV1 channel to open 
at lower temperatures, explaining the heightened sensitivity of 
injured skin to increases in temperature. Indeed, inﬂ ammation-
induced thermal hyperalgesia is absent in mice engineered to 
lack the TRPV1 channel. While all mammals normally express 
the TRPV1 channel, birds do not, thus explaining how birds 
can consume the spiciest of chili peppers. This fact also ex-
plains how birdseed laced with capsaicin can be enjoyed by 
birds without interference from raiding squirrels.

In addition to its protection of birdseed and widespread 
culinary use, capsaicin has a seemingly paradoxical clini-
cal  application.  Applied  in  large  quantities,  it  can  cause 
analgesia,  the  absence  of  pain.  The  capsaicin  desensi-
tizes  pain  ﬁ bers  and  depletes  the  peptide  substance  P 
from  their  nerve  terminals.  Capsaicin  ointments,  sprays, 
and patches are useful treatments for pain associated with 
arthritis, strains, psoriasis, shingles, and other conditions 
(see Box 12.1).

Habañero

Red chili

Jalapeño

O

N
H

CH3O

HO

Figure A
 Peppers containing capsaicin and the molecule’s chemical structure.

 Bradykinin was discussed earlier as one of the chemicals that directly 
depolarizes nociceptors. In addition to this effect, bradykinin stimulates 
long-lasting intracellular changes that make heat-activated ion channels 
more sensitive.  Prostaglandins  are chemicals generated by the enzymatic 
breakdown of lipid membrane. While prostaglandins do not elicit overt 
pain, they do increase greatly the sensitivity of nociceptors to other stim-
uli. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs are a useful 
treatment for hyperalgesia because they inhibit the enzymes required for 
prostaglandin synthesis. 

Substance  P   is  a  peptide  synthesized  by  the  nociceptors  themselves. 
Activation of one branch of a nociceptor axon can lead to the secretion of 
substance P by the other branches of that axon in the neighboring skin. 
Substance  P  causes  vasodilation  (swelling  of  the  blood  capillaries)  and 
the release of histamine from mast cells. Sensitization of other nocicep-
tors around the site of injury by substance P is one cause of secondary 
hyperalgesia. 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   440
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   440

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

441

Promotes
swelling

Bradykinin

Mast cell

Substance P

Prostaglandins

K+

Histamine

Noxious
signal

Dorsal root
ganglion

Noxious
signal

Blood 
vessel

Substance P

▲ FIGURE 12.25
Peripheral chemical mediators of pain and hyperalgesia.

Spinal cord

 CNS mechanisms also contribute to secondary hyperalgesia. Following 
injury, the activation of mechanoreceptive A ␤  axons by light touch can 
evoke pain. Thus, another mechanism of hyperalgesia involves cross-talk 
between the touch and pain pathways in the spinal cord. 

 Itch 
 Itch is deﬁ ned as a disagreeable sensation that induces a desire or a re-
ﬂ ex to scratch. Itch and the scratching it evokes can serve as a natural 
defense against parasites and plant toxins on the skin and scalp. Itch is 
usually a brief and minor annoyance. It can also become a chronic and 
seriously  debilitating  condition.  Chronic  itch  may  be  caused  by  a  wide 
variety of skin conditions such as allergic reactions, infections, infesta-
tions, and psoriasis; it can also be triggered by non-skin disorders such 
as  cancers,  iron  deﬁ ciency,  hyperthyroidism,  liver  disease,  stress,  and 
psychiatric  conditions.  Imagine  that  your  worst  itch  has  spread  across 
most of your body and persists through every waking minute. The need to 
scratch can be unrelenting and irresistible. Chronic itch can be as dread-
ful  as  chronic  pain,  and  it  is  notoriously  difﬁ cult  to  treat  with  current 
drugs and therapies. 

 Itch has always been a hard sensation to categorize. Although pain and 
itch  are  unmistakably  distinct,  they  also  have  many  similarities.  Both 
are  mediated  by  thin  sensory  axons,  although  the  axons  carrying  pain 
signals seem to be different from those triggering itch. Both can be trig-
gered by various types of stimuli, including chemicals and touch. Some 
of the drugs and compounds that regulate pain can also trigger itch, and 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   441
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   441

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

442

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

some signaling molecules transduce both sensations. Pain and itch also 
interact. For example, pain can suppress itch; this is why we sometimes 
aggressively scratch an itchy patch of skin. 

 Some  types  of  itch  are  triggered  by  speciﬁ c  molecules  and  neural 
circuits. The very smallest C ﬁ bers (conduction velocity of 0.5 m/sec or 
less) are selectively responsive to histamine, the natural itch-producing 
 substance that is released by mast cells in the skin during  inﬂ ammation 
(see Figure 12.25). Histamine mediates itch by binding to histamine re-
ceptors, which then activate TRPV1 channels; surprisingly, these are the 
same types of TRPV1 channels that are stimulated by capsaicin and high 
temperature (see Box 12.5). Antihistamines—drugs that antagonize his-
tamine  receptors—can  suppress  this  kind  of  itch.  Not  all  itch  is  medi-
ated by histamine, however. Itch can also be triggered by a wide variety 
of endogenous and exogenous substances, and thin itch-mediating axons 
seem to express a large number of other itch-producing types of receptors, 
signaling molecules, and membrane channels. 

 Many things about itch remain mysterious. It is not clear whether there 
are different types of itch-producing axons. The central circuits involved 
in itch are also poorly understood. One fascinating study implicated cer-
tain peptide neurotransmitters in speciﬁ c itch-producing pathways in the 
spinal cord. If speciﬁ c signaling molecules and receptors mediating itch 
can be identiﬁ ed and understood, it may be possible to develop effective 
and selective drugs to treat chronic itch without affecting pain and other 
somatic sensory processes. 

 Primary Afferents and Spinal Mechanisms 
 A ␦  and C ﬁ bers bring information to the CNS at different rates because 
of differences in their action potential conduction velocities. Accordingly, 
the  activation  of  skin  nociceptors  produces  two  distinct  perceptions  of 
pain: a fast, sharp,  ﬁ rst pain  followed by a duller, longer lasting  second 
pain . First pain is caused by the activation of A ␦  ﬁ bers; second pain is 
caused by the activation of C ﬁ bers (Figure 12.26). 

 Like  the  A ␤   mechanosensory  ﬁ bers,  the  small-diameter  ﬁ bers  have 
their cell bodies in the segmental dorsal root ganglia, and they enter the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The ﬁ bers branch immediately, travel a 
short distance up and down the spinal cord in a region called the  zone of 
Lissauer , and then synapse on cells in the outer part of the dorsal horn in 
a region known as the  substantia gelatinosa  (Figure 12.27). 

 The neurotransmitter of the pain afferents is glutamate; however, as 
mentioned previously, these neurons also contain the peptide substance P 

Aδ fiber

C fiber

y
t
i
s
n
e

t

n

i
 

i

n
a
P

First pain

Second pain

Zone of
Lissauer

To brain

Substantia gelatinosa

Time

Noxious
stimulus

▲ FIGURE 12.26
First and second pain. The first pain 
sensation registered by noxious 
 stimulation is mediated by fast A␦ ax-
ons. The second, longer lasting pain 
sensation is mediated by slow C fibers.

▲ FIGURE 12.27
Spinal connections of nociceptive axons.

Dorsal root

C fiber

Ventral root

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   442
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   442

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

443

(Figure 12.28). Substance P is contained within storage granules in the 
axon  terminals  (see  Chapter  5)  and  can  be  released  by  high-frequency 
trains of action potentials. Recent experiments have shown that synaptic 
transmission mediated by substance P is required to experience moderate 
to intense pain. 

 It is interesting to note that nociceptor axons from the viscera enter 
the spinal cord by the same route as the cutaneous nociceptors. Within 
the spinal cord, there is substantial mixing of information from these two 
sources of input (Figure 12.29). This cross-talk gives rise to the phenom-
enon of  referred pain , where visceral nociceptor activation is perceived 
as  a  cutaneous  sensation.  The  classic  example  of  referred  pain  is  an-
gina, occurring when the heart fails to receive sufﬁ cient oxygen. Patients 
often localize the pain of angina to the upper chest wall and the left arm. 
Another common example is the pain associated with appendicitis, which 
in its early stages is referred to the abdominal wall around the navel. 

 Ascending Pain Pathways 
 Let’s  brieﬂ y  highlight  the  differences  we’ve  encountered  between  the 
touch and pain pathways. First, they differ with respect to their nerve 
endings in the skin. The touch pathway is characterized by specialized 
structures  in  the  skin;  the  pain  pathway  has  only  free  nerve  endings. 
Second, they differ with respect to the diameter of their axons. The touch 
pathway  is  swift,  using  fat,  myelinated  A ␤   ﬁ bers;  the  pain  pathway  is 
slow, using thin, lightly myelinated A ␦  ﬁ bers and unmyelinated C ﬁ bers. 
Third,  they  differ  with  respect  to  their  connections  in  the  spinal  cord. 
Branches of the A ␤  axons terminate in the deep dorsal horn; the A ␦  and 
C ﬁ bers branch, run within the zone of Lissauer, and terminate within 
the substantia gelatinosa. As we will now see, the two pathways also dif-
fer substantially in the way they transmit information to the brain. 

▲ FIGURE 12.28
Immunocytochemical localization of 
substance P in the spinal cord. 
Arrows point to strong concentrations of 
substance P in the substantia gelatinosa. 
(Source: Mantyh et al., 1997.)

Skin

Viscera

Dorsal root
ganglion

To brain

Primary afferent
axons

Sympathetic
ganglion of
the ANS

Primary afferent
axon

▲ FIGURE 12.29
The convergence of nociceptor input from the viscera and the skin.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   443
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   443

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

444

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The  Spinothalamic  Pain  Pathway.  Information  about  pain  (as  well  as 
temperature) in the body is conveyed from the spinal cord to the brain via 
the  spinothalamic pathway . Unlike the dorsal column–medial lemnis-
cal pathway, the axons of the second-order neurons  immediately decussate  
and  ascend  through  the   spinothalamic  tract   running  along  the  ventral 
surface of the spinal cord (compare Figures 12.14 and 12.27). As the name 
implies, the spinothalamic ﬁ bers project up the spinal cord and through 
the medulla, pons, and midbrain without synapsing, until they reach the 
thalamus (Figure 12.30). As the spinothalamic axons journey through the 
brain stem, they eventually come to lie alongside the medial lemniscus, 
but the two groups of axons remain distinct from each other. 

 Figure 12.31 summarizes the different ascending pathways for touch 
and pain information. Notice that information about touch ascends  ipsi-
laterally , while information about pain (and temperature) ascends  contra-
laterally . This organization can lead to a curious, but predictable, group of 
deﬁ cits when the nervous system is impaired. For example, if half of the 
spinal cord is damaged, certain deﬁ cits of mechanosensitivity occur on the 

Primary
somatosensory
cortex (S1)

3

2

1

3

Thalamus
(intralaminar
and VP nuclei)

Small dorsal
root axons

2

Dorsal
column

Medulla

Spinothalamic
tract

1

Spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 12.30
The spinothalamic pathway.  This is the 
major route by which pain and temperature 
information ascend to the cerebral cortex.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   444
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   444

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

445

Dorsal column–
medial lemniscal

pathway

Medial
lemniscus

Dorsal
column
nuclei

Dorsal
column

Dorsal
root axon
(Aα, Aβ, Aδ)

Spinothalamic

pathway

Cerebral
cortex

Thalamus

Medulla

Spinal cord

Lateral
spinothalamic
tract

Dorsal
root axon
(Aδ, C)

Midline

Midline

Touch, vibration, two-point 
discrimination, proprioception

Pain, temperature,

some touch

▲ FIGURE 12.31
An overview of the two major ascending pathways of somatic sensation.

same side as the spinal cord damage: insensitivity to light touch, the vibra-
tions of a tuning fork on the skin, the position of a limb. On the other hand, 
deﬁ cits in pain and temperature sensitivity will show up on the side of the 
body  opposite  the cord damage. Other signs, such as motor deﬁ ciency and 
the exact map of sensory deﬁ cits, give additional clues about the site of spi-
nal cord damage. For example, movements will be impaired on the ipsilat-
eral side. The constellation of sensory and motor signs following damage to 
one side of the spinal cord is called  Brown–Séquard syndrome . 

 The Trigeminal Pain Pathway. Pain (and temperature) information from 
the face and head takes a path to the thalamus that is analogous to the 
spinal path. The small-diameter ﬁ bers in the trigeminal nerve synapse 
ﬁ rst on second-order sensory neurons in the  spinal trigeminal nucleus  of 
the brain stem. The axons of these cells cross and ascend to the thalamus 
in the  trigeminal lemniscus . 

 In  addition  to  the  spinothalamic  and  trigeminothalamic  pathways, 
other closely related pain (and temperature) pathways send axons into a 
variety of structures at all levels of the brain stem, before they reach the 
thalamus. Some of these pathways are particularly important in gener-
ating sensations of slow, burning, agonizing pain, while others trigger a 
more general state of behavioral arousal and alertness. 

 The Thalamus and Cortex. The spinothalamic tract and trigeminal lem-
niscal axons synapse over a wider region of the thalamus than those of 
the medial lemniscus. Some of the axons terminate in the VP nucleus, just 
as the medial lemniscal axons do, but the touch and pain systems  still  
remain  segregated  there  by  occupying  separate  regions  of  the  nucleus. 
Other spinothalamic axons end in the small  intralaminar nuclei  of the 
thalamus (Figure 12.32). From the thalamus, pain and temperature in-
formation is projected to various areas of the cerebral cortex. As in the 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   445
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   445

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

446

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 12.32
Somatic sensory nuclei of the 
thalamus. In addition to the VP 
nucleus, the intralaminar nuclei 
 relay nociceptive information to a 
large expanse of the cerebral 
 cortex.

Anterior

Intralaminar nuclei

VP nucleus

Posterior

thalamus, this pathway covers a much wider territory than the cortical 
connections of the dorsal column–medial lemniscal pathway. 

 The Regulation of Pain 
 The  perception  of  pain  is  highly  variable.  Depending  on  the  concur-
rent  level  of  nonpainful  sensory  input  and  the  behavioral  context,  the 
same  level  of  nociceptor  activity  can  produce  more  pain  or  less  pain. 
Understanding  this  modulation  of  pain  is  of  great  importance  because 
it may offer new strategies for the treatment of chronic pain, a condition 
that afﬂ icts up to 20% of the adult population. 

 Afferent  Regulation.  We’ve  already  seen  that  light  touch  can  evoke  pain 
via the mechanisms of hyperalgesia. However, pain evoked by activity in 
nociceptors can also be  reduced  by simultaneous activity in low-threshold 
mechanoreceptors (A ␤  ﬁ bers). Presumably, this is why it feels good to rub 
the skin around your shin when you bruise it. This may also explain an elec-
trical treatment for some kinds of chronic, intractable pain. Wires are taped 
to the skin surface, and pain is suppressed when the patient simply turns on 
an electrical stimulator designed to activate large-diameter sensory axons. 
 In the 1960s, Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall, then working at MIT, 
proposed a hypothesis to explain these phenomena. Their  gate theory of 
pain  suggests that certain neurons of the dorsal horns, which project an 
axon up the spinothalamic tract, are excited by both large-diameter sen-
sory axons and unmyelinated pain axons. The projection neuron is also 
inhibited by an interneuron, and the interneuron is both  excited  by the 
large sensory axon and  inhibited  by the pain axon (Figure 12.33). By this 
arrangement, activity in the pain axon alone maximally excites the pro-
jection neuron, allowing nociceptive signals to rise to the brain. However, 
if the large mechanoreceptive axon ﬁ res concurrently, it activates the in-
terneuron and suppresses nociceptive signals. 

 Descending  Regulation.  Stories  abound  of  soldiers,  athletes,  and  tor-
ture victims who sustained horrible injuries but apparently felt no pain. 
Strong  emotion,  stress,  or  stoic  determination  can  powerfully  suppress 
feelings of pain. Several brain regions have been implicated in pain sup-
pression (Figure 12.34). One is a zone of neurons in the midbrain called 
the periventricular and  periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) . Electrical 
stimulation of the PAG can cause a profound analgesia that has some-
times been exploited clinically. 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   446
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   446

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

447

Spinal cord

Dorsal horn

Aα or Aβ axon
(non-nociceptive
mechanoreceptors)

To dorsal column

–

–

+

+

+

C fiber
(nociceptive
signals)

Interneuron

Projection 
neuron

To spinothalamic tract

▲ FIGURE 12.33
Melzack’s and Wall’s gate theory of pain.  The relay of nociceptive signals by 
the projection neuron is gated by the activity of an inhibitory interneuron. Activity 
in the non-nociceptive mechanoreceptor can suppress, or close the “gate” on, 
nociceptive signals before they can proceed to the spinothalamic tract. The ⫹ 
signs indicate excitatory synapses and the ⫺ signs indicate inhibitory synapses.

3

2

1

PAG

Midbrain

3

Medulla

2

Raphe nuclei

Spinal cord

1

Dorsal horn

▲ FIGURE 12.34
Descending pain-control pathways. A variety 
of brain structures, many of which are affected 
by behavioral state, can influence activity within 
the periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) of the mid-
brain. The PAG can influence the raphe nuclei of 
the medulla, which in turn can modulate the flow 
of nociceptive information through the dorsal 
horns of the spinal cord.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   447
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   447

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

448

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The PAG normally receives input from several brain structures, many 
of them appropriate for transmitting signals related to emotional status. 
PAG neurons send descending axons into various midline regions of the 
medulla, particularly to the  raphe nuclei  (which use the  neurotransmitter 
serotonin). These medullary neurons in turn project axons down to the 
dorsal  horns  of  the  spinal  cord,  where  they  can  effectively  depress  the 
activity of nociceptive neurons. 

 The  Endogenous  Opioids.  Opium  was  probably  known  to  the  ancient 
Sumerians  around  4000  BCE.  Their  pictograph  for  the  poppy  roughly 
translates  to  “joy  plant.”  By  the  seventeenth  century,  the  therapeutic 
value  of  opium  was  undisputed.  Opium,  its  active  narcotic  ingredients, 
and their analogues—including morphine, codeine, and heroin—are used 
and abused widely today, in most cultures of the world. These drugs, and 
others  with  similar  actions,  are  called   opioids ,  and  they  produce  pro-
found analgesia when taken systemically (see Chapter 6). They can also 
produce  mood  changes,  drowsiness,  mental  clouding,  nausea,  vomiting, 
and constipation. The 1970s brought the stunning discoveries that opi-
oids act by binding tightly and speciﬁ cally to several types of  opioid re-
ceptors  in the brain, and that the brain itself manufactures endogenous 
morphine-like substances, collectively called  endorphins  (see Box 6.1).
Endorphins are relatively small proteins, or peptides. 

 Endorphins and their receptors are distributed widely in the CNS, but 
they are particularly concentrated in areas that process or modulate noci-
ceptive information. Small injections of morphine or endorphins into the 
PAG, the raphe nuclei, or the dorsal horn can produce analgesia. Because 
this effect is prevented by administering the speciﬁ c blocker of opioid re-
ceptors,  naloxone,  the injected drugs must have acted by binding to opi-
oid receptors in those areas. Naloxone can also block the analgesic effects 
induced by electrically stimulating these areas. At the cellular level, en-
dorphins  exert  multiple  effects  that  include  suppressing  the  release  of 
glutamate from presynaptic terminals and inhibiting neurons by hyper-
polarizing their postsynaptic membranes. In general, extensive systems of 
endorphin-containing neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem prevent 
the passage of nociceptive signals through the dorsal horn and into higher 
levels of the brain where the perception of pain is generated (Box 12.6). 

BOX 12.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Pain and the Placebo Effect

To test the efﬁ cacy of a new drug, clinical trials are often 

conducted in which one group of subjects receives the drug 
and  the  other  receives  an  inert  substance.  Both  groups 
of  subjects  may  believe  they  have  been  given  the  drug. 
Surprisingly, the inert substance is often reported to have the 
effect that patients are told to expect from the drug. The term 
placebo  is  used  to  describe  such  substances  (the  word  is 
from the Latin meaning, “I shall please”), and the phenom-
enon is called the placebo effect.

Placebos  can  be  highly  effective  analgesics.  A  majority 
of  patients  suffering  from  postoperative  pain  have  reported 

 getting relief from an injection of sterile saline! Does this mean 
that these patients have only imagined their pain? Not at all. 
The opioid receptor antagonist naloxone can block the anal-
gesic effect of the placebo, just as it antagonizes the effects 
of morphine, a true analgesic. Apparently, the belief that the 
treatment will work can be enough to cause activation of the 
endogenous pain-relief systems of the brain. The placebo ef-
fect is a likely explanation for the success of other treatments 
for pain, such as acupuncture, hypnosis, and, for children, a 
mother’s loving kiss.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   448
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   448

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

449

TEMPERATURE 
TEMPPERATTURE 

 As is the case for the sense of touch and pain, nonpainful temperature 
sensations originate from receptors in the skin (and elsewhere), and they 
depend on the neocortex for their conscious appreciation. Here, we brieﬂ y 
describe how this system is organized. 

 Thermoreceptors 
 Because the rate of chemical reactions depends on temperature, the func-
tioning of all cells is sensitive to temperature. However,   thermoreceptors
are  neurons  that  are  exquisitely  sensitive  to  temperature  because  of 
 speciﬁ c membrane mechanisms. For example, we can perceive changes 
in  our  average  skin  temperature  of  as  little  as  0.01°C.  Temperature-
sensitive neurons clustered in the hypothalamus and the spinal cord are 
important in the physiological responses that maintain stable body tem-
perature, but it is the thermoreceptors in the skin that apparently con-
tribute to our perception of temperature. 

 Temperature sensitivity is not spread uniformly across the skin. With 
a small cold or warm probe, you can map your skin’s sensitivity to tem-
perature changes. Some spots about 1 mm wide are especially sensitive 
to  either  hot or cold but not both. The fact that the locations of hot and 
cold sensitivity are different demonstrates that separate receptors encode 
them. Also, small areas of skin between the hot and cold spots are rela-
tively insensitive to temperature. 

 The sensitivity of a sensory neuron to a change in temperature depends 
on the type of ion channels the neuron expresses. Discovery of the channels 
responsive to painful increases in temperature above 43°C (see Box 12.5) led 
researchers to wonder if other, closely related channels might be tuned to 
sense other temperature ranges. Just as the active ingredient in hot peppers 
was used to identify the “hot” receptor protein, called TRPV1, the active in-
gredient in mint was used to identify a “cold” receptor. Menthol, which pro-
duces a sensation of cold, was found to stimulate a receptor, called TRPM8, 
which is also activated by nonpainful decreases in temperature below 25°C. 
 We now understand that there are six distinct TRP channels in thermo-
receptors that confer different temperature sensitivities (Figure 12.35). 
As a rule, each thermoreceptive neuron appears to express only a single 
type of channel, thus explaining how different regions of skin can show 
distinctly different sensitivities to temperature. An exception appears to 
be some cold receptors that also express TRPV1 and are therefore also 
sensitive to increases in temperature above 43°C. If such heat is applied 
to wide areas of skin, it is usually painful, but if the heat is restricted 
to small regions of skin innervated by a cold receptor, it can produce a 
paradoxical  feeling  of  cold.  This  effect  emphasizes  an  important  point: 
The CNS does not know  what  kind of stimulus (in this case, heat) caused 
the receptor to ﬁ re, but it continues to interpret all activity from its cold 
receptor as a response to cold. 

 As  with  mechanoreceptors,  the  responses  of  thermoreceptors  adapt 
during long-duration stimuli. Figure 12.36 shows that a sudden drop in 
skin temperature causes a cold receptor to ﬁ re strongly, while it silences 
a warm receptor. After a few seconds at 32°C, however, the cold receptor 
slows its ﬁ ring (but still ﬁ res faster than it did at 38°C), while the warm 
receptor  speeds  up  slightly.  Notice  that  a  return  to  the  original  warm 
skin temperature causes opposite responses—transient silence of the cold 
receptor and a burst of activity in the warm receptor—before both return 
to their steady, adapted rates. Thus, the differences between the response 
rates of warm and cold receptors are greatest during, and shortly after, 

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   449
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   449

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

450

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

TRPA1

TRPM8

TRPV4

TRPV3

TRPV1

TRPV2

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
l
e
n
n
a
h
C

(a)

0

(b)

▲ FIGURE 12.35
Thermoreceptor TRP channels tuned 
to detect different temperatures. 
(a) The arrangement of the known ther-
mosensitive TRP channel protein 
 molecules in the neuronal membrane. 
TRPM8 and TRPVI are responsive to 
menthol and capsaicin, respectively. 
(b) This graph plots the activation of the 
various TRP channels as a function of 
temperature. (Source: Adapted from 
Patapoutian, et al., 2003, Fig. 3.)

TRPM8

TRPV4

TRPA1

10

30
20
Temperature (°C)

TRPV3

TRPV1 TRPV2

40

50

temperature changes. Our perceptions of temperature often reﬂ ect these 
skin receptor responses. 

 Try a simple experiment. Fill two buckets with tap water, one cold and 
one hot (but not painfully hot). Then plunge your right hand for one min-
ute into each of them in turn. Notice the striking sensations of hot and 
cold that occur with each change, but also notice how transient the sensa-
tions are. With thermoreception, as with most other sensory systems, it 
is the sudden  change  in the quality of a stimulus that generates the most 
intense neural and perceptual responses. 

38

38

Skin
temperature (°C)

32

Cold
receptor

Warm
receptor

5 sec

▲ FIGURE 12.36
Adaptations of thermoreceptors.  The responses of cold and warm receptors to 
a step reduction in skin temperature are shown. Both receptors are most respon-
sive to sudden changes in temperature, but they adapt over several seconds.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   450
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   450

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER 12    THE SOMATIC SENSORY SYSTEM

451

 The Temperature Pathway 
 At this point, you may be relieved to learn that the organization of the 
temperature  pathway  is  virtually  identical  to  that  of  the  pain  pathway 
already  described.  Cold  receptors  are  coupled  to  A ␦   and  C  ﬁ bers,  while 
warm  receptors  are  coupled  only  to  C  ﬁ bers.  As  we  learned  previously, 
small-diameter axons synapse within the substantia gelatinosa of the dor-
sal horn. The axons of second-order neurons immediately decussate and 
ascend in the contralateral spinothalamic tract (see Figure 12.30). Thus, 
if the spinal cord is transected on one side, there will be a loss of tempera-
ture sensitivity (as well as pain) on the opposite side of the body, speciﬁ -
cally in those regions of skin innervated by spinal segments below the cut. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 This  concludes  our  discussion  of  the  sensory  systems.  Although  each  one 
has evolved to be the brain’s interface with a different form of environmen-
tal energy, the systems are strikingly similar in organization and function. 
Different types of somatic sensory information are necessarily kept separate 
in the spinal nerves because each axon is connected to only one type of sen-
sory receptor ending. Segregation of sensory types continues within the spi-
nal cord and is largely maintained all the way to the cerebral cortex. In this 
way, the somatic sensory system repeats a theme common throughout the 
nervous system: Several ﬂ ows of related, but distinct, information are passed 
in parallel through a series of neural structures. The mixing of these streams 
occurs along the way, but only judiciously, until higher levels of processing 
are reached in the cerebral cortex. We saw other examples of parallel pro-
cessing of sensory information in the chemical senses, vision, and audition. 
 Exactly how the parallel streams of sensory data are melded into per-
ception, images, ideas, and memories remains the Holy Grail of neurosci-
ence. Thus, the perception of any handled object involves the seamless 
coordination of all facets of somatic sensory information. The bird in hand 
is rounded, warm, soft, and light in weight; its heartbeat ﬂ utters against 
your ﬁ ngertips; its claws scratch; and its textured wings brush against 
your palm. Somehow, your brain knows it’s a bird, even without looking 
or listening, and would never mistake it for a toad. In the chapters that 
follow, we describe how the brain begins to use sensory information to 
plan and coordinate movement. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
somatic sensation (p. 416)

Touch
mechanoreceptors (p. 417)
Pacinian corpuscle (p. 417)
spinal segments (p. 423)
dermatome (p. 424)
dorsal column–medial lemniscal 

pathway (p. 426)

dorsal column (p. 428)
dorsal column nuclei (p. 428)
medial lemniscus (p. 428)

ventral posterior (VP) nucleus 

primary somatosensory cortex 

(p. 428)

(S1) (p. 428)

trigeminal nerves (p. 428)
posterior parietal cortex (p. 430)
somatotopy (p. 432)
agnosia (p. 437)
neglect syndrome (p. 437)

Pain
nociceptors (p. 437)
hyperalgesia (p. 439)

inﬂ ammation (p. 439)
analgesia (p. 440)
substantia gelatinosa (p. 442)
referred pain (p. 443)
spinothalamic pathway (p. 444)
periaqueductal gray matter 

(PAG) (p. 446)

opioids (p. 448)
opioid receptors (p. 448)
endorphins (p. 448)

Temperature
thermoreceptors (p. 449)

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   451
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   451

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

452

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Imagine rubbing your ﬁ ngertips across a pane of smooth glass and then across a brick. What 
kinds of skin receptors help you distinguish the two surfaces? As far as your somatic sensory 
system is concerned, what is different about the two surfaces?

2.  What purpose is served by the encapsulations around some sensory nerve endings in the skin?
3.  If someone tossed you a hot potato and you caught it, which information would reach your CNS 

ﬁ rst: the news that the potato was hot or that it was relatively smooth? Why?

4.  At what levels of the nervous system are all types of somatic sensory information represented on 
the contralateral side: the spinal cord, the medulla, the pons, the midbrain, the thalamus, and 
the cortex?

5.  What lobe of the cortex contains the main somatic sensory areas? Where are these areas relative 

to the main visual and auditory areas?

6.  Where within the body can pain be modulated, and what causes its modulation?
7.  Where in the CNS does information about touch, shape, temperature, and pain converge?
8.  Imagine this experiment: Fill two buckets with water, one relatively cold and one hot. Fill a third 
bucket with water of an intermediate, lukewarm temperature. Put your left hand into the hot 
water, your right hand into the cold, and wait one minute. Now quickly plunge both hands into 
the lukewarm water. Try to predict what sensations of temperature you will feel in each hand. 
Will they feel the same? Why?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Abraira VE, Ginty DD. 2013. The sensory neu-

rons of touch. Neuron 79:618–639.

Fain GL. 2003. Sensory Transduction. 

Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.

Braz J, Solorzano C, Wang X, Basbaum AI. 2014. 

Transmitting pain and itch messages: a con-
temporary view of the spinal cord circuits that 
generate gate control. Neuron 82:522–536.
Di Noto PM, Newman L, Wall S, Einstein G. 

2013. The hermunculus: what is known about 
the representation of the female body in the 
brain? Cerebral Cortex 23:1005–1013.
Eijkelkamp N, Quick K, Wood JN. 2013. 
Transient receptor potential channels 
and mechanosensation. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 36:519–546.

Hsiao S. 2008. Central mechanisms of tac-

tile shape perception. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 18:418–424.

McGlone F, Wessberg J, Olausson H. 2014. 

Discriminative and affective touch: sensing 
and feeling. Neuron 82:737–755.

Vallbo Å. 1995. Single-afferent neurons and 

somatic sensation in humans. In The Cognitive 
Neurosciences, ed. Gazzaniga M. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, pp. 237–251.

415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   452
415–452_Bear_12_revised_final.indd   452

12/20/14   5:08 AM
12/20/14   5:08 AM

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Spinal Control of 
Movement

  INTRODUCTION 
 THE SOMATIC MOTOR SYSTEM 
 THE LOWER MOTOR NEURON 

 The Segmental Organization of Lower Motor Neurons 
 Alpha Motor Neurons 

 Graded Control of Muscle Contraction by Alpha Motor Neurons 
 Inputs to Alpha Motor Neurons 

 Types of Motor Units 

 Neuromuscular Matchmaking 
  BOX 13.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: ALS: Glutamate, Genes, and Gehrig 

 EXCITATION–CONTRACTION COUPLING 

  BOX 13.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Myasthenia Gravis 

 Muscle Fiber Structure 
 The Molecular Basis of Muscle Contraction 

  BOX 13.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy 

 SPINAL CONTROL OF MOTOR UNITS 

 Proprioception from Muscle Spindles 

 The Stretch Reﬂ ex 
  BOX 13.4   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Nerve Regeneration Does Not Ensure Full 
Recovery, by Timothy C. Cope 

 Gamma Motor Neurons 
 Proprioception from Golgi Tendon Organs 

 Proprioception from the Joints 

 Spinal Interneurons 

 Inhibitory Input 
 Excitatory Input 

 The Generation of Spinal Motor Programs for Walking 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   453
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   453

45344545454455445444 333333333
453

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

454

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 We are now ready to turn our attention to the system that actually gives 
rise to behavior. The  motor system  consists of all our muscles and the 
neurons that control them. The importance of the motor system was sum-
marized by the pioneering English neurophysiologist Charles Sherrington 
in the Linacre lecture of 1924: “To move things is all that mankind can 
do . . . for such the sole executant is muscle, whether in whispering a syl-
lable or in felling a forest.” A moment’s thought will convince you that the 
motor  system  is  also  incredibly  complex.  Behavior  requires  the  coordi-
nated action of various combinations of almost 700 muscles in a changing 
and often unpredictable environment. 

 Have you heard the expression “running around like a chicken with its 
head cut off”? It comes from the observation that some complex patterns 
of behavior (running around a barnyard, at least brieﬂ y) can be generated 
without the participation of the brain. There is a considerable amount of 
circuitry within the spinal cord for the coordinated control of movements, 
particularly  stereotyped  (repetitive)  ones  such  as  those  associated  with 
locomotion. This point was established early in this century by Sherrington 
and his English contemporary Thomas Graham Brown, who showed that 
rhythmic  movements  could  be  elicited  in  the  hind  legs  of  cats  and  dogs 
long after their spinal cords had been severed from the rest of the central 
nervous system. Today’s view is that the spinal cord contains certain  motor 
programs  for the generation of coordinated movements, and that these pro-
grams are accessed, executed, and modiﬁ ed by descending commands from 
the brain. Thus, motor control can be divided into two parts: (1) the spinal 
cord’s command and control of coordinated muscle contraction, and (2) the 
brain’s command and control of the motor programs in the spinal cord. 

 In this chapter, we will explore the peripheral somatic motor system: 
the joints, skeletal muscles, and spinal motor neurons and interneurons, 
and how they communicate with each other. In Chapter 14, we will take 
a look at how the brain inﬂ uences the activity of the spinal cord. 

 THE SOMATIC MOTOR SYSTEM 
THE SSOMAATIC MOTOR SYSTEEM 

 Based on their appearance under the microscope, the muscles in the body 
can be described according to two broad categories: striated and smooth. 
But they are also distinct in other ways.  Smooth muscle  lines the diges-
tive tract, arteries, and related structures and is innervated by nerve ﬁ bers 
from the autonomic nervous system (see Chapter 15). Smooth muscle plays 
a role in peristalsis (the movement of material through the intestines) and 
the control of blood pressure and blood ﬂ ow. There are two types of  striated 
muscle : cardiac and skeletal.  Cardiac muscle  is heart muscle, which con-
tracts rhythmically even in the absence of any innervation. Innervation of 
the heart from the autonomic nervous system (ANS) functions to accelerate 
or slow down the heart rate. (Recall Otto Loewi’s experiment in Chapter 5.) 
  Skeletal muscle  constitutes the bulk of the muscle mass of the body 
and functions to move bones around joints, to move the eyes within the 
head, to inhale and exhale, to control facial expression, and to produce 
speech.  Each  skeletal  muscle  is  enclosed  in  a  connective  tissue  sheath 
that, at the ends of the muscle, forms the tendons. Within each muscle 
are hundreds of  muscle ﬁ bers,  the cells of skeletal muscle, and each ﬁ ber 
is innervated by a single axon branch from the central nervous system 
(CNS) (Figure 13.1). Because skeletal muscle is derived embryologically 
from 33 paired somites (see Chapter 7), these muscles and the parts of 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   454
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   454

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

455

Muscle
fibers

▲ FIGURE 13.1
The structure of skeletal muscle. Each 
muscle fiber is innervated by a single 
axon.

Axons from CNS

Muscle
(biceps)

the nervous system that control them are collectively called the  somatic 
motor system.  We focus our attention on this system here because it is 
under voluntary control and it generates behavior. (The visceral motor 
system of the ANS will be discussed in Chapter 15.) 

 Consider the elbow joint (Figure 13.2). This joint is formed where the 
humerus, the upper arm bone, is bound by ﬁ brous ligaments to the radius 
and ulna, the bones of the lower arm. The joint functions like a hinge on 
a pocket knife. Movement in the direction that closes the knife is called 
 ﬂ exion ,  and  movement  in  the  direction  that  opens  the  knife  is  called 
 extension . Note that muscles only pull on a joint; they cannot push. The 
major muscle that causes ﬂ exion is the brachialis, whose tendons insert 

Humerus

Biceps brachii

Flexion

Brachialis

Radius

Ulna

▲ FIGURE 13.2
Major muscles of the elbow joint. The biceps 
and triceps are antagonistic muscles. Contrac-
tion of the biceps causes flexion of the elbow, 
and contraction of the triceps causes extension.

Extension

Triceps
brachii

Anconeus

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   455
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   455

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

456

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Extensor

Flexor #1

Flexor #2

Flexion

▲ FIGURE 13.3
How contracting muscles flex or extend a joint. Contractions of the flexors pull 
the right end of the bone upward (flexion). Contraction of the extensor pulls the 
left end of the bone upward, causing the right end to pivot downward (extension). 
Flexor #1 and flexor #2 are synergists. Flexors #1 and #2 are antagonist muscles 
of the extensor.

Extension

into the humerus at one end and into the ulna at the other. Two other 
muscles cause ﬂ exion at this joint, the biceps brachii and the coracobra-
chialis (which lies under the biceps). Together, these muscles are called 
ﬂ exors  of the elbow joint, and, because the three muscles all work to-
gether,  they  are  called   synergists   of  one  another.  The  two  synergistic 
muscles  that  cause  extension  of  the  elbow  joint  are  the  triceps  brachii 
and the anconeus; these two muscles are called  extensors.  Because the 
ﬂ exors  and  extensors  pull  on  the  joint  in  opposite  directions,  they  are 
called  antagonists  to one another. The relationships between these mus-
cles and bones, and the forces and movements they generate, are shown 
schematically in Figure 13.3. Even the simple ﬂ exion of the elbow joint 
requires the coordinated contraction of the synergistic ﬂ exor muscles  and
the relaxation of the antagonistic extensor muscles. Relaxing the antago-
nists allows movements to be faster and more efﬁ cient because the mus-
cles are not working against one another. 

 Other terms to note about somatic musculature refer to the location of 
the joints they act on. The muscles that are responsible for movements of 
the trunk are called  axial muscles ; those that move the shoulder, elbow, 
pelvis, and knee are called  proximal  (or  girdle )  muscles ; and those that 
move the hands, feet, and digits (ﬁ ngers and toes) are called  distal mus-
cles.  The axial musculature is very important for maintaining posture, the 
proximal musculature is critical for locomotion, and the distal musculature, 
particularly of the hands, is specialized for the manipulation of objects. 

THE LOWER MOTOR NEURON 
THE LLOWEER MOTOR NEURONN 

 The somatic musculature is innervated by the somatic motor neurons in 
the ventral horn of the spinal cord (Figure 13.4). These cells are some-
times  called   lower  motor  neurons   to  distinguish  them  from  the  higher 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   456
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   456

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

457

Ventral
root

Mixed
spinal
nerve

Muscle
fiber

Ventral 
horn

Lower
motor
neurons

▲ FIGURE 13.4
Muscle innervation by lower motor neurons. The ventral horn of the spinal cord 
contains motor neurons that innervate skeletal muscle fibers.

order  upper motor neurons  of the brain that supply input to the spinal 
cord. Remember, only the lower motor neurons directly command muscle 
contraction. Sherrington called these neurons the  ﬁ nal common pathway  
for the control of behavior. 

 The Segmental Organization of Lower Motor Neurons 
 The axons of lower motor neurons bundle together to form ventral roots; 
each ventral root joins with a dorsal root to form a spinal nerve that exits 
the cord through the notches between vertebrae. Recall from Chapter 12 
that there are as many spinal nerves as there are notches between ver-
tebrae; in humans, this adds up to 30 on each side. Because they contain 
sensory and motor ﬁ bers, they are called  mixed spinal nerves.  The motor 
neurons that provide ﬁ bers to one spinal nerve are said to belong to a spi-
nal segment, named for the vertebra where the nerve originates. The seg-
ments are cervical (C) 1–8, thoracic (T) 1–12, lumbar (L) 1–5, and sacral 
(S) 1–5 (see Figure 12.11). 

 Skeletal muscles are not distributed evenly throughout the body, nor 
are lower motor neurons distributed evenly within the spinal cord. For 
example, innervation of the more than 50 muscles of the arm originates 
entirely from spinal segments C3–Tl. Thus, in this region of the spinal 
cord, the dorsal and ventral horns appear swollen to accommodate the 
large number of spinal interneurons and motor neurons that control the 
arm  musculature  (Figure  13.5).  Similarly,  spinal  segments  Ll–S3  have 
swollen dorsal and ventral horns because this is where the neurons con-
trolling the leg musculature reside. Thus, we can see that the motor neu-
rons that innervate distal and proximal musculature are found mainly 
in the cervical and lumbar–sacral segments of the spinal cord, whereas 
those innervating axial musculature are found at all levels. 

 The lower motor neurons are also distributed within the ventral horn 
at each spinal segment in a predictable way, depending on their function. 
The cells innervating the axial muscles are medial to those innervating 
the distal muscles, and the cells innervating ﬂ exors are dorsal to those 
innervating extensors (Figure 13.6). 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   457
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   457

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

458

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Medulla

Spinal cord

Cervical
enlargement
(C3–T1)

Lumbar
enlargement
(L1–S3)

Ventral
horn

Ventral
horn

Ventral
horn

▲ FIGURE 13.5
The distribution of motor neurons in the spinal cord. The cervical enlargement 
of the spinal cord contains the motor neurons that innervate the arm muscles. The 
lumbar enlargement contains the neurons that innervate the muscles of the leg.

 Alpha Motor Neurons 
 There are two categories of lower motor neurons of the spinal cord: alpha 
motor neurons and gamma motor neurons (the latter are discussed later 
in the chapter).  Alpha motor neurons  directly trigger the generation 
of force by muscles. One alpha motor neuron and all the muscle ﬁ bers 
it  innervates  collectively  make  up  the  elementary  component  of  motor 
control; Sherrington called it the  motor   unit . Muscle contraction results 
from the individual and combined actions of motor units. The collection 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   458
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   458

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

of alpha motor neurons that innervates a single muscle (e.g., the biceps 
brachii) is called a  motor neuron pool  (Figure 13.7). 

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

459

 Graded Control of Muscle Contraction by Alpha Motor Neurons. It is im-
portant to exert just the right amount of force during movements: Too much, 
and you’ll crush the egg you just picked up, while also wasting metabolic en-
ergy. Too little, and you may lose the swim race. Most of the movements we 
make, such as walking, talking, and writing, require only weak muscle con-
tractions. Now and then we need to jog, hop, or lift a pile of books, and stron-
ger contractions are necessary. We reserve the maximal contraction force of 
our muscles for rare events, such as competitive sprinting or scrambling up 
a tree to escape a charging bear. The nervous system uses several mecha-
nisms to control the force of muscle contraction in a ﬁ nely graded fashion. 

Ventral

horn

Dorsal

Flexors

Axial
muscles

Distal
muscles

Extensors

Ventral

Lateral

Medial

▲ FIGURE 13.6
The distribution of lower motor neu-
rons in the ventral horn. Motor neu-
rons controlling flexors lie dorsal to 
those controlling extensors. Motor neu-
rons controlling axial muscles lie medial 
to those controlling distal muscles.

 The ﬁ rst way the CNS controls muscle contraction is by varying the 
ﬁ ring rate of motor neurons. An alpha motor neuron communicates with 
a muscle ﬁ ber by releasing the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) at 
the neuromuscular junction, the specialized synapse between a nerve and 
a skeletal muscle (see Chapter 5). Because of the high reliability of neuro-
muscular transmission, the ACh released in response to one presynaptic 
action potential causes an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the 
muscle ﬁ ber (sometimes also called an  end-plate potential ) large enough 
to  trigger  one  postsynaptic  action  potential.  By  mechanisms  we  will 
discuss in a moment, a postsynaptic action potential causes a twitch—
a  rapid  sequence  of  contraction  and  relaxation—in  the  muscle  ﬁ ber.  A 
sustained contraction requires a continual barrage of action potentials. 
High-frequency presynaptic activity causes temporal summation of the 
postsynaptic responses, as it does for other types of synaptic transmis-
sion. Twitch summation increases the tension in the muscle ﬁ bers and 
smoothes the contraction (Figure 13.8). The rate of ﬁ ring of motor units is 
therefore one important way the CNS grades muscle contraction. 

 A second way the CNS grades muscle contraction is by recruiting ad-
ditional  synergistic  motor  units.  The  extra  tension  provided  by  the  re-
cruitment of an active motor unit depends on how many muscle ﬁ bers are 
in that unit. In the antigravity muscles of the leg (muscles that oppose 
the force of gravity when standing upright), each motor unit tends to be 
quite large, with an innervation ratio of over 1000 muscle ﬁ bers per sin-
gle alpha motor neuron. In contrast, the smaller muscles that control the 
movement of the ﬁ ngers and the rotation of the eyes are characterized by 
much smaller innervation ratios, as few as three muscle ﬁ bers per alpha 
motor neuron. In general, muscles with a large number of small motor 
units can be more ﬁ nely controlled by the CNS. 

 Most muscles have a range of motor unit sizes, and these motor units 
are usually recruited in the order of smallest ﬁ rst, largest last. This orderly 
recruitment explains why ﬁ ner control is possible when muscles are under 
light loads than when they are under greater loads. Small motor units have 
small alpha motor neurons, and large motor units have large alpha motor 
neurons. Thus, one way orderly recruitment occurs is that small neurons, 
as a consequence of the geometry and physiology of their soma and den-
drites, are more easily excited by signals descending from the brain. The 
idea that the orderly recruitment of motor neurons is due to variations in 
alpha motor neuron size is called the  size principle , ﬁ rst proposed in the 
late 1950s by Harvard University neurophysiologist Elwood Henneman. 

 Inputs  to  Alpha  Motor  Neurons.  Alpha  motor  neurons  excite  skeletal 
muscles. Therefore, to understand the control of muscles, we must under-
stand what regulates motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are controlled 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   459
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   459

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

460

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Alpha
motor
neuron

Muscle
fibers

(a)

Record motor
neuron activity

Measure muscle contraction

Motor
unit

(a)

Motor
neuron
pool

Muscle

(b)

▲ FIGURE 13.7
A motor unit and motor neuron 
pool. (a) A motor unit is an alpha motor 
neuron and all the muscle fibers it inner-
vates. (b) A motor neuron pool is all the 
alpha motor neurons that innervate one 
muscle.

Muscle contraction

5 Hz

Motor neuron activity

Action potentials recorded extracellularly

Time

20 Hz

e
c
r
o
F

e
c
r
o
F

e
c
r
o
F

e
c
r
o
F

Time

10 Hz

40 Hz

Input from spinal 
interneurons

Sensory input
from muscle
spindles

Input from
upper motor
neurons in 
the brain

Alpha motor
neuron

▲ FIGURE 13.9
An alpha motor neuron and its three 
sources of input.

Time

Time
(b)
▲ FIGURE 13.8
From muscle twitch to sustained contraction. (a) A single action potential in an 
alpha motor neuron causes the muscle fiber to twitch. (b) The summation of 
twitches causes a sustained contraction as the number and frequency of incom-
ing action potentials increase.

by synaptic inputs in the ventral horn.  There are only three major sources 
of  input  to  an  alpha  motor  neuron,   as  shown  in  Figure  13.9. The  ﬁ rst 
source is dorsal root ganglion cells with axons that innervate a special-
ized  sensory  apparatus  embedded  within  the  muscle  known  as  a   mus-
cle spindle . As we shall see, this input provides feedback about muscle 
length. The second source of input to an alpha motor neuron derives from 
upper motor neurons in the motor cortex and brain stem. This input is 
important for the initiation and control of voluntary movement and will 
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 14. The third and largest input 
to an alpha motor neuron derives from interneurons in the spinal cord. 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   460
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   460

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

461

This input may be excitatory or inhibitory and is part of the circuitry that 
generates the spinal motor programs. 

 Types of Motor Units 
 If you have ever eaten different parts of chicken, you know that not all 
muscle is the same; the leg has dark meat and the breast and wing have 
white meat. The different appearance, and taste, of the various muscles 
are due to the biochemistry of the constituent muscle ﬁ bers. The red (dark) 
muscle  ﬁ bers  are  characterized  by  a  large  number  of  mitochondria  and 
enzymes specialized for oxidative energy metabolism. These, sometimes 
called  slow (S) ﬁ bers , are relatively slow to contract but can sustain con-
traction for a long time without fatigue. They are typically found in the 
antigravity muscles of the leg and torso and in the ﬂ ight muscles of birds 
that ﬂ y (as opposed to domesticated chickens). In contrast, the pale (white) 
muscle  ﬁ bers  contain  fewer  mitochondria  and  rely  mainly  on  anaerobic 
(without  oxygen)  metabolism.  These  ﬁ bers,  sometimes  called   fast  (F) 
ﬁ bers , contract rapidly and powerfully, but they also fatigue more quickly 
than slow ﬁ bers. They are typical of muscles involved in escape reﬂ exes; 
for example, the jumping muscles of frogs and rabbits. In humans, the arm 
muscles contain a large number of white ﬁ bers. Fast ﬁ bers can be further 
divided into two subtypes:  Fatigue-resistant (FR) ﬁ bers  generate moder-
ately strong and fast contractions and are relatively resistant to fatigue; 
 fast fatigable (FF) ﬁ bers  generate the strongest, fastest contractions but 
are quickly exhausted when stimulated at high frequency for long periods. 
 Even though all three types of muscle ﬁ bers can (and usually do) co-
exist  in  a  given  muscle,  each  motor  unit  contains  muscle  ﬁ bers  of  only 
a single type. Thus, there is one type of  slow motor unit  that contains 
only slowly fatiguing red ﬁ bers, and there are two types of  fast motor 
units , each containing either FR or FF white ﬁ bers (Figure 13.10). Just 
as the muscle ﬁ bers of the three types of units differ, so do many of the 
properties of alpha motor neurons. For example, the motor neurons of the 
FF units are generally the biggest and have the largest diameter, fastest 
conducting axons; FR units have motor neurons and axons intermediate 
in size; and slow units have small-diameter, slowly conducting axons. The 
ﬁ ring properties of the three types of motor neuron also differ. Fast (FF) 
motor neurons tend to generate occasional high-frequency bursts of action 
potentials (30–60 impulses per second), whereas slow motor neurons are 
characterized by relatively steady, low-frequency activity (10–20 impulses 
per second). 

 Neuromuscular Matchmaking. The precise matching of particular motor 
neurons to particular muscle ﬁ bers raises an interesting question. Since 
we’ve been talking about chickens, let’s pose the question this way: Which 
came ﬁ rst, the muscle ﬁ ber or the motor neuron? Perhaps during early 
embryonic  development,  there  is  a  matching  of  the  appropriate  axons 
with the appropriate muscle ﬁ bers. Alternatively, we could imagine that 
the properties of the muscle are determined solely by the type of innerva-
tion it gets. If it receives a synaptic contact from a fast motor neuron, it 
becomes a fast ﬁ ber and vice versa for slow units. 

 John  Eccles  and  his  colleagues,  working  at  the  Australian  National 
University, addressed this question with an experiment in which the nor-
mal innervation of a fast muscle was removed and replaced with a nerve 
that normally innervated a slow muscle (Figure 13.11). This procedure 
resulted in the muscle’s acquiring slow properties, including not only the 
type  of  contraction  (slow,  fatigue-resistant)  but  also  a  switch  in  much 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   461
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   461

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

462

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

▲ FIGURE 13.10
Three types of motor units and their con-
tractile properties. (a) A single action po-
tential triggers contraction strengths of dif-
ferent force and time-course in each of the 
three types of motor units. (b) Repeated 
trains of action potentials at 40 Hz over 
many minutes lead to different rates of fa-
tigue in the three types of motor units. 
(Source: Adapted from Burke et al., 1973.)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

)
s
m
a
r
g
(
 
e
c
r
o
F

Fast fatigable

0

2

4

6

15

Fast fatigue-resistant

0

2

4

6

50

Slow

)
s
m
a
r
g
(
 
e
c
r
o
F

)
s
m
a
r
g
(
 
e
c
r
o
F

)
s
m
a
r
g
(
 
e
c
r
o
F

50

0

30

20

10

0

4

2

0

Fast fatigable

Fast
fatigue-
resistant

Slow

0

50 100 150 200 250 300

0

2

4

6

60

(a)

Time (msec)

(b)

Time (min)

of its underlying biochemistry. This change is referred to as a switch of 
muscle  phenotype —its physical characteristics—because the types of pro-
teins expressed by the muscle were altered by the new innervation. Work 
by Terje Lømo and his colleagues in Norway suggests that this switch in 
muscle phenotype can be induced simply by changing the activity in the 
motor neuron from a fast pattern (occasional bursts at 30–60 spikes per 
second)  to  a  slow  pattern  (steady  activity  at  10–20  spikes  per  second). 
These ﬁ ndings are particularly interesting because they raise the possi-
bility that  neurons  switch phenotype as a consequence of synaptic activity 
(experience), and that this may be a basis for learning and memory (see 
Chapters 24 and 25). 

Normal

innervation

Crossed

innervation

Alpha motor
neuron type:

Slow

Fast

Slow

Fast

▲  FIGURE 13.11
A crossed-innervation experiment. Forc-
ing slow motor neurons to innervate a fast 
muscle causes the muscle to switch to 
assume slow properties.

Muscle name:
Muscle type:

Soleus
Slow

Gastrocnemius

Fast

Soleus
Fast-like

Gastrocnemius

Slow-like

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   462
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   462

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

463

 Besides the alterations imposed by patterns of motor neuron activity, 
simply varying the absolute amount of activity can also change muscle 
ﬁ bers.  A  long-term  consequence  of  increased  activity  (especially  due  to 
isometric exercise) is  hypertrophy , or exaggerated growth, of the muscle 
ﬁ bers as seen in bodybuilders. Conversely, prolonged inactivity leads to 
atrophy , or degeneration, of muscle ﬁ bers, which can happen when joints 
are immobilized in a cast following an injury. Clearly, there is an inti-
mate relationship between the lower motor neuron and the muscle ﬁ bers 
it innervates (Box 13.1). 

BOX 13.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

ALS: Glutamate, Genes, and Gehrig

Amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  (ALS)  is  a  particularly  cruel 

disease that was ﬁ rst described in 1869 by the French neu-
rologist Jean-Martin Charcot. The initial signs of the disease 
are muscle weakness and atrophy. Usually over the course 
of 1–5 years, all voluntary movement is lost; walking, speak-
ing, swallowing, and breathing gradually deteriorate. Death is 
usually caused by failure of the respiratory muscles. Because 
the  disease  often  has  no  effect  on  sensations,  intellect,  or 
cognitive  function,  patients  are  left  to  watch  their  bod-
ies slowly waste away, keenly aware of what is happening. 
The  disease  is  relatively  rare,  afﬂ icting  one  out  of  approxi-
mately  every  20,000  individuals.  Still,  an  estimated  30,000 
Americans  are  currently  diagnosed  with  ALS.  Its  most  fa-
mous victim was Lou Gehrig, a star baseball player with the 
New York Yankees, who died of ALS in 1936. In the United 
States, ALS is often called Lou Gehrig’s disease.

Muscle  weakness  and  paralysis  are  characteristics  of 
motor unit damage. Indeed, the main pathology associated 
with ALS is the degeneration of the large alpha motor neu-
rons.  The  large  neurons  of  the  motor  cortex  that  innervate 
alpha motor neurons are also affected, but, curiously, other 
neurons in the CNS are generally spared. The selective dam-
age  to  motor  neurons  explains  the  selective  loss  of  motor 
functions in ALS patients.

There appear to be many causes of ALS, most of them 
still unknown. One suspected cause is excitotoxicity. As we 
learned in Chapter 6, overstimulation by the excitatory neu-
rotransmitter glutamate and closely related amino acids can 
cause the death of otherwise normal neurons (see Box 6.4). 
Many ALS patients have elevated levels of glutamate in their 
cerebrospinal ﬂ uid. Excitotoxicity has been implicated in the 
unusually high incidence of ALS on the island of Guam that 
occurred  before  World  War  II.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
one environmental cause in Guam may have been the inges-
tion of cycad nuts, which contain an excitotoxic amino acid. 
In  addition,  research  indicates  that  a  glutamate  transporter 
may  be  defective  in  ALS,  thereby  prolonging  the  exposure 
of  active  neurons  to  extracellular  glutamate.  Thus,  the  ﬁ rst 
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for 

the treatment of ALS was riluzole, a blocker of glutamate re-
lease. The drug treatment can slow the disease by only a few 
months, however, and unfortunately, the long-term outcome 
is the same.

Only  10%  of  ALS  cases  are  obviously  inherited,  and 
screens for defective genes have pointed to several mutations 
that can lead to ALS. The ﬁ rst mutation, discovered in 1993, 
leads to defects in the enzyme superoxide dismutase. A toxic 
by-product of cellular metabolism is the negatively charged 
⫺, called the superoxide radical. Superoxide radi-
molecule O2
cals are extremely reactive and can inﬂ ict irreversible cellular 
damage. Superoxide dismutase is a key enzyme that causes 
superoxide radicals to lose their extra electrons, converting 
them back to oxygen. Thus, the loss of superoxide dismutase 
would  lead  to  a  buildup  of  superoxide  radicals  and  cellular 
damage, particularly in cells that are metabolically very active. 
The death of motor neurons seems to depend on the actions 
of glial cells that surround them.

More  recent  research  has  identiﬁ ed  mutations  of  about 
15 more genes that can cause inherited forms of ALS. They 
affect a surprisingly wide variety of basic cellular processes. 
Some mutations cause defects in proteins that normally bind 
and regulate RNA during transcription. Others affect proteins 
involved in the trafﬁ cking of vesicles, protein secretion, cell di-
vision, ATP production, or the dynamics of the cytoskeleton. 
Genome-wide  association  studies,  which  examine  a  large 
number of gene variations to reveal which are associated with 
a disease, suggest that the coincidence of two mutations of 
distinctly different genes can also cause ALS. The picture that 
is emerging is that ALS can have many distinct causes; it is 
really a group of diseases that happen to share similar clinical 
characteristics.

There is still much to be learned about selective motor neu-
ron loss in ALS. What we know so far has led to new ideas for 
possible treatments, including the use of neuronal stem cells 
to replace lost neurons and glia, and genetics-based strate-
gies to suppress the effects of mutations. Translating these 
ideas into effective treatments for ALS patients is an exciting 
but still distant possibility.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   463
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   463

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

464

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

EXCITATION–CONTRACTION COUPLING 
EXCITATIOON–CONTRACTION COUPLING 

 Muscle contraction is initiated by the release of acetylcholine (ACh) from 
the axon terminals of alpha motor neurons, as we said. ACh produces a 
large EPSP in the postsynaptic membrane due to the activation of nico-
tinic ACh receptors. Because the membrane of the muscle cell contains 
voltage-gated  sodium  channels,  this  EPSP  is  sufﬁ cient  to  evoke  an  ac-
tion  potential  in  the  muscle  ﬁ ber  (but  see  Box  13.2).  By  the  process  of 
excitation–contraction coupling , this action potential (the  excitation ) 
triggers  the  release  of  Ca 2  ⫹   from  an  organelle  inside  the  muscle  ﬁ ber, 
which leads to  contraction  of the ﬁ ber. Relaxation occurs when the Ca 2  ⫹  
levels are lowered by reuptake into the organelle. To understand this pro-
cess, we must take a closer look at the muscle ﬁ ber. 

 Muscle Fiber Structure 
 The structure of a muscle ﬁ ber is shown in Figure 13.12. Muscle ﬁ bers 
are formed early in fetal development by the fusion of muscle precursor 
cells, or myoblasts, which are derived from the mesoderm (see Chapter 7). 
This fusion leaves each cell with more than one cell nucleus, so individ-
ual muscle cells are said to be  multinucleated.  The fusion elongates the 
cells (hence the name ﬁ ber), and ﬁ bers can range from 1 to 500 mm in 
length. Muscle ﬁ bers are enclosed by an excitable cell membrane called 
the  sarcolemma . 

BOX 13.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Myasthenia Gravis

The neuromuscular junction is an exceptionally reliable syn-

apse. A presynaptic action potential causes the contents of 
hundreds of synaptic vesicles to be released into the synap-
tic cleft. The liberated ACh molecules act at densely packed 
nicotinic  receptors  in  the  postsynaptic  membrane,  and  the 
resulting EPSP is many times larger than what is necessary 
to trigger an action potential, and twitch, in the muscle ﬁ ber—
normally, that is.

In  a  clinical  condition  called  myasthenia  gravis,  the  ACh 
released is far less effective, and neuromuscular transmission 
often fails. The name is derived from the Greek for “severe 
muscle weakness.” The disorder is characterized by weak-
ness  and  fatigability  of  voluntary  muscles,  typically  includ-
ing  the  muscles  of  facial  expression,  and  it  can  be  fatal  if 
respiration is compromised. The disease strikes roughly one 
in 10,000 people of all ages and ethnic groups. An unusual 
feature of myasthenia gravis is that the severity of the muscle 
weakness ﬂ uctuates, even over the course of a single day.

Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease. In 1973, Jim 
Patrick  and  Jon  Lindstrom,  working  at  the  Salk  Institute  in 
California, discovered that rabbits injected with puriﬁ ed nico-
tinic ACh receptors generated antibodies to their own ACh 
receptors and contracted a rabbit version of myasthenia gra-
vis. For reasons we don’t understand, the immune systems 
of  most  myasthenia-afﬂ icted  humans  generate  antibodies 

against  their  own  nicotinic  ACh  receptors.  The  antibodies 
bind to the receptors, interfering with the normal actions of 
ACh at the neuromuscular junctions. In addition, the binding 
of antibodies to the receptors leads to secondary, degenera-
tive changes in the structure of the neuromuscular junctions 
that also make transmission much less efﬁ cient.

An effective treatment for myasthenia gravis is the admin-
istration  of  drugs  that  inhibit  the  enzyme  acetylcholinester-
ase (AChE). Recall from Chapters 5 and 6 that AChE breaks 
down ACh in the synaptic cleft. In low doses, AChE inhibitors 
can  strengthen  neuromuscular  transmission  by  prolonging 
the life of released ACh. But the drugs are imperfect and the 
therapeutic  window  is  narrow.  As  we  saw  in  Box  5.5,  too 
much ACh in the cleft leads to desensitization of the recep-
tors  and  a  block  of  neuromuscular  transmission.  Different 
muscles may respond differently to the same drug dose. The 
increased levels of ACh can also affect the ANS, leading to 
side  effects  such  as  nausea,  vomiting,  abdominal  cramps, 
diarrhea,  and  bronchial  secretions.  Another  common  treat-
ment for myasthenia gravis involves suppression of the im-
mune system, either with drugs or by surgical removal of the 
thymus gland.

With  careful  and  continual  medical  treatment,  the  long-
term prognosis is good and life expectancy is normal for pa-
tients with this disease of the neuromuscular junction.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   464
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   464

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

465

 Within  the  muscle  ﬁ ber  are  a  number  of  cylindrical  structures  called 
 myoﬁ brils ,  which  contract  in  response  to  an  action  potential  sweeping 
down  the  sarcolemma.  Myoﬁ brils  are  surrounded  by  the   sarcoplasmic 
reticulum  (SR) ,  an  extensive  intracellular  sac  that  stores  Ca 2  ⫹   (simi-
lar  in  appearance  to  the  smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum  of  neurons;  see 
Chapter 2). Action potentials sweeping along the sarcolemma gain access to 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum deep inside the ﬁ ber by way of a network of tun-
nels called  T tubules  (T for transverse). These are like inside-out axons; 
the interior of each T tubule is continuous with the extracellular ﬂ uid. 

 Where  the  T  tubule  comes  in  close  apposition  to  the  SR,  there  is  a 
specialized  coupling  of  the  proteins  in  the  two  membranes.  A  voltage-
sensitive cluster of four calcium channels, called a  tetrad , in the T tubule 
membrane is linked to a  calcium release channel  in the SR. As illustrated 
in Figure 13.13, the arrival of an action potential in the T tubule mem-
brane causes a conformational change in the voltage-sensitive tetrad of 
channels, which opens the calcium release channel in the SR membrane. 
Some Ca 2  ⫹  ﬂ ows through the tetrad channels, and even more Ca 2  ⫹  ﬂ ows 
through the calcium-release channel, and the resulting increase in free 
Ca 2  ⫹  within the cytosol causes the myoﬁ bril to contract. 

Mitochondria

Myofibrils

T tubules

Sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR)

Openings of
T tubules

Sarcolemma

▲ FIGURE 13.12
The structure of a muscle fiber. T tu-
bules conduct electrical activity from the 
surface membrane into the depths of the 
muscle fiber.

Muscle fiber

Myofibril

Sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR)

T tubule
Sarcolemma

Inside of SR

Cut edge of SR 
membrane

Cytosol of 
muscle fiber

Cut edge of 
T tubule
membrane
Inside of
T tubule

Ca2+

Ca2+

Rest

Depolarized

Calcium
release 
channel

Tetrad of
calcium
channels

▲ FIGURE 13.13
The release of Ca2ⴙ from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. Depolarization of the T tubule mem-
brane causes conformational changes in proteins 
that are linked to calcium channels in the SR, re-
leasing stored Ca2⫹ into the cytosol of the mus-
cle fiber.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   465
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   465

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

466

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Z line

Sarcomere

 The Molecular Basis of Muscle Contraction 
 A  closer  look  at  the  myoﬁ bril  reveals  how  Ca 2  ⫹   triggers  contraction 
(Figure  13.14).  The  myoﬁ bril  is  divided  into  segments  by  disks  called 
 Z lines  (named for their appearance when viewed from the side). A seg-
ment  composed  of  two  Z  lines  and  the  myoﬁ bril  in  between  is  called  a 
 sarcomere . Anchored to each side of the Z lines is a series of bristles 
called  thin ﬁ laments . The thin ﬁ laments from adjacent Z lines face one 
another but do not come in contact. Between and among the two sets of 
thin ﬁ laments are a series of ﬁ bers called  thick ﬁ laments . Muscle con-
traction occurs when the thin ﬁ laments slide along the thick ﬁ laments, 
bringing adjacent Z lines toward one another. In other words, the sarco-
mere becomes shorter in length. This  sliding-ﬁ lament model  of sarcomere 
shortening is shown in Figure 13.15. 

Thin
filaments

Thick
filaments

▲ FIGURE 13.14
The myofibril: a closer look.

Z line

Z line

Thin
filaments

Thick
filaments

Weight

▲ FIGURE 13.15
The sliding-filament model of muscle 
contraction. Myofibrils shorten when the 
thin filaments slide toward one another 
on the thick filaments.

Fully relaxed

Ca2+

Fully contracted

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   466
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   466

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

Myosin
filament

Actin
filament

Ca2+

Troponin

Tropomyosin

Ca2+

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

467

▲ FIGURE 13.16
The molecular basis of muscle con-
traction. The binding of Ca2⫹ to troponin 
shifts tropomyosin and allows the myo-
sin heads to bind to the actin filament. 
Then the myosin heads pivot, causing 
the filaments to slide with respect to one 
another.

 The sliding of the ﬁ laments with respect to one another occurs because 
of the interaction between the major thick ﬁ lament protein,  myosin , and 
the major thin ﬁ lament protein,  actin . The exposed “heads” of the myo-
sin  molecules  bind  actin  molecules  and  then  undergo  a  conformational 
change that causes them to pivot (Figure 13.16). This pivoting causes the 
thick ﬁ lament to move with respect to the thin ﬁ lament. Adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP) then binds to the myosin heads and the heads disengage 
and “uncock” so that the process can repeat itself. Repeating this cycle 
enables the myosin heads to “walk” along the actin ﬁ lament. 

 When the muscle is at rest, myosin cannot interact with actin because 
the myosin attachment sites on the actin molecule are covered by a complex 
of two proteins:  tropomyosin  and  troponin . Ca 2  ⫹  initiates muscle contrac-
tion by binding to troponin and causing tropomyosin to shift its position, 
thereby exposing the sites where myosin binds to actin. Contraction con-
tinues as long as Ca 2  ⫹  and ATP are available; relaxation occurs when the 
Ca 2  ⫹  is sequestered by the SR. The reuptake of Ca 2  ⫹  by the SR depends on 
the action of a calcium pump and hence also requires ATP. 

 We can summarize the steps of excitation–contraction coupling as follows: 

  Excitation  
 1. An action potential occurs in an alpha motor neuron axon. 
 2. ACh is released by the axon terminal of the alpha motor neuron at the 

neuromuscular junction. 

 3. Nicotinic receptor channels in the sarcolemma open, and the postsyn-

aptic sarcolemma depolarizes (EPSP). 

 4. Voltage-gated sodium channels in the sarcolemma open and an action 
potential is generated in the muscle ﬁ ber, which sweeps down the sar-
colemma and into the T tubules. 

 5. Depolarization of the T tubules causes Ca 2  ⫹  release from the SR. 
  Contraction  
 1. Ca 2  ⫹  binds to troponin. 
 2.  Tropomyosin shifts position and myosin binding sites on actin are exposed. 
 3. Myosin heads bind actin. 
 4. Myosin heads pivot. 
 5. An ATP binds to each myosin head and it disengages from actin. 
 6. The cycle continues as long as Ca 2  ⫹  and ATP are present. 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   467
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   467

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

468

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Relaxation  
 1. As EPSPs end, the sarcolemma and T tubules return to their resting 

potentials. 

 2. Ca 2  ⫹  is sequestered by the SR by an ATP-driven pump. 
 3. Myosin binding sites on actin are covered by tropomyosin. 

 You can now understand why death causes stiffening of the muscles, a 
condition known as  rigor mortis . Starving the muscle cells of ATP prevents 
the detachment of the myosin heads and leaves the myosin attachment 
sites on the actin ﬁ laments exposed for binding. The end result is the for-
mation of permanent attachments between the thick and thin ﬁ laments. 
 Since  the  proposal  of  the  sliding-ﬁ lament  model  in  1954  by  English 
physiologists Hugh Huxley, Andrew Huxley, and their colleagues, there 
has  been  a  tremendous  amount  of  progress  in  identifying  the  detailed 
molecular mechanisms of excitation–contraction coupling in muscle. This 
progress has resulted from a multidisciplinary approach to the problem, 
with critical contributions made by the use of electron microscopy as well 
as biochemical, biophysical, and genetic methods. The application of molec-
ular genetic techniques also has added important new information to our 
understanding of muscle function, in both health and disease (Box 13.3). 

BOX 13.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular  dystrophy  is  a  group  of  inherited  disorders,  all 

of  which  are  characterized  by  progressive  weakness  and 
deterioration of muscle. The most common type, Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy, afﬂ icts about one in 3500 boys before 
adolescence.  The  disease  is  ﬁ rst  detected  as  a  weakness 
of the legs and usually puts its victims in wheelchairs by the 
time they reach age 12. The disease continues to progress, 
and afﬂ icted males typically do not survive past the age of 30.
The characteristic hereditary pattern of this disease, which 
afﬂ icts only males but is passed on from their mothers, led to a 
search for a defective gene on the X chromosome. Major break-
throughs came in the late 1980s when the defective region of 
the  X  chromosome  was  identiﬁ ed.  Researchers  discovered 
that this region contains the gene that codes for a cytoskeletal 
protein dystrophin. The dystrophin gene is enormous—2.6 mil-
lion base pairs—and its size makes it unusually vulnerable to 
mutations. Boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy have an 
entirely  dysfunctional  dystrophin  gene:  They  cannot  produce 
the mRNA encoding dystrophin. A milder form of the disease, 
called Becker muscular dystrophy, is associated with an altered 
mRNA encoding a portion of the dystrophin protein.

Dystrophin is a large protein that helps to link the muscle 
cytoskeleton, lying just under the sarcolemma, to the extra-
cellular  matrix.  The  protein  also  seems  to  be  important  for 
helping  muscle  deal  with  oxidative  stress.  Dystrophin  must 
not be strictly required for muscle contraction because move-
ments in afﬂ icted boys appear to be normal during their ﬁ rst 
few years of life. The absence of dystrophin may lead to sec-

ondary  changes  in  the  contractile  apparatus,  eventually  re-
sulting in muscle degeneration. It is interesting to note that 
dystrophin is also concentrated in axon terminals in the brain, 
where it might contribute to excitation-secretion coupling.

Intensive efforts are underway to ﬁ nd a strategy for treat-
ing, or even curing, Duchenne muscular dystrophy with some 
form of gene therapy. One long-standing idea is to introduce 
an artiﬁ cial gene that essentially repairs the patient’s defec-
tive dystrophin gene or mimics a normal dystrophin gene. A 
big  challenge,  as  with  most  attempts  at  gene  therapy,  has 
been  to  get  the  artiﬁ cial  gene  into  dystrophic  muscle  cells 
safely and effectively. Specially engineered forms of viruses 
that carry the gene, infect muscle cells, and induce the cells 
to  express  dystrophin  are  often  used.  Another  approach  is 
to transplant stem cells—immature cells that can grow and 
differentiate  into  mature,  normal  muscle  cells  that  express 
dystrophin—into dystrophic muscles. Stem cell therapy has 
been very promising when tested in mouse models of mus-
cular  dystrophy.  Yet,  another  strategy  is  to  test  small  mol-
ecules  that  might  minimize  muscle  degeneration,  promote 
muscle regeneration, mitigate encoding problems by mutant 
dystrophin genes, or promote the production of other muscle 
proteins that can substitute for dystrophin.

There is no cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy as yet, 
but some of the new treatment strategies have shown prom-
ise in clinical trials. It is exciting to think that a devastating ge-
netic disease such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy might 
soon be treatable.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   468
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   468

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

469

 SPINAL CONTROL OF MOTOR UNITS 
SPINAAL COONTROL OF MOTORR UNITS 

 We’ve traced the action potentials sweeping down the axon of the alpha 
motor neuron and seen how this causes contraction of the muscle ﬁ bers in 
the motor unit. Now let’s explore how the activity of the motor neuron is 
itself controlled. We begin with a discussion of the ﬁ rst source of synaptic 
input  to  the  alpha  motor  neuron  introduced  earlier—sensory  feedback 
from the muscles themselves. 

 Proprioception from Muscle Spindles 
 As we mentioned already, deep within most skeletal muscles are specialized 
structures  called   muscle  spindles   (Figure  13.17).  A  muscle  spindle,  also 
called a  stretch receptor , consists of several types of specialized skeletal muscle 
ﬁ bers contained in a ﬁ brous capsule. The middle third of the capsule is swol-
len, giving the structure the shape for which it is named. In this middle (equa-
torial) region, group Ia sensory axons wrap around the muscle ﬁ bers of the 
spindle. The spindles and their associated Ia axons, specialized for the detec-
tion of changes in muscle length (stretch), are examples of  proprioceptors . 
These receptors are a component of the somatic sensory system that is spe-
cialized for “body sense,” or  proprioception  (from the Latin for “one’s own”), 
which informs us about how our body is positioned and moving in space. 

 Recall  from  Chapter  12  that  group  I  axons  are  the  thickest  myelin-
ated axons in the body, meaning that they conduct action potentials very 
rapidly. Within this group, Ia axons are the largest and fastest. Ia axons 
enter the spinal cord via the dorsal roots, branch repeatedly, and form 
excitatory synapses upon both interneurons and alpha motor neurons of 
the ventral horns. The Ia inputs are also very powerful. Neurophysiologist 
Lorne Mendell, working at Harvard with Henneman, was able to show 
that a single Ia axon synapses on virtually every alpha motor neuron in 
the pool innervating the same muscle that contains the spindle. 

Group Ia sensory axons 

Fibrous
capsule

Muscle
spindle

▲ FIGURE 13.17
A muscle spindle and its sensory innervation.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   469
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   469

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

470

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The Stretch Reﬂ ex. The function of this sensory input to the spinal cord 
was ﬁ rst shown by Sherrington, who noted that when a muscle is pulled 
on,  it  tends  to  pull  back  (contract).  The  fact  that  this   stretch  reﬂ ex , 
sometimes called the  myotatic reﬂ ex  ( myo  from the Greek for “muscle,” 
 tatic   from  the  Greek  for “stretch”),  involves  sensory  feedback  from  the 
muscle  was  shown  by  cutting  the  dorsal  roots.  Even  though  the  alpha 
motor neurons were left intact, this procedure eliminated the stretch re-
ﬂ ex and caused a loss of muscle tone. Sherrington deduced that the motor 
neurons must receive a continual synaptic input from the muscles. Later 
work showed that the discharge of Ia sensory axons is closely related to 
the length of the muscle. As the muscle is stretched, the discharge rate 
goes  up;  as  the  muscle  is  shortened  and  goes  slack,  the  discharge  rate 
goes down. 

 The Ia axon and the alpha motor neurons on which it synapses consti-
tute the  monosynaptic stretch reﬂ ex arc —  “monosynaptic” because only 
one synapse separates the primary sensory input from the motor neuron 
output.  Figure  13.18  shows  how  this  reﬂ ex  arc  serves  as  an  antigrav-

Muscle
spindle

Ia axon

Muscle

Alpha motor 
neuron

Weight

d
a
o
L

f

o

 

h

t

g
n
e
L

l

e
c
s
u
m

Weight added to muscle

Transient elongation of muscle

Ia discharge

n
o
x
a

 

a

I

n
o
r
u
e
n

Alpha motor neuron discharge shortens muscle

▲ FIGURE 13.18
The stretch reflex. This illustration shows the response of an Ia axon and a mo-
tor neuron to the sudden addition of weight that stretches the muscle.

r
o

t

 

o
m
a
h
p
A

l

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   470
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   470

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

471

Ia axon

Quadriceps

Muscle
spindle

Alpha
motor
neuron

Tendon of 
quadriceps

▲ FIGURE 13.19
The knee-jerk reflex.

ity feedback loop. When a weight is placed on a muscle and the muscle 
starts  to  lengthen,  the  muscle  spindles  are  stretched.  The  stretching 
of the equatorial region of the spindle leads to depolarization of the Ia 
axon endings due to the opening of mechanosensitive ion channels (see 
Chapter 12). The resulting increased action potential discharge of the Ia 
axons synaptically depolarizes the alpha motor neurons, which respond 
by increasing their action potential frequency. This causes the muscle to 
contract, thereby shortening it. 

 The knee-jerk reﬂ ex is one example of the stretch reﬂ ex. When your 
doctor  taps  the  tendon  beneath  your  kneecap,  the  tendon  very  brieﬂ y 
stretches the quadriceps muscle of your thigh, which then reﬂ exively con-
tracts and causes your leg to extend (Figure 13.19). The knee-jerk reﬂ ex 
tests the intactness of the nerves and muscles in this reﬂ ex arc. Stretch 
reﬂ exes can also be elicited by stretching muscles of the arm, the ankle, 
and the jaw. 

 Peripheral sensory and motor nerves are vulnerable to various type of in-
jury. As we learned earlier, the cut axons of peripheral nerves can often re-
generate and reestablish their connections with muscle (see Figure 13.11). 
Are regenerated axons and synapses as effective as normal axons and syn-
apses? This question has been studied carefully in the neural circuits of the 
stretch reﬂ ex (Box 13.4). 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   471
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   471

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

472

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 13.4

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Nerve Regeneration Does Not Ensure Full 
Recovery
by Timothy C. Cope

Tapping a muscle’s tendon can cause the muscle to con-

tract and a leg to jerk. The monosynaptic circuit underlying 
this stretch reﬂ ex is shown in Figure 13.19. You will not be 
surprised to hear that cutting the sensory and motor nerves 
interrupts the reﬂ ex. Peripheral nerves can often regrow, how-
ever. What would you expect after the cut axons grow back 
into  the  muscle?  The  surprising  answer  is  that  the  stretch 
reﬂ ex does not recover, even though voluntary contractions 
regain  substantial  force.  It  would  seem  easy  to  ﬁ gure  out 
why. Every element of this circuit is accessible to measure-
ments,  including  the  ﬁ ring  patterns  of  group  Ia  axons  that 
encode muscle length, ﬁ ring patterns of the motor neurons, 
the force of contraction produced by the stretched muscle 
and its synergists, and even the excitatory postsynaptic po-
tentials (EPSPs) produced by the synapses between Ia axons 
and motor neurons in the spinal cord. Studies of this problem 
have fascinated me for more than 20 years. They have given 
me a rare opportunity to understand how a neural circuit can 
generate normal behavior, how a circuit responds to injury, 
and what factors limit the nervous system’s capacity to re-
cover from injury.

The recovery problem was most likely on the sensory side 
of  the  circuit.  It  couldn’t  be  a  deﬁ cit  in  the  motor  neurons 
or  muscle  or  their  restored  connections  because  the  mus-
cle contracted normally during reﬂ exes triggered by sensory 
stimuli other than stretch. At ﬁ rst, the most likely alternative 
hypothesis  seemed  to  be  that  regenerating  sensory  axons 
end up reconnecting with the wrong sensory receptor organs 
in the periphery. It was well known that sensory axons in sev-
ered nerves reconnect somewhat indiscriminately with their 
targets, meaning that a reduced number of Ia axons would 
be available after regeneration to detect muscle stretch and 
to excite motoneurons. Even so, a sizable fraction of Ia axons 
do manage to reinnervate their normal targets; Lorne Mendell 
and  his  coworkers  found  that  nearly  40%  of  regenerat-
ing Ia axons reconnected with muscle spindles. Even if the 
total excitation from fewer Ia axons were too weak to excite 

motoneurons to ﬁ re during muscle stretch, we would still ex-
pect that the action potentials in the reconnected Ia axons 
would provide a boost to the force of ongoing muscle con-
traction. In the laboratory, however, Brian Clark and I found 
no detectable ﬁ ring modulation of motor units by stretching 
self-reinnervated  muscles.  Our  colleague  Richard  Nichols, 
using different methods, corroborated our ﬁ ndings. The re-
sults were clear and puzzling: Muscle stretch utterly fails to 
recruit motor neurons after recovery from nerve cuts.

So  what  defect  accounts  for  the  nearly  complete  and 
persistent absence of stretch reﬂ exes following injury? A key 
result  emerged  from  our  studies  of  EPSPs  recorded  from 
motor neurons during natural stretch of the muscle. The Ia 
synaptic potentials were weaker, of course, in part because 
roughly half of the Ia axons were not responding appropri-
ately to muscle stretch. In addition, Edyta Bichler and Katie 
Bullinger  in  our  lab  made  the  prescient  observation  that 
these diminished EPSPs could be found only in about half 
of the motor neurons studied, while the other half showed 
no  EPSPs  at  all  (Figure  A).  Normally,  Ia  axons  produce  an 
EPSP in every motor neuron that innervates the same mus-
cle. These observations highlighted a key shortcoming of Ia 
sensory  neurons  that  regenerate  their  damaged  peripheral 
axons: While some reconnect with muscle spindle receptors 
in the muscle, they also disconnect from many motor neu-
rons in the spinal cord.

Recently,  a  structural  explanation  for  the  loss  of  the 
stretch  reﬂ ex  was  provided  by  Francisco  Alvarez  and  his 
laboratory  in  collaboration  with  ours:  A  probe  that  allows 
microscopic  identiﬁ cation  of  Ia  synaptic  terminals  revealed 
the loss of more than 70% of Ia synapses on the proximal 
dendrites of motor neurons. We also found that regenerating 
Ia axons actually retract their branches from the areas where 
motor  neuron  cell  bodies  and  dendrites  reside.  Synaptic 
loss and axonal retraction in the spinal cord occur despite 
successful regeneration of the injured Ia axons’ branches in 
the muscle.

 Gamma Motor Neurons 
 The muscle spindle contains modiﬁ ed skeletal muscle ﬁ bers within its ﬁ -
brous capsule. These muscle ﬁ bers are called  intrafusal ﬁ bers , to distinguish 
them from the more numerous  extrafusal ﬁ bers  that lie outside the spindle 
and form the bulk of the muscle. An important difference between the two 
types of muscle ﬁ bers is that only extrafusal ﬁ bers are innervated by alpha 
motor neurons. Intrafusal ﬁ bers receive their motor innervation by another 
type of lower motor neuron called a  gamma motor neuron  (Figure 13.20). 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   472
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   472

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

473

Ia axon

Regenerated end 
of Ia axon

Muscle 
spindle

Muscle 

Ventral horn
of spinal cord

Ia synapses

Degenerated
Ia synapses

Muscle stretch triggers EPSP

Muscle stretch fails to trigger EPSP

Figure A

Alpha motor
neurons

What  is  the  value  of  these  ﬁ ndings?  The  circuits  of  the 
stretch  reﬂ ex  play  an  important  role  during  normal  move-
ment  by  sensing  the  conﬁ guration  of  the  body  and  limbs 
and regulating the way they respond to mechanical distur-
bances. The reorganization of spinal circuits after nerve in-
jury helps us to understand why some movement disorders 
persist despite the regeneration of axons. Our ﬁ ndings may 
also apply to circuits beyond the spinal cord. For example, 
we might consider whether there are similar changes to syn-
apses on corticospinal neurons after disruption of descend-
ing motor tracts; this could have implications for therapeutic 
strategies  for  dealing  with  spinal  cord  injury.  Our  ﬁ ndings 
so far strongly motivate us to move forward and learn more 
about the biological processes that underlie the degenera-
tion of neurons.

Many people participated in these studies, including under-
graduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students. Our progress 
rested on the diverse expertise and hard work of these collabo-
rators. I believe that a team approach is an absolute necessity 
for tackling the extraordinarily complex functions and malfunc-
tions of the central nervous system. Working collaboratively ex-
poses us to new ideas and promotes our growth as scientists.

REFERENCES
Bullinger  KL,  Nardelli  P,  Pinter  MJ,  Alvarez  FJ,  Cope  TC.  2011. 
Permanent central synaptic disconnection of proprioceptors after 
nerve  injury  and  regeneration.  II.  Loss  of  functional  connectivity 
with motoneurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 106:2471–2485.

Haftel VK, Bichler EK, Wang QB, Prather JF, Pinter MJ, Cope TC. 
2005.  Central  suppression  of  regenerated  proprioceptive  affer-
ents. Journal of Neuroscience 25:4733–4742.

 Imagine a situation in which muscle contraction is commanded by an 
upper motor neuron. The alpha motor neurons respond, the extrafusal ﬁ -
bers contract, and the muscle shortens. The response of the muscle spindles 
is shown in Figure 13.21. If they were to become slack, the Ia axons would 
become silent and the spindle would go “off the air,” no longer providing 
information about muscle length. This does not happen, however, because 
the gamma motor neurons are also activated. Gamma motor neurons in-
nervate the intrafusal muscle ﬁ ber at the two ends of the muscle spindle. 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   473
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   473

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

474

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Alpha motor
neuron

Gamma motor
neuron

Extrafusal
muscle fibers

Intrafusal
muscle fibers

Gamma motor axons

▲ FIGURE 13.20
Alpha motor neurons, gamma motor neurons, and the muscle fibers they 
innervate.

Activation of these ﬁ bers causes a contraction of the two poles of the muscle 
spindle, thereby pulling on the noncontractile equatorial region and keep-
ing  the  Ia  axons  active.  Notice  that  the  activation  of  alpha  and  gamma 
motor  neurons  has  opposite  effects  on  Ia  output;  alpha  activation  alone 
decreases Ia activity, while gamma activation alone increases Ia activity. 
 Recall from our discussion earlier that the monosynaptic stretch reﬂ ex 
arc can be viewed as a feedback loop. The principles of feedback control 
systems are that a set point is determined (in this case, the desired mus-
cle length), deviations from the set point are detected by a sensor (the Ia 
axon endings), and deviations are compensated for by an effector system 
(alpha motor neurons and extrafusal muscle ﬁ bers), returning the sys-
tem to the set point. Changing the activity of the gamma motor neurons 

Extrafusal fibers

Intrafusal fibers

Ia axon and
action potentials

▲ FIGURE 13.21
The function of gamma motor neu-
rons. (a) Activation of alpha motor neu-
rons causes the extrafusal muscle fibers 
to shorten. (b) If the muscle spindle were 
to become slack, it would go “off the air” 
and no longer report the length of the 
muscle. (c) Activation of gamma motor 
neurons causes the poles of the spindle to 
contract, keeping it active and “on the air.”

Activate

gamma motor

neuron

Activate

alpha motor

neuron

Gamma motor
neuron axon

Alpha motor
neuron axon

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   474
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   474

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

475

changes the set point of the stretch feedback loop. This circuit, gamma 
motor neuron → intrafusal muscle ﬁ ber → Ia afferent axon → alpha motor 
neuron → extrafusal muscle ﬁ bers, is sometimes called the  gamma loop.  
 During most normal movements, alpha and gamma motor neurons are 
simultaneously  activated  by  descending  commands  from  the  brain.  By 
regulating the set point of the stretch feedback loop, the gamma loop pro-
vides additional control of alpha motor neurons and muscle contraction. 

 Proprioception from Golgi Tendon Organs 
 Muscle spindles are not the only source of proprioceptive inputs from the 
muscles. Another sensor of skeletal muscle is the  Golgi tendon organ , 
which acts like a very sensitive strain gauge; that is, it monitors muscle 
tension, or the force of contraction. Golgi tendon organs are about 1 mm 
long  and  0.1  mm  wide.  They  are  located  at  the  junction  of  the  muscle 
and the tendon and are innervated by group Ib sensory axons, which are 
slightly smaller than the Ia axons innervating the muscle spindles. Within 
the Golgi tendon organ, thin branches of the Ib axon entwine among the 
coils of collagen ﬁ brils (Figure 13.22). When the muscle contracts, the ten-
sion on the collagen ﬁ brils increases. As the ﬁ brils straighten and squeeze 
the Ib axons, their mechanosensitive ion channels are activated and ac-
tion potentials can be triggered. 

 It is important to note that while spindles are situated  in parallel  with 
the muscle ﬁ bers, Golgi tendon organs are situated  in series  (Figure 13.23). 
This different anatomical arrangement helps to determine the types of 
information these two sensors provide the spinal cord: Ia activity from 
the spindle encodes  muscle length  information, while Ib activity from the 
Golgi tendon organ encodes  muscle tension  information. 

 The Ib axons enter the spinal cord, branch repeatedly, and synapse on 
special interneurons called Ib inhibitory interneurons in the ventral horn. Ib 
interneurons also receive inputs from other sensory receptors and from de-
scending pathways. Some of the Ib interneurons form inhibitory connections 
with the alpha motor neurons innervating the same muscle (Figure 13.24). 
This is the basis for another spinal reﬂ ex. In extreme circumstances, this Ib 

Muscle

Golgi tendon
organ

Tendon

Bone

Ib axon

Collagen
fibrils

Ib axon

▲ FIGURE 13.22
A Golgi tendon organ.

Golgi tendon
organ

Extrafusal
muscle
fibers

Ib axon

la axon

Golgi tendon
organ

Muscle spindle

Alpha motor
neuron axon

(inactive)

Action

potentials

Ib axon

Ia axon

Muscle spindle

Alpha motor
neuron axon

(active)

(b)  

(a)  
▲ FIGURE 13.23
The organization of muscle proprioceptors. (a) Muscle spindles are arranged 
parallel to the extrafusal fibers; Golgi tendon organs lie in series, between the 
muscle fibers and their points of attachment. (b) Golgi tendon organs respond to 
increased tension on the muscle and transmit this information to the spinal cord 
via group Ib sensory axons. Because the activated muscle does not change 
length, the Ia axons remain silent in this example.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   475
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   475

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

476

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Bone 

Golgi tendon
organ

Ib axon

Inhibitory
interneuron

Alpha motor
neuron

▲ FIGURE 13.24
Golgi tendon organ circuit. The Ib axon of the Golgi tendon organ excites an 
inhibitory interneuron, which inhibits the alpha motor neurons of the same muscle.

reﬂ ex arc may protect the muscle from being overloaded. However, its nor-
mal function is to regulate muscle tension within an optimal range. As mus-
cle tension increases, the inhibition of the alpha motor neuron slows muscle 
contraction; as muscle tension falls, the inhibition of the alpha motor neu-
ron is reduced, and muscle contraction increases. This type of propriocep-
tive feedback is thought to be particularly important for the proper execu-
tion of ﬁ ne motor acts, such as the manipulation of fragile objects with the 
hands, which require a steady, but not too powerful, grip. 

 Proprioception from the Joints. We have focused on the proprioceptors 
that are involved in reﬂ ex control of the spinal motor neurons. However, 
besides muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs, a variety of propriocep-
tive axons are present in the connective tissues of joints, especially within 
the ﬁ brous tissue surrounding the joints (joint capsules) and ligaments. 
These mechanosensitive axons respond to changes in the angle, direction, 
and velocity of movement in a joint. Most are rapidly adapting, meaning 
that  sensory  information  about  a   moving   joint  is  plentiful,  but  nerves 
encoding the  resting  position of a joint are few. We are, nevertheless, quite 
good at judging the position of a joint, even with our eyes closed. It seems 
that information from joint receptors, muscle spindles, and Golgi tendon 
organs, and probably from receptors in the skin, is combined within the 
CNS to estimate joint angle. Removing one source of information can be 
compensated for by the use of the other sources. When an arthritic hip is 
replaced with a steel and plastic one, patients can still tell the angle be-
tween their thigh and their pelvis, despite the fact that all their hip joint 
mechanoreceptors are sitting in a jar of formaldehyde. 

 Spinal Interneurons 
 The actions of Ib inputs from Golgi tendon organs on alpha motor neu-
rons are entirely  polysynaptic ; they are all mediated by intervening spi-
nal interneurons. Indeed, most of the input to the alpha motor neurons 
comes from interneurons of the spinal cord. Spinal interneurons receive 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   476
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   476

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

477

synaptic input from primary sensory axons, descending axons from the 
brain, and collaterals of lower motor neuron axons. The interneurons are 
themselves networked together in a way that allows coordinated motor 
programs to be generated in response to their many inputs. 

 Inhibitory Input.  Interneurons play a critical role in the proper execution 
of  even  the  simplest  reﬂ exes.  Consider  the  stretch  reﬂ ex,  for  example. 
Compensation for the lengthening of one set of muscles, such as the ﬂ ex-
ors  of  the  elbow,  involves  contraction  of  the  ﬂ exors  via  the  stretch  re-
ﬂ ex but also requires relaxation of the antagonist muscles, the extensors. 
This process is called  reciprocal inhibition , the contraction of one set 
of  muscles  accompanied  by  the  relaxation  of  their  antagonist  muscles. 
The importance of this is obvious; imagine how hard it would be to lift 
something by contracting your biceps if its antagonist muscles (e.g., your 
triceps) were constantly opposing you. In the case of the stretch reﬂ ex, 
reciprocal inhibition occurs because collaterals of the Ia axons synapse 
on inhibitory spinal interneurons that contact the alpha motor neurons 
supplying the antagonist muscles (Figure 13.25). 

 Reciprocal  inhibition  is  also  used  by  descending  pathways  from  the 
brain  to  overcome  the  powerful  stretch  reﬂ ex.  Consider  a  situation  in 
which the ﬂ exors of the elbow are voluntarily commanded to contract. 
You might expect the resulting stretch of the antagonist extensor mus-
cles to activate their stretch reﬂ ex arc, which would strongly resist ﬂ exion 
of the joint. However, the descending pathways that activate the alpha 
motor neurons controlling the ﬂ exors also activate interneurons, which 
inhibit the alpha motor neurons that supply the antagonist muscles. 

 Excitatory Input. Not all interneurons are inhibitory. An example of a reﬂ ex 
mediated in part by excitatory interneurons is the  ﬂ exor reﬂ ex , sometimes 
called the  ﬂ exor withdrawal reﬂ ex  (Figure 13.26). This is a complex, polysyn-
aptic reﬂ ex arc used to withdraw a limb from an aversive stimulus (such as 
the withdrawal of your foot from the thumbtack in Chapter 3). The ﬂ exor re-
ﬂ ex is remarkably speciﬁ c. The speed of withdrawal depends on how painful 
the stimulus is. The direction of withdrawal depends on the location of the 
stimulus; for example, hot stimuli applied to your palm and to the back of 
your hand trigger withdrawals in opposite directions (as you would hope!). 

Inhibitory
interneuron

Ia axon

Muscle 
spindle

Alpha motor
neurons

Antagonist
muscle

▲ FIGURE 13.25
Reciprocal inhibition of flexors and extensors of the same joint.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   477
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   477

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

478

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Flexor
muscles

Excitatory
interneurons

Pain
axon

▲ FIGURE 13.26
Circuitry of the flexor withdrawal reflex.

 The ﬂ exor reﬂ ex is far slower than the stretch reﬂ ex, indicating that 
a number of interneurons intervene between the sensory stimulus and 
the  coordinated  motor  act.  The  ﬂ exor  reﬂ ex  is  activated  by  the  small, 
myelinated A ␦  nociceptive axons that trigger pain (see Chapter 12). The 
nociceptive axons entering the spinal cord branch profusely and activate 
interneurons in several different spinal segments. These cells eventually 
excite the alpha motor neurons that control all the ﬂ exor muscles of the 
affected limb (and, needless to say, inhibitory interneurons are also re-
cruited to inhibit the alpha motor neurons that control the extensors). 

 You’re walking around barefoot, and you step on a tack. Thanks to the 
ﬂ exor reﬂ ex, you reﬂ exively yank your foot up. But where would that leave 
the rest of your body if nothing else happened? Falling to the ﬂ oor, most 
likely. Luckily, an additional component of the reﬂ ex is recruited: the acti-
vation of extensor muscles and the inhibition of ﬂ exors  on the opposite side.  
This is called the  crossed-extensor reﬂ ex,  and it is used to compensate for the 
extra load imposed by limb withdrawal on the antigravity extensor muscles 
of the opposite leg (Figure 13.27). Notice that this is another example of re-
ciprocal inhibition, but in this case, activation of the ﬂ exors on one side of the 
spinal cord is accompanied by inhibition of the ﬂ exors on the opposite side. 

 The Generation of Spinal Motor Programs for Walking 
 The crossed-extensor reﬂ ex, in which one limb extends as the other limb 
ﬂ exes, seems to provide a building block for locomotion. When you walk, 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   478
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   478

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

479

▲ FIGURE 13.27
Circuitry of the crossed-extensor reflex.

+

–

+

+

+
+

+

+

–

Flex

Extend

Flex

Extend

you alternately withdraw and extend your two legs. All that’s lacking is 
a mechanism to coordinate the timing. In principle, this could be a se-
ries of descending commands from upper motor neurons. However, as we 
already suspected from our consideration of headless chicken behavior, 
it seems likely that this control is exerted from within the spinal cord. 
Indeed, a complete transection of a cat’s spinal cord at the mid-thoracic 
level  leaves  the  hind  limbs  capable  of  generating  coordinated  walking 
movements. The circuit for the coordinated control of walking must re-
side, therefore, within the spinal cord. In general, circuits that give rise to 
rhythmic motor activity are called  central pattern generators . 

 How do neural circuits generate rhythmic patterns of activity? Different 
circuits  use  different  mechanisms.  However,  the  simplest  pattern  gen-
erators are individual neurons whose membrane properties endow them 
with pacemaker properties. An interesting example comes from the work 
of Sten Grillner and his colleagues in Stockholm, Sweden. Based on the 
assumption that the spinal central pattern generators for locomotion in 
different species are variations on a plan that was established in a com-
mon ancestor, Grillner focused on the mechanism for swimming in the 
lamprey, a jawless ﬁ sh that has evolved slowly over the course of the past 
450  million  years.  Lampreys  swim  by  undulating  their  elongated  bod-
ies. They lack limbs and even pairs of ﬁ ns, but the coordinated rhythmic 
contractions of their body muscles during swimming closely resemble the 
contraction patterns necessary for terrestrial animals to walk. 

 The lamprey spinal cord can be dissected and kept alive  in vitro  for 
several days. Electrical stimulation of the stumps of axons descending 
from the brain can generate alternating rhythmic activity in the spinal 
cord,  mimicking  that  which  occurs  during  swimming.  In  an  important 
series of experiments, Grillner showed that the activation of NMDA re-
ceptors on spinal interneurons was sufﬁ cient to generate this locomotor 
activity. 

 Recall from Chapter 6 that NMDA receptors are glutamate-gated ion 
channels  with  two  peculiar  properties:  (1)  They  allow  more  current  to 
ﬂ ow into the cell when the postsynaptic membrane is depolarized, and (2) 
they admit Ca 2  ⫹  as well as Na ⫹  into the cell. In addition to NMDA recep-
tors, spinal interneurons possess calcium-activated potassium channels. 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   479
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   479

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

480

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Apply glutamate

(a)

(b)

(c)

K+

Glu

Mg2+

(d)

10 mV

2 sec

Ca2+
Na+

Ca2+
Na+

Calcium-
activated
potassium
channel

NMDA
receptor

▲ FIGURE 13.28
Rhythmic activity in a spinal interneuron. Some neurons respond to the activa-
tion of NMDA receptors with rhythmic depolarization. (a) In the resting state, the 
NMDA receptor channels and the calcium-activated potassium channels are 
closed. (b) Glutamate causes the NMDA receptors to open, the cell membrane to 
depolarize, and Ca2⫹ to enter the cell. (c) The rise in intracellular [Ca2⫹] causes the 
Ca2⫹-activated potassium channels to open. Potassium ions leave the neuron, hy-
perpolarizing the membrane. The hyperpolarization allows Mg2⫹ to enter and clog 
the NMDA channel, arresting the flow of Ca2⫹. (d) As [Ca2⫹] falls, the potassium 
channels close, resetting the membrane for another oscillation. (Source: Adapted 
from Wallen and Grillner, 1987.)

Now imagine the cycle that is initiated when NMDA receptors are acti-
vated by glutamate (Figure 13.28): 
 1. The membrane depolarizes. 
 2. Na ⫹  and Ca 2  ⫹  ﬂ ow into the cell through the NMDA receptors. 
 3. Ca 2  ⫹  activates potassium channels. 
 4. K ⫹  ﬂ ows out of the cell. 
 5. The membrane hyperpolarizes. 
 6. Ca 2  ⫹  stops ﬂ owing into the cell. 
 7. The potassium channels close. 
 8. The membrane depolarizes, and the cycle repeats. 

 It is easy to imagine how intrinsic pacemaker activity in spinal inter-
neurons might act as the primary rhythmic driving force for sets of motor 
neurons that in turn command cyclic behaviors like walking. However, 
pacemaker neurons are not solely responsible for generating rhythms in 
vertebrates. They are embedded within interconnected circuits, and it is 
the combination of intrinsic pacemaker properties and synaptic intercon-
nections that produces rhythm. 

 An  example  of  a  possible  pattern-generating  circuit  for  walking  is 
shown  in  Figure  13.29.  According  to  this  scheme,  walking  is  initiated 
when a steady input excites two interneurons that connect to the motor 

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   480
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   480

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER 13    SPINAL CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

481

Excitatory
interneuron

Flexor
motor neuron

Continuous
input from brain

Inhibitory
interneurons

Action potentials

Excitatory
interneuron

Extensor
motor neuron

▲ FIGURE 13.29
A possible circuit for rhythmic alternating activity.

neurons  controlling  the  ﬂ exors  and  extensors,  respectively.  The  inter-
neurons respond to a continuous input by generating bursts of outputs 
(see Figure 13.28). The activity of these two interneurons alternates be-
cause they inhibit each other via another set of interneurons, which are 
inhibitory. Thus, a burst of activity in one interneuron strongly inhibits 
the  other,  and  vice  versa.  Then,  using  the  spinal  cord  circuitry  of  the 
crossed-extensor reﬂ ex (or a similar circuit), the movements of the oppo-
site limb could be coordinated so that ﬂ exion on one side is accompanied 
by  extension  on  the  other.  The  addition  of  more  interneuronal  connec-
tions between the lumbar and cervical spinal segments could account for 
the swinging of the arms that accompanies walking, or the coordination 
of forelimbs and hind limbs in four-legged animals. 

 Work  on  many  vertebrate  species,  from  lampreys  to  humans,  has 
shown that locomotor activity in the spinal cord and its coordination de-
pend on multiple mechanisms. Such complexity is not surprising when 
we consider the demands on the system—for example, the adjustments 
necessary when one foot strikes an obstacle while walking, or the changes 
in output that are necessary to walk forward or backward, or to go from 
walking, to jogging, to running, to jumping. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 We  can  draw  several  conclusions  from  the  preceding  discussion  of  the 
spinal control of movement. First, a great deal has been learned about 
movement and its spinal control by working at different levels of analy-
sis, ranging from biochemistry and genetics to biophysics and behavior. 
Indeed,  a  complete  understanding,  whether  of  excitation–contraction 
coupling or central pattern generation, requires knowledge derived from 
every approach. Second, sensation and movement are inextricably linked 
even at the lowest levels of the neural motor system. The normal function 
of the alpha motor neuron depends on direct feedback from the muscles 
themselves and indirect information from the tendons, joints, and skin. 
Third,  the  spinal  cord  contains  an  intricate  network  of  circuits  for  the 
control of movement; it is far more than just a conduit for somatic sensory 
and motor information. 

 Evidently, coordinated and complex patterns of activity in these spi-
nal  circuits  can  be  driven  by  relatively  crude  descending  signals.  This 
leaves the question of precisely what the upper motor neurons contribute 
to motor control—the subject of the next chapter.  

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   481
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   481

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

482

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
motor system (p. 454)

The Somatic Motor System
smooth muscle (p. 454)
striated muscle (p. 454)
cardiac muscle (p. 454)
skeletal muscle (p. 454)
muscle ﬁ bers (p. 454)
somatic motor system (p. 455)
ﬂ exion (p. 455)
extension (p. 455)
ﬂ exors (p. 456)
synergists (p. 456)
extensors (p. 456)
antagonists (p. 456)
axial muscles (p. 456)

proximal (girdle) muscles (p. 456)
distal muscles (p. 456)

The Lower Motor Neuron
alpha motor neurons (p. 458)
motor unit (p. 458)
motor neuron pool (p. 459)
slow motor unit (p. 461)
fast motor unit (p. 461)

Excitation–Contraction Coupling
excitation–contraction coupling 

(p. 464)

sarcolemma (p. 464)
myoﬁ brils (p. 465)
sarcoplasmic reticulum (p. 465)
T tubules (p. 465)

sarcomere (p. 466)
thin ﬁ laments (p. 466)
thick ﬁ laments (p. 466)
myosin (p. 467)
actin (p. 467)

Spinal Control of Motor Units
muscle spindles (p. 469)
proprioceptors (p. 469)
proprioception (p. 469)
stretch reﬂ ex (p. 470)
gamma motor neuron (p. 472)
Golgi tendon organ (p. 475)
reciprocal inhibition (p. 477)
central pattern generators 

(p. 479)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What did Sherrington call the “ﬁ nal common pathway,” and why?
2.  Deﬁ ne, in one sentence, motor unit. How does it differ from motor neuron pool?
3.  Which is recruited ﬁ rst, a fast motor unit or a slow motor unit? Why?
4.  When and why does rigor mortis occur?
5.  Your doctor taps the tendon beneath your kneecap and your leg extends. What is the neural basis 

of this reﬂ ex? What is it called?

6.  What is the function of gamma motor neurons?
7.  Lenny,  a  character  in  Steinbeck’s  classic  book  Of  Mice  and  Men,  loved  rabbits,  but  when  he 
hugged them, they were crushed to death. Which type of proprioceptive input might Lenny have 
been lacking?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Kernell D. 2006. The Motoneurone and its 

Muscle Fibres. New York: Oxford University 
Press.

Lieber RL. 2002. Skeletal Muscle Structure, 

Function, and Plasticity, 2nd ed. Baltimore: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.

Poppele R, Bosco G. 2003. Sophisticated spinal 

contributions to motor control. Trends in 
Neurosciences 26:269–276.

Schouenborg J, Kiehn O, eds. 2001. The 

Segerfalk symposium on principles of spinal 
cord function, plasticity, and repair. Brain 
Research Reviews 40:1–329.

Stein PSG, Grillner S, Selverston AI, Stuart 

DG, eds. 1999. Neurons, Networks, and Motor 
Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Windhorst U. 2007. Muscle proprioceptive feed-

back and spinal networks. Brain Research 
Bulletin 73:155–202.

453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   482
453–482_Bear_13_revised_final.indd   482

12/20/14   5:15 AM
12/20/14   5:15 AM

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Brain Control of 
Movement

INTRODUCTION
DESCENDING SPINAL TRACTS

The Lateral Pathways

The Effects of Lateral Pathway Lesions
 BOX 14.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Paresis, Paralysis, Spasticity, and Babinski

The Ventromedial Pathways
The Vestibulospinal Tracts
The Tectospinal Tract
The Pontine and Medullary Reticulospinal Tracts

THE PLANNING OF MOVEMENT BY THE CEREBRAL CORTEX

Motor Cortex
The Contributions of Posterior Parietal and Prefrontal Cortex
Neuronal Correlates of Motor Planning

 BOX 14.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Behavioral Neurophysiology

Mirror Neurons

THE BASAL GANGLIA

Anatomy of the Basal Ganglia
Direct and Indirect Pathways through the Basal Ganglia

Basal Ganglia Disorders
 BOX 14.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Do Neurons in Diseased Basal Ganglia 
Commit Suicide?
 BOX 14.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Destruction and Stimulation: Useful Therapies 
for Brain Disorders

THE INITIATION OF MOVEMENT BY PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX

The Input–Output Organization of M1
The Coding of Movement in M1

 BOX 14.5   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Distributed Coding in the Superior Colliculus, 
by James T. McIlwain
The Malleable Motor Map

THE CEREBELLUM

 BOX 14.6   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Involuntary Movements—Normal and 
Abnormal

Anatomy of the Cerebellum
The Motor Loop through the Lateral Cerebellum

Programming the Cerebellum

CONCLUDING REMARKS

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   483
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   483

483

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

484

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

INTRODUCTION 
INTRRODUCCTION 

 In Chapter 13, we discussed the organization of the peripheral somatic 
motor system: the joints, skeletal muscles, and their sensory and motor 
innervation.  We  saw  that  the  ﬁ nal  common  pathway  for  behavior  is 
the  alpha  motor neuron, that  the activity  of  this  cell is under  the con-
trol of sensory feedback and spinal interneurons, and that reﬂ ex move-
ments reveal the complexity of this spinal control system. In this chapter, 
we’ll  explore how the brain inﬂ uences the activity of the spinal cord to 
 command voluntary movements. 

 The central motor system is arranged as a hierarchy of control levels, 
with the forebrain at the top and the spinal cord at the bottom. It is useful 
to think of this motor control hierarchy as having three levels (Table 14.1). 
The  highest level, represented by the association areas of neocortex and 
basal ganglia of the forebrain, is concerned with  strategy : the goal of the 
movement and the movement strategy that best achieves the goal. The 
middle  level,  represented  by  the  motor  cortex  and  cerebellum,  is  con-
cerned  with   tactics:   the  sequences  of  muscle  contractions,   arranged  in 
space and time, required to smoothly and accurately achieve the strategic 
goal. The lowest level, represented by the brain stem and spinal cord, is 
concerned with   execution : activation of the motor neuron and interneuron 
pools that generate the  goal-directed movement and make any necessary 
adjustments of posture. 

 To appreciate the different contributions of the three hierarchical lev-
els to movement, consider the actions of a baseball pitcher preparing to 
pitch to a batter (Figure 14.1). The cerebral neocortex has information— 
based on vision, audition, somatic sensation, and proprioception—about 
precisely where the body is in space. Strategies must be devised to move 
the body from the current state to one in which a pitch is delivered and 
the  desired  outcome  is  attained  (a  swing  and  a  miss  by  the  batter). 
Several throwing options are available to the pitcher—a curve ball, a fast 
ball, a slider, and so on—and these alternatives are ﬁ ltered through the 
basal ganglia and back to the cortex until a ﬁ nal decision is made, based 
in large part on past experience (e.g., “This batter hit a home run last 
time I threw a fast ball”). The motor areas of cortex and the  cerebellum 
then make the tactical decision (to throw a curve ball) and issue instruc-
tions to the brain stem and spinal cord. Activation of neurons in the brain 
stem and spinal cord then causes the movement to be executed. The prop-
erly timed activation of motor neurons in the cervical spinal cord gener-
ates a coordinated movement of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and ﬁ ngers. 
Simultaneously, brain stem inputs to the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord 
command  the  appropriate  leg  movements  along  with  postural  adjust-
ments that keep the pitcher from falling over during the throw. In addi-
tion, brain stem motor neurons are activated to keep the pitcher’s eyes 
ﬁ xed on the catcher, his target, as his head and body move about. 

 According to the laws of physics, the movement of a thrown baseball 
through space is  ballistic , referring to a trajectory that cannot be altered. 

TABLE 14.1  The Motor Control Hierarchy
Level

Structures

Function

High
Middle
Low

Strategy
Tactics
Execution

Association areas of neocortex, basal ganglia
Motor cortex, cerebellum
Brain stem, spinal cord

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   484
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   484

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

485

▲ FIGURE 14.1
The contributions of the motor control 
hierarchy. As a baseball pitcher plans to 
pitch a ball to a batter, chooses which 
pitch to throw, and then throws the ball, 
he engages the three hierarchical levels 
of motor control.

The movement of the pitcher’s arm that throws the ball is also described 
as ballistic because it cannot be altered once initiated. This type of rapid 
voluntary movement is not under the same type of sensory feedback con-
trol  that  regulates  antigravity  postural  reﬂ exes  (see  Chapter  13).  The 
reason is simple: The movement is too fast to be adjusted by sensory feed-
back. But the movement does not occur in the absence of sensory informa-
tion. Sensory information  before  the movement was initiated was crucial 
in order to decide when to initiate the pitch, to determine the starting 
 positions of the limbs and body, and to anticipate any changes in resis-
tance during the throw. And sensory information   during  the movement is 
also important, not necessarily for the movement at hand, but for improv-
ing subsequent similar movements. 

 The  proper  functioning  of  each  level  of  the  motor  control  hierarchy 
 relies  so  heavily  on  sensory  information  that  the  motor  system  of  the 
brain might properly be considered a  sensorimotor system . At the highest 
level, sensory information generates a mental image of the body and its 
relationship  to  the  environment.  At  the  middle  level,  tactical  decisions 
are based on the memory of sensory information from past movements. 
At the lowest level, sensory feedback is used to maintain posture, muscle 
length, and tension before and after each voluntary movement. 

 In  this  chapter,  we  investigate  this  hierarchy  of  motor  control  and 
how each level contributes to the control of the peripheral somatic motor 
 system. We start by exploring the pathways that bring information to the 
spinal motor neurons. From there we will ascend to the highest  levels of 
the motor hierarchy, and then we’ll ﬁ ll in the pieces of the puzzle that 
bring  the   different  levels  together.  Along  the  way,  we’ll  describe  how 
 pathology in speciﬁ c parts of the motor system leads to particular move-
ment disorders. 

  DESCENDING SPINAL TRACTS  
 DESCCENDING SPINAL TRACTTS  

 How does the brain communicate with the motor neurons of the spinal 
cord? Axons from the brain descend through the spinal cord along two 
major  groups  of  pathways,  shown  in  Figure  14.2.  One  is  in  the  lateral 
column of the spinal cord, and the other is in the ventromedial column. 
Remember this rule of thumb: The  lateral pathways  are involved in vol-
untary movement of the distal musculature and are under direct cortical 
control, and the  ventromedial pathways  are involved in the control of 
posture and locomotion and are under brain stem control. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   485
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   485

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

486

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 ▲  FIGURE 14.2
The descending tracts of the spinal 
cord.  The lateral pathways, consisting of 
the corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts, 
control voluntary movements of the distal 
musculature. The ventromedial pathways, 
consisting of the medullary reticulospinal, 
pontine reticulospinal, vestibulospinal, 
and tectospinal tracts, control postural 
muscles.

Tectospinal
tract

Corticospinal
tract

Rubrospinal
tract

Lateral
pathways

Medullary
reticulospinal
tract

Vestibulospinal
tracts

Pontine
reticulospinal
tract

Ventromedial

pathways

 The Lateral Pathways 
 The most important component of the lateral pathways is the  corticospi-
nal  tract   (Figure  14.3a).  Originating  in  the  neocortex,  it  is  the  longest 
and one of the largest central nervous system (CNS) tracts (10 6  axons in 
humans). Two-thirds of the axons in the tract originate in areas 4 and 6 of 
the frontal lobe, collectively called  motor cortex . Most of the remaining 
axons in the corticospinal tract derive from the somatosensory areas of the 
parietal lobe and serve to regulate the ﬂ ow of somatosensory information 
to the brain (see Chapter 12). Axons from the cortex pass through the inter-
nal capsule bridging the telencephalon and thalamus, course through the 
base of the  cerebral peduncle , a large collection of axons in the midbrain, 
then pass through the pons, and collect to form a tract at the base of the 
medulla. The tract forms a bulge, called the  medullary pyramid , running 
down the ventral surface of the medulla. When cut, the tract’s cross section 
is roughly triangular, explaining why it is also called the  pyramidal tract . 
 At  the  junction  of  the  medulla  and  spinal  cord,  the  pyramidal  tract 
crosses, or decussates, at the pyramidal decussation. This means that the 
 right  motor cortex directly commands the movement of the  left  side of the 
body, and the  left  motor cortex controls the muscles on the  right  side. As 
the axons cross, they collect in the lateral column of the spinal cord and 
form the lateral corticospinal tract. The corticospinal tract axons termi-
nate in the dorsolateral region of the ventral horns and intermediate gray 
matter, the location of the motor neurons and interneurons that control 
the distal muscles, particularly the ﬂ exors (see Chapter 13). 

 A much smaller component of the lateral pathways is the  rubrospinal 
tract , which originates in the  red nucleus  of the midbrain, named for its 
distinctive pinkish hue in a freshly dissected brain ( rubro  is from the Latin 
for “red”). Axons from the red nucleus decussate in the pons, almost imme-
diately, and parallel those in the corticospinal tract in the lateral column 
of the spinal cord (Figure 14.3b). A major source of input to the red nucleus 
is the very region of frontal cortex that also contributes to the corticospi-
nal tract. Indeed, it appears that this indirect corticorubrospinal pathway 
has largely been replaced by the direct corticospinal path over the course 
of primate evolution Thus, while the rubrospinal tract contributes impor-
tantly to motor control in many mammalian species, in humans it appears 
to be reduced, most of its functions subsumed by the corticospinal tract. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   486
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   486

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

487

Motor
cortex

1

2

3

4

Thalamus

1

Base of
cerebral 
peduncle

2

Midbrain

3

Medullary
pyramid

Corticospinal
tract

4

Medulla

Pyramidal
decussation

Spinal
cord

Rubrospinal
tract

(a)

(b)

 The  Effects  of  Lateral  Pathway  Lesions.   Donald  Lawrence  and  Hans 
Kuypers laid the foundation for the modern view of the functions of the 
lateral  pathways  in  the  late  1960s.  Experimental  lesions  in  both  corti-
cospinal  and  rubrospinal  tracts  in  monkeys  rendered  them  unable  to 
make fractionated movements of the arms and hands; that is, they could 
not move their shoulders, elbows, wrists, and ﬁ ngers independently. For 
 example,  they  could  grasp  small  objects  with  their  hands  but  only  by 
using all the ﬁ ngers at once. Voluntary movements were also slower and 
less accurate. Despite this, the animals could sit upright and stand with 
normal posture. By analogy, a human with a lateral pathway lesion would 
be able to stand on the pitcher’s mound but would be unable to grip the 
ball properly and throw it accurately. 

Internal
capsule

Right
red
nucleus

▲ FIGURE 14.3
The lateral pathways.  Origins and termina-
tions of (a) the corticospinal tract and 
(b) the rubrospinal tract. These tracts con-
trol fine movements of the arms and fingers.

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   487
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   487

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

488

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 14.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Paresis, Paralysis, Spasticity, and Babinski

The neural components of the motor system extend from 

the highest reaches of the cerebral cortex to the farthest ter-
minals of the motor axons in muscles. Its sheer size makes 
the  motor  system  uncommonly  vulnerable  to  disease  and 
trauma. The site of motor system damage has a big effect on 
the types of deﬁ cits patients experience.

Damage  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  motor  system—alpha 
motor neurons or their motor axons—leads to easily predicted 
consequences.  Partial  damage  may  cause  paresis  (weak-
ness). Complete severing of a motor nerve leads to paralysis,
a loss of movement of the affected muscles, and  areﬂ exia, an 
absence  of  their  spinal  reﬂ exes.  The  muscles  also  have  no 
tone or resting tension; they are ﬂ accid and soft. Damaged 
motor  neurons  can  no  longer  exert  their  trophic  inﬂ uence 
on muscle ﬁ bers (see Chapter 13). The  muscles profoundly 
 atrophy (decrease in size) with time, losing up to 70–80% of 
their mass.

Damage to the upper parts of the motor system—the motor 
cortex or the various motor tracts that descend into the spinal 
cord—can cause a distinctly different set of motor problems. 
These are common after a stroke, which damages regions of 
the cortex or brain stem by depriving them of their blood supply, 
or traumatic injury, such as a knife or gunshot wound, or even a 
demyelinating disease that damages axons (see Box 4.5).

Immediately  following  severe  upper  motor  system  dam-
age, there is a period of spinal shock: reduced muscle tone 

( hypotonia),  areﬂ exia,  and  paralysis.  Paralysis  is  known  as 
hemiplegia  if  it  occurs  on  one  side  of  the  body,  paraplegia
if  it  involves  only  the  legs,  and  quadriplegia  if  it  involves  all 
four limbs. With the loss of descending brain inﬂ uences, the 
functions of the spinal cord appear to shut down. Over the 
next several days, some of its reﬂ exive functions mysteriously 
reappear.  This  is  not  necessarily  a  good  thing.  A  condition 
called spasticity sets in, often permanently. Spasticity is char-
acterized  by  a  dramatic  and  sometimes  painful  increase  of 
muscle  tone  (hypertonia)  and  spinal  reﬂ exes  (hyperreﬂ exia), 
compared to normal. Overactive stretch reﬂ exes often cause 
clonus,   rhythmic  cycles  of  contraction  and  relaxation  when 
limb  muscles are stretched.

Another indication of motor tract damage is the Babinski 
sign,  described  by  the  French  neurologist  Joseph  Babinski 
in 1896. Sharply scratching the sole of the foot from the heel 
toward  the  toes  causes  reﬂ exive  upward  ﬂ exion  of  the  big 
toe and an outward fanning of the other toes. The normal re-
sponse to this stimulus, for anyone older than about 2 years, 
is to curl the toes downward. Normal infants also exhibit the 
Babinski sign, presumably because their descending motor 
tracts have not yet matured.

By systematically testing a patient’s reﬂ exes, muscle tone, 
and motor ability across his body, a skilled neurologist can 
often deduce the site and severity of motor system damage 
with impressive precision.

 Lesions in the monkeys’ corticospinal tracts alone caused a movement 
deﬁ cit  as  severe  as  that  observed  after  lesions  in  the  lateral  columns. 
Interestingly,  however,  many  functions  gradually  reappeared  over  the 
months following surgery. In fact, the only permanent deﬁ cit was some 
weakness  of  the  distal  ﬂ exors  and  an  inability  to  move  the  ﬁ ngers  in-
dependently.  A  subsequent  lesion  in  the  rubrospinal  tract  completely 
 reversed this recovery, however. These results suggest that the cortico-
rubrospinal pathway was able, over time, to partially compensate for the 
loss of the corticospinal tract input. 

 Strokes  that  damage  the  motor  cortex  or  the  corticospinal  tract  are 
common  in  humans.  Their  immediate  consequence  can  be  paralysis  on 
the contralateral side, but considerable recovery of voluntary movements 
may occur over time (Box 14.1). As in Lawrence and Kuypers’ lesioned 
monkeys,  it  is  the  ﬁ ne,  fractionated  movements  of  the  ﬁ ngers  that  are 
least likely to recover. 

 The Ventromedial Pathways 
 The ventromedial pathways contain four descending tracts that originate 
in  the  brain  stem  and  terminate  among  the  spinal  interneurons  con-
trolling  proximal  and  axial  muscles.  These  tracts  are  the  vestibulospi-
nal tract, the tectospinal tract, the pontine reticulospinal tract, and the 
medullary reticulospinal tract. The ventromedial pathways use sensory 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   488
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   488

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

489

information about balance, body position, and the visual environment to 
reﬂ exively maintain balance and body posture. 

 The  Vestibulospinal  Tracts.   The  vestibulospinal  and  tectospinal  tracts 
function to keep the head balanced on the shoulders as the body moves 
through space and to turn the head in response to new sensory stimuli. 
The   vestibulospinal  tracts   originate  in  the   vestibular  nuclei   of  the 
 medulla, which relay sensory information from the vestibular labyrinth 
in the inner ear (Figure 14.4a). The  vestibular labyrinth  consists of ﬂ uid-
ﬁ lled canals and cavities in the temporal bone that are closely associated 
with the cochlea (see Chapter 11). The motion of the ﬂ uid in this laby-
rinth, which accompanies movement of the head, activates hair cells that 
signal the vestibular nuclei via cranial nerve VIII. 

 One component of the vestibulospinal tracts projects bilaterally down 
the  spinal  cord  and  activates  the  cervical  spinal  circuits  that  control 
neck and back muscles and thus guide head movement. Stability of the 
head is important because the head contains our eyes, and keeping the 
eyes stable, even as our body moves, ensures that our image of the world 
 remains stable. Another component of the vestibulospinal tracts projects 
ipsilaterally as far down as the lumbar spinal cord. It helps us maintain 
an upright and balanced posture by facilitating extensor motor neurons 
of the legs. 

 The Tectospinal Tract.  The  tectospinal tract  originates in the superior 
colliculus  of  the  midbrain,  which  receives  direct  input  from  the   retina 
(Figure 14.4b). (Recall from Chapter 10 that optic tectum is another name 

1

3

2

Vestibular
nucleus

Superior
colliculus

1

2

Vestibulospinal
tracts

Medulla

Tectospinal
tract

Spinal
cord

3

(a)  

(b)  

 ▲  FIGURE 14.4
The ventromedial pathways.  Origins 
and terminations of (a) the vestibulospi-
nal tracts and (b) the tectospinal tract. 
These tracts control the posture of the 
head and neck.

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   489
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   489

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

490

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

for  the  superior  colliculus.)  Besides  its  retinal  input,  the  superior  col-
liculus receives projections from visual cortex, as well as afferent axons 
carrying somatosensory and auditory information. From this input, the 
 superior colliculus constructs a map of the world around us; stimulation 
at  one  site  in  this  map  leads  to  an  orienting  response  that  directs  the 
head and eyes to move so that the appropriate point of space is imaged 
on the fovea. Activation of the colliculus by an image of a runner sprint-
ing toward second base, for example, would cause the pitcher to orient his 
head and eyes toward this important new stimulus. 

 After leaving the colliculus, axons of the tectospinal tract quickly decus-
sate and project close to the midline into cervical regions of the spinal cord, 
where they help to control muscles of the neck, upper trunk, and shoulders. 

 The  Pontine  and  Medullary  Reticulospinal  Tracts.   The  reticulospinal 
tracts  arise  mainly  from  the   reticular  formation   of  the  brain  stem, 
which runs the length of the brain stem at its core, just under the cere-
bral aqueduct and fourth ventricle. A complex meshwork of neurons and 
ﬁ bers, the reticular formation receives input from many sources and par-
ticipates in many different functions. For the purposes of our discussion of 
motor control, the reticular formation may be divided into two parts that 
give rise to two different descending tracts: the pontine (medial) reticulo-
spinal tract and the medullary (lateral) reticulospinal tract (Figure 14.5). 
 The  pontine reticulospinal tract  enhances the antigravity reﬂ exes 
of the spinal cord. Activity in this pathway, by facilitating the extensors 
of  the  lower  limbs,  helps  maintain  a  standing  posture  by  resisting  the 
effects of gravity. This type of regulation is an important component of 
motor control: Keep in mind that most of the time, the activity of ventral 
horn neurons maintains, rather than changes, muscle length and tension. 

Cerebellum

Pons

3

Pontine reticular
formation

3

2

1

Medulla

2

▲ FIGURE 14.5
The pontine (medial) and medullary 
(lateral) reticulospinal tracts.  These 
components of the ventromedial path-
way control posture of the trunk and 
the  antigravity muscles of the limbs.

Spinal
cord

1

Medullary reticular
formation

Reticulospinal
tracts

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   490
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   490

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

491

Cerebral
cortex

Motor
cortex

Cortico-
spinal
tract

Red

nucleus

Reticular

nuclei

Superior colliculus
and vestibular nuclei

Lateral
pathways

Ventromedial
pathways

Spinal cord

▲  FIGURE 14.6
A summary of the major descending 
spinal tracts and their origins.

The  medullary reticulospinal tract , however, has the opposite effect; 
it liberates the antigravity muscles from reﬂ ex control. Activity in both 
reticulospinal tracts is controlled by descending signals from the cortex. 
A ﬁ ne balance between them is required as the pitcher goes from stand-
ing on the mound to winding up and throwing the ball. 

 Figure 14.6 provides a simple summary of the major descending spinal 
tracts. The ventromedial pathways originate from several regions of the 
brain  stem  and  participate  mainly  in  the  maintenance  of  posture  and 
certain reﬂ ex movements. Initiation of a voluntary, ballistic movement, 
such as throwing a baseball, requires instructions that descend from the 
motor cortex along the lateral pathways. The motor cortex directly acti-
vates spinal motor neurons and also liberates them from reﬂ ex control by 
communicating with the nuclei of the ventromedial pathways. It is clear 
that the cortex is critical for voluntary movement and behavior, so we will 
now focus our attention there. 

THE PLANNING OF MOVEMENT BY THE 
THE PPLANNNING OF MOVEMENNT BY THE 
CEREEBRALL CORTEX 
CEREBRAL CORTEX 

 Although cortical areas 4 and 6 are called motor cortex, it is important to 
recognize that the control of voluntary movement engages almost all of 
the neocortex. Goal-directed movement depends on knowledge of where 
the body is in space, where it intends to go, and on the selection of a plan 
to get it there. Once a plan has been selected, it must be held in memory 
until the appropriate time. Finally, instructions must be issued to imple-
ment the plan. To some extent, these different aspects of motor control 
are localized to different regions of the cerebral cortex. In this section, we 
explore  some  of  the  cortical  areas  implicated  in  motor  planning.  Later 
we’ll look at how a plan is converted into action. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   491
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   491

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

492

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

Area 4

Area 6

PMA

M1

SMA

Central
sulcus

Areas
1, 2, 3

S1

Area 5

Posterior 
parietal
cortex

Area 7

Prefrontal 
cortex

▲ FIGURE 14.7
Planning and directing voluntary movements.  These areas of the  neocortex are 
involved in the control of  voluntary movement. Areas 4 and 6  constitute the motor 
cortex.

 Motor Cortex 
 The  motor  cortex  is  a  circumscribed  region  of  the  frontal  lobe.  Area  4 
lies just anterior to the central sulcus on the precentral gyrus, and area 
6 lies just anterior to area 4 (Figure 14.7). The deﬁ nitive  demonstration 
that these areas constitute motor cortex in humans came from the work 
of  neurosurgeon  Wilder  Penﬁ eld.  Recall  from  Chapter  12  that  Penﬁ eld 
electrically stimulated the cortex in patients who were undergoing sur-
gery to remove bits of brain thought to be inducing epileptic seizures. The 
stimulation was used in an attempt to identify which regions of cortex 
were so critical that they should be spared from the knife. In the course 
of these operations, Penﬁ eld discovered that weak electrical stimulation 
of area 4 in the precentral gyrus would elicit a twitch of the muscles in a 
particular region of the body on the contralateral side. Systematic prob-
ing of this region established that there is a somatotopic organization in 
the human precentral gyrus much like that seen in the somatosensory 
areas of the postcentral gyrus (Figure 14.8). Area 4 is now often referred 
to as  primary motor cortex  or  M1.  

 The foundation for Penﬁ eld’s discovery had been laid nearly a century 
before by Gustav Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig, who in 1870 had shown that 
stimulation of the frontal cortex of anesthetized dogs would elicit move-
ment of the contralateral side of the body (see Chapter 1). Then, around 
the turn of the century, David Ferrier and Charles Sherrington discov-
ered that the motor area in primates was located in the precentral gyrus. 
By comparing the histology of this region in Sherrington’s apes with that 
of the human brain, Australian neuroanatomist Alfred Walter Campbell 
concluded that cortical area 4 is motor cortex. 

 Campbell speculated that cortical area 6, just rostral to area 4, might 
be an area specialized for skilled voluntary movement. Penﬁ eld’s studies 
50 years later supported the conjecture that this was a “higher” motor 
area  in  humans  by  showing  that  electrical  stimulation  of  area  6  could 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   492
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   492

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

493

R

in

L

it
tl

g

e

M

id

In
d

dle

T

h

u

e

x

m

b

N

e
ck

E

y

e
bro

w

Eyelid and
eyeball
Face

H

a

n

d

W

r

i

s

t

E

l

b

o
w

S

h

o

u

l

d

e

r

T
r
u
n
k

Hip

K n e e

Ankle

Toes

Lips

Jaw

T o n g u e

S w a ll o w i n g

▲ FIGURE 14.8
A somatotopic motor map of the human precentral gyrus.  Area 4 of the pre-
central gyrus is also known as primary motor cortex (M1).

evoke complex movements of either side of the body. Penﬁ eld found two 
somatotopically organized motor maps in area 6: one in a lateral region he 
called the  premotor area (PMA)  and one in a medial region called the 
 supplementary motor area (SMA)  (see Figure 14.7). These two areas 
appear to perform similar functions but on different groups of muscles. 
While the SMA sends axons that innervate distal motor units directly, 
the PMA connects primarily with reticulospinal neurons that innervate 
proximal motor units. 

 The Contributions of Posterior Parietal and Prefrontal 
Cortex 
 Recall the baseball player standing on the mound, preparing to pitch. It 
should be apparent that before the detailed sequence of muscle contrac-
tions for the desired pitch can be calculated, the pitcher must have infor-
mation about the current position of his body in space and how it relates 
to the positions of the batter and the catcher. This mental body image 
seems to be generated by somatosensory, proprioceptive, and visual in-
puts to the posterior parietal cortex. 

 Two  areas  are  of  particular  interest  in  the  posterior  parietal  cortex: 
area 5, which is a target of inputs from the primary somatosensory cor-
tical areas 3, 1, and 2 (see Chapter 12); and area 7, which is a target of 
higher  order  visual  cortical  areas  such  as  MT  (see  Chapter  10).  Recall 
that human patients with lesions in these areas of the parietal lobes, as 
can occur after a stroke, show bizarre abnormalities of body image and 
the perception of spatial relations. In its most extreme manifestation, the 
patient will simply neglect the side of the body, and even the rest of the 
world, opposite the parietal lesion. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   493
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   493

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

494

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The parietal lobes are extensively interconnected with regions in the 
anterior  frontal  lobes  that  in  humans  are  thought  to  be  important  for 
 abstract thought, decision making, and anticipating the consequences of 
action. These “prefrontal” areas, along with the posterior parietal cortex, 
represent the highest levels of the motor control hierarchy, where deci-
sions  are  made  about  what  actions  to  take  and  their  likely  outcome  (a 
curve ball followed by a strike). The prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex 
both send axons that converge on cortical area 6. Recall that areas 6 and 4 
together contribute most of the axons to the descending corticospinal tract. 
Thus, area 6 lies at the junction where signals encoding  what  actions are 
converted into signals that specify  how  the actions will be carried out. 

 This  general  view  of  higher  order  motor  planning  received  dramatic 
support in a series of studies on humans carried out by Danish neurolo-
gist Per Roland and his colleagues. They used positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET) to monitor changes in the patterns of cortical activation that 
accompany voluntary movements (see Box 7.3). When the subjects were 
asked to perform a series of ﬁ nger movements from memory, the follow-
ing regions of cortex showed increased blood ﬂ ow: the somatosensory and 
posterior parietal areas, parts of the prefrontal cortex (area 8), area 6, and 
area 4. These are the very regions of the cerebral cortex that, as discussed 
earlier,  are  thought  to  play  a  role  in  generating  the  intention  to  move 
and converting that intention into a plan of action. Interestingly, when 
the subjects were asked only to mentally rehearse the movement without 
 actually moving the ﬁ nger, area 6 remained active but area 4 did not. 

 Neuronal Correlates of Motor Planning 
 Experimental work on monkeys further supports the idea that area 6 (SMA 
and PMA) plays an important role in the planning of movement, partic-
ularly  complex movement sequences of  the distal musculature. Using a 
method  developed  in  the  late  1960s  by  Edward  Evarts  at  the  National 
Institutes of Health, researchers have recorded the activity of neurons in 
the motor areas of awake, behaving animals (Box 14.2). Cells in the SMA 
typically increase their discharge rates about a second before the execu-
tion of a hand or wrist movement, consistent with their proposed role in 
planning movement (recall Roland’s ﬁ ndings in humans). An important 
feature of this activity is that it occurs in advance of the movements of 
 either   hand,  suggesting  that  the  supplementary  areas  of  the  two  hemi-
spheres are closely linked via the corpus callosum. Indeed, movement deﬁ -
cits observed following an SMA lesion on one side, in both monkeys and 
humans, are particularly pronounced for tasks requiring the coordinated 
actions of the two hands, such as buttoning a shirt. In humans, a selective 
inability to perform complex (but not simple) motor acts is called  apraxia . 
 You’ve heard the expression “ready, set, go.” The preceding discussion 
suggests that readiness (“ready”) depends on activity in the parietal and 
frontal lobes, along with important contributions from the brain centers that 
control levels of attention and alertness. “Set” may reside in the supplemen-
tary and premotor areas, where movement strategies are devised and held 
until they are executed. A good example is shown in Figure 14.9, based on 
the work of Michael Weinrich and Steven Wise at the National Institutes of 
Health. They monitored the discharge of a neuron in the PMA as a monkey 
performed a task requiring a speciﬁ c arm movement to a target. The mon-
key was ﬁ rst given an  instruction stimulus  informing him what the target 
would be (“Get set, monkey!”), followed after a variable delay by a  trigger 
stimulus  informing the monkey that it was OK to move (“Go, monkey!”). 
Successful performance of the task (i.e., waiting for the “go” signal and 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   494
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   494

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

495

BOX 14.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Behavioral Neurophysiology

Showing  that  a  brain  lesion  impairs  movement  and  that 

brain stimulation elicits movement does not tell us how the 
brain controls movement. To address this problem, we need 
to know how the activity of neurons relates to different types 
of voluntary movement in the intact organism. PET scans and 
fMRI  are  extremely  valuable  for  plotting  out  the  distribution 
of activity in the brain as behaviors are performed, but they 
lack  the  resolution  to  track  the  millisecond-by- millisecond 
changes in the activity of individual neurons. The best method 
for this purpose is  extracellular recording with metal micro-
electrodes  (see  Box  4.1).  But  how  is  this  done  in  awake, 
 behaving animals?

This problem was solved by Edward Evarts and his col-
leagues  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.  Monkeys  were 
trained  to  perform  simple  tasks;  when  the  tasks  were  per-
formed successfully, the monkeys were rewarded with a sip of 
fruit juice. For example, to study the brain’s guidance of hand 
and arm movements, the monkey might be trained to move 
its hand toward the brightest of several spots on a computer 
screen. Pointing to the correct spot earned it a juice reward. 
After training, the animals were anesthetized. In a simple sur-
gical procedure, each monkey was ﬁ tted with a small head-
piece so that a microelectrode could be introduced into the 
brain through a small  opening in the skull. When the animals 
recovered from surgery, they showed no signs of discomfort 

from either the headpiece or the insertion of a microelectrode 
into the brain (recall from Chapter 12 that there are no noci-
ceptors in the brain). Evarts and his colleagues then recorded 
the discharges of individual cells in the motor cortex as the an-
imals made voluntary movements. In the example above, one 
could then see how the neuron’s response changes when the 
animal points to different spots on the screen.

This is an example of what is now called behavioral neu-
rophysiology, the recording of cellular activity in the brain of 
awake, behaving animals. By altering the task that the animal 
performs,  the  same  method  can  be  applied  to  the  investi-
gation  of  a  wide  range  of  neuroscientiﬁ c  topics,  including 
 attention, perception, learning, and movement. Some types 
of human neurosurgery are also done with the patient awake, 
at least during part of the procedure. By applying the tech-
niques of behavioral neurophysiology to informed, consent-
ing adults, we have also learned some fascinating information 
about uniquely human skills.

In  recent  years,  technical  developments  have  made  it 
possible to insert large numbers of microelectrodes into the 
same or different parts of an animal’s brain and to record from 
dozens or even hundreds of neurons simultaneously. This ap-
proach  yields  a  massive  amount  of  information  about  brain 
activity  and  its  relationship  to  behavior.  Understanding  this 
relationship is one of the greatest challenges in neuroscience.

then making the movement to the appropriate target) was rewarded with 
a sip of juice. The neuron in the PMA began ﬁ ring if the instruction was 
to move the arm to the left, and it continued to discharge until the trigger 
stimulus came on and the movement was initiated. If the instruction was to 
move to the right, this neuron did not ﬁ re (presumably another population 
of PMA cells became active under this condition). Thus, the activity of this 
PMA neuron reported the direction of the upcoming movement and contin-
ued to do so until the movement was made. Although we do not yet under-
stand the details of the coding taking place in the SMA and PMA, the fact 
that neurons in these areas are selectively active well before movements 
are initiated is consistent with a role in planning the movement. 

 Mirror Neurons 
 We mentioned previously that some neurons in cortical area 6 respond not 
only when movements are executed but also when the same movement 
is  only  imagined—mentally  rehearsed.  Remarkably,  some  neurons  in 
motor areas of cortex ﬁ re not only when a monkey makes a speciﬁ c move-
ment himself but also when the monkey simply observes another mon-
key, or even a human, making the same type of movement (Figure 14.10). 
These cells were called  mirror neurons  by Giacomo Rizzolatti and his 
colleagues  when  they  discovered  them  in  the  PMA  of  monkeys  at  the 
University of Parma in the early 1990s. Mirror neurons seem to represent 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   495
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   495

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

496

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

(a) 

Instruction
stimulus

 ▲  FIGURE 14.9
The discharge of a neuron in the 
 premotor area before a movement.  
(a) Ready: A monkey sits before a panel 
of lights. The task is to wait for an in-
struction stimulus that will inform him of 
the movement required to receive a juice 
reward, then perform the movement 
when a trigger stimulus goes on. The 
activity of a neuron in PMA is recorded 
during the task. (b) Set: The instruction 
stimulus (one of the square red lights) 
occurs at the time indicated by the up-
ward arrow, resulting in the discharge of 
the neuron in PMA. (c) Go: A trigger 
stimulus (a blue light in one of the but-
tons) tells the monkey when and where 
to move. Shortly after the movement is 
initiated, the PMA cell ceases firing. 
(Source: Adapted from Weinrich and 
Wise, 1982.)

(b) 

(c) 

Trigger
stimulus

Action potential activity
of PMA neuron

Instruction
stimulus

on

Trigger
stimulus

on

particular motor acts, such as reaching, grasping, holding, or moving ob-
jects, regardless of whether a monkey actually performs the act or merely 
observes others doing it. Each cell has very speciﬁ c movement preferences; 
a mirror neuron that responds when its monkey grasps a food tidbit will 
also respond to the sight of another monkey making a similar grasp of a 
tidbit but not when either monkey waves its hand. Many mirror neurons 
even  respond  to  the  unique  sounds  another  monkey  produces  during  a 
speciﬁ c movement (e.g., cracking open a peanut), as well as to the sight 
of that movement. In general, mirror neurons seem to encode the speciﬁ c 
goals of motor acts rather than particular sensory stimuli. 

 It is very likely that humans also have mirror neurons in PMA and 
other cortical areas, although the evidence for this, mainly from studies 
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (see Boxes 7.2 and 
7.3), is still indirect. 

 Mirror  neurons  may  be  part  of  an  extensive  brain  system  for  under-
standing the actions and even the intentions of others. This is an exciting 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   496
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   496

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

497

Action potential activity of
PMA neuron

Monkey picks up peanut

Monkey watches another
monkey pick up peanut

Monkey watches human
pick up peanut

Monkey watches human
pick up peanut with forceps

and attractive hypothesis. It implies that we use the same motor circuits 
both for planning our own movements and for understanding the actions 
and goals of others. When one pitcher watches another pitcher throw a 
ball, the ﬁ rst pitcher may activate the same motor planning neurons that 
allow him to throw his own ball. In a sense, he may be experiencing the 
action  of  the  other  pitcher  by  running  his  own  neural  program  for  the 
same type of action. More expansive versions of this hypothesis suggest 
that mirror neurons are also responsible for our ability to read the emo-
tions and sensations of others and to empathize. Some investigators have 
even suggested that dysfunctional mirror neurons are responsible for cer-
tain features of autism, such as the impaired ability to understand the 
thoughts, intentions, feelings, and ideas of others (see Box 23.4). As in-
triguing as these hypotheses about mirror neuron functions are, there is 

 ▲  FIGURE 14.10
The discharge of a mirror neuron.  
(a) A PMA mirror neuron fires action 
 potentials when a monkey reaches for a 
peanut. (b) The same mirror neuron fires 
when the monkey sees another monkey 
reach for a peanut. (c) The neuron also 
fires when the monkey sees a human 
reach for a peanut. (d) When the human 
reaches for a peanut using a forceps, 
the mirror neuron is not activated. 
(Source: Adapted from Rizzolatti et al., 
1996.)

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   497
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   497

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

498

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

still scant evidence for any of them. As methods for recording directly from 
human neurons improve, it will be fascinating to test these ideas directly. 

 Now, let’s again consider our baseball pitcher standing on the mound. 
He has made the decision to throw a curve ball, but the batter abruptly 
walks  away  from  the  plate  to  adjust  his  helmet.  The  pitcher  stands 
 motionless  on  the  mound,  muscles  tensed.  He  knows  the  batter  will 
 return, so he waits. The pitcher is “set”; a select population of neurons 
in the premotor and supplementary motor cortex (the cells that are plan-
ning the curve ball movement sequence) are ﬁ ring away in anticipation of 
the throw. Then the batter steps up to the plate, and an internally gener-
ated “go” command is given. This command appears to be implemented 
with the participation of a major  subcortical  input to area 6, which is the 
subject of the next section. After that, we’ll examine the origin of the “go” 
command, the primary motor cortex. 

 THE BASAL GANGLIA 
THE BBASALL GANGLIA 

 The major subcortical input to area 6 arises in a nucleus of the dorsal 
thalamus, called the  ventral lateral (VL) nucleus . The input to this 
part of VL, called VLo, arises from the  basal ganglia  buried deep within 
the  telencephalon.  The  basal  ganglia,  in  turn,  are  targets  of  the  cere-
bral cortex, particularly the frontal, prefrontal, and parietal cortex. Thus, 
we  have  a  loop  where  information  cycles  from  the  cortex  through  the 
basal ganglia and thalamus and then back to the cortex, particularly the 
 supplementary  motor  area  (Figure  14.11).  One  of  the  functions  of  this 
loop appears to be the selection and initiation of willed movements. 

 Anatomy of the Basal Ganglia 
 The  basal  ganglia  consist  of  the   caudate  nucleus ,  the   putamen ,  the 
 globus pallidus  (consisting of an internal segment, GPi, and an exter-
nal segment, GPe), and the  subthalamic nucleus . In addition, we can 
add the  substantia nigra , a midbrain structure that is reciprocally con-
nected with the basal ganglia of the forebrain (Figure 14.12). The caudate 
and putamen together are called the  striatum , which is the target of the 
cortical input to the basal ganglia. The globus pallidus is the source of the 
output to the thalamus. The other structures participate in various side 
loops that modulate the direct path: 

 Cortex → Striatum → GPi → VLo → Cortex (SMA) 

 Through the microscope, the neurons of the striatum appear randomly 
scattered, with no apparent order such as that seen in the layers of the 
cortex.  But  this  bland  appearance  hides  a  degree  of  complexity  in  the 
organization of the basal ganglia that we only partially understand. It 
appears that the basal ganglia participate in a large number of parallel 
circuits, only a few of which are strictly motor. Other circuits are involved 
in certain aspects of memory and cognitive function. We will try to give 
a concise account of the motor function of the basal ganglia, simplifying 
this very complex and poorly understood part of the brain. 

 Direct and Indirect Pathways through the Basal Ganglia 
 The motor loop through the basal ganglia originates with excitatory connec-
tions from the cortex. In the  direct pathway  through the basal ganglia, syn-
apses from cortical cells excite cells in the putamen, which make inhibitory 
synapses on neurons in the globus pallidus, which in turn make inhibitory 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   498
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   498

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

499

Prefrontal

cortex

Motor
cortex

Area

6

Area

4

Sensory
cortex

Cerebral
cortex

Basal
ganglia

VLo

Cortico-
spinal
tract

Red

nucleus

Reticular

nuclei

Superior colliculus
and vestibular nuclei

Lateral
pathways

Spinal cord

Ventromedial
pathways

VL  nucleus of
thalamus

▲ FIGURE 14.11
A summary of the motor loop from 
the cortex to the basal ganglia to the 
thalamus and back to area 6.

Basal ganglia 
and associated
structures:

Caudate
nucleus

Putamen

Striatum

Globus
pallidus

Subthalamic
nucleus

Substantia
nigra

▲ FIGURE 14.12
The basal ganglia and associated structures.

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   499
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   499

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

500

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

SMA
+

VL

Frontal cortex
neuron

Globus
pallidus

Putamen

GPe

GPi

▲ FIGURE 14.13
A wiring diagram of the basal ganglia motor loop.  Synapses marked with a 
plus (⫹) are excitatory; those with a  minus (⫺) are inhibitory.

Substantia
nigra

Subthalamus

connections  with  the  cells  in  VLo.  The  thalamocortical  connection  (from 
VLo to SMA) is excitatory and facilitates the discharge of movement-related 
cells in the SMA. This direct motor loop is summarized in Figure 14.13. 

 In general, the direct pathway allows the basal ganglia to enhance the 
initiation of desired movements. Cortical activation of the putamen leads 
to excitation of the SMA by VL. Let’s work out how this happens. A crit-
ical point is that neurons in the internal segment of the globus pallidus 
are spontaneously active at rest, and therefore they tonically inhibit VL. 
Cortical  activation  (1)  excites  putamen  neurons,  which  (2)  inhibit  GPi 
neurons, which (3) release the cells in VLo from inhibition, allowing them 
to  become  active.  The  activity  in  VLo  boosts  the  activity  of  the  SMA. 
Thus, this part of the circuit acts as a positive-feedback loop that may 
serve to focus, or funnel, the activation of widespread cortical areas onto 
the supplementary motor area of cortex. We can speculate that the “go” 
signal for an internally generated movement occurs when activation of 
the SMA is boosted beyond some threshold amount by the activity reach-
ing it through this basal ganglia “funnel.” 

 There  is  also  a  complex   indirect  pathway   through  the  basal  ganglia 
that  tends  to  antagonize  the  motor  functions  of  the  direct  pathway. 
Information from the cortex ﬂ ows through the direct and indirect path-
ways in parallel, and the outputs of both pathways ultimately regulate 
the motor thalamus (Figure 14.14). The most unique features of the indi-
rect pathway are the GPe and the subthalamic nucleus. Striatal  neurons 
inhibit  cells  of  the  GPe,  which  then  inhibit  cells  of  both  the  GPi  and 
 subthalamic nucleus. The subthalamic nucleus is also excited by axons 
from the cortex, and its projections excite the neurons of the GPi, which 
of course inhibit thalamic neurons. 

 Whereas activation of the direct pathway by the cortex tends to facilitate 
the thalamus and information passing through it, activation of the indirect 
pathway by the cortex tends to inhibit the thalamus. In general, the direct 
pathway may help to select certain motor actions while the indirect pathway 
simultaneously suppresses competing, and inappropriate, motor programs. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   500
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   500

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

501

Direct
pathway

Indirect
pathway

Cerebral cortex

Striatum

(putamen, caudate)

SN

GPe

GPi

Thalamus

STN

Excitatory

Inhibitory

Inputs to thalamus

▲ FIGURE 14.14
The direct and indirect pathways through the basal ganglia.  Dopaminergic 
neurons of the substantia nigra (SN) modulate the putamen and caudate nucleus. 
The GPe and the subthalamic nucleus (STN) are part of the indirect pathway.”

 Basal Ganglia Disorders.  Studies of several human diseases have sup-
ported the view that the direct motor loop through the basal ganglia func-
tions  to  facilitate  the  initiation  of  willed  movements. According  to  one 
model, increased inhibition of the thalamus by the basal ganglia under-
lies  hypokinesia , a paucity of movement, whereas decreased basal ganglia 
output leads to  hyperkinesia , an excess of movement. 

  Parkinson’s  disease   exempliﬁ es  the  ﬁ rst  condition.  This  disorder, 
which affects about 1% of all people over age 60, is characterized by hypoki-
nesia. Its symptoms include slowness of movement (  bradykinesia ), difﬁ culty 
in initiating willed movements ( akinesia ), increased muscle tone ( rigidity ), 
and tremors of the hands and jaw, which are most prominent at rest when 
the patient is not attempting to move. Many patients also suffer deﬁ cits of 
cognition as the disease progresses. The organic basis of Parkinson’s disease 
is a degeneration of certain substantia nigra neurons and their inputs to 
the striatum (Box 14.3). These inputs use the neurotransmitter dopamine 
(DA). The actions of DA are complex because it binds to multiple types of 
striatal DA receptors that mediate quite different effects (see Figure 14.14). 
Dopaminergic synapses terminate on striatal neurons closely adjacent to 
the synaptic inputs from the cortex, and DA can enhance the cortical inputs 
to  the  direct  pathway.  DA  facilitates  the  direct  motor  loop  by  activating 
cells in the putamen (which releases VLo from GPi-induced inhibition). In 
essence, the depletion of dopamine in Parkinson’s disease closes the funnel 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   501
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   501

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

502

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 14.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Do Neurons in Diseased Basal Ganglia 
Commit Suicide?

Several devastating neurological diseases involve the slow,

progressive  death  of  neurons.  Patients  with  Parkinson’s 
disease have usually lost more than 80% of the dopamine- 
utilizing neurons in their substantia nigra (Figure A). Neurons 
of the striatum and other regions slowly degenerate in suffer-
ers of Huntington’s disease (Figure B). Why do these neurons 
die? Ironically, it may be that natural forms of cell death are 
involved. A process called programmed cell death is essential 
for  normal  brain  development;  certain  neurons  commit  sui-
cide as part of the “program” by which the nervous system 
forms (see Chapter 23). All cells have several “death genes” 
that  trigger  a  set  of  enzymes  that  destroy  cellular  proteins 
and  DNA.  Some  forms  of  cancer  occur  when  normal  pro-
grammed cell death is prevented and cells proliferate wildly. 
Some  neurological  diseases  may  result  when  programmed 
cell death is unnaturally activated.

Huntington’s disease is caused by a dominant gene that 
codes for a large brain protein called huntingtin. The normal 
molecule has a chain of 10–34 glutamines at one end, but 
people  with  a  repeat  of  more  than  40  glutamines  develop 
Huntington’s  disease.  The  abnormally  long  huntingtins  ag-
gregate; globs of them accumulate and trigger neuronal de-
generation.  The  function  of  normal  huntingtin  is  unknown, 
but it may counterbalance the triggers for programmed cell 
death.  Thus,  Huntington’s  disease  may  arise  from  normal 
processes of neuronal degeneration gone awry.

Parkinson’s disease is usually a disease of aging, and 
the  vast  majority  of  cases  occur  after  age  60.  However, 
in 1976 and again in 1982, several relatively young drug 
abusers  in  Maryland  and  California  developed  severe 
Parkinsonian  symptoms  within  a  few  days.  This  was  ex-
traordinary  because  usually,  symptoms  accumulate  over 
many years. Medical detective work unraveled the cause 
of  the  addicts’  affliction.  Each  had  taken  street  versions 
of a synthetic narcotic that contained the chemical MPTP. 
The  incompetent  basement  chemists  who  had  synthe-
sized  the  illegal  drug  tried  to  shortcut  the  procedure, 
thereby  creating  a  chemical  by-product  that  kills  dopa-
minergic neurons. MPTP has since helped us understand 
Parkinson’s  disease  better.  We  now  know  that  MPTP  is 
converted  in  the  brain  to  MPP⫹;  dopaminergic  cells  are 
selectively vulnerable to it because their membrane dopa-
mine transporters mistake MPP⫹ for dopamine, and they 
selectively  accumulate  this  chemical  Trojan  horse.  Once 
inside the cell, MPP⫹ disrupts energy production in mito-
chondria,  and  the  neurons  apparently  die  because  their 
ATP is depleted.

The effect of MPTP supports the idea that common forms 
of  Parkinson’s  disease  might  be  caused  by  chronic  expo-
sure  to  a  slowly  acting  toxic  chemical  in  the  environment. 
Unfortunately, no one has identiﬁ ed such a toxin. Research 
has  shown  that  MPTP  can  induce  a  form  of  programmed 

that feeds activity to the SMA via the basal ganglia and VLo. At the same 
time, DA inhibits the neurons in the striatum that send inhibitory outputs, 
via the indirect pathway, to the GPe. 

 A  central  goal  of  most  therapies  for  Parkinson’s  disease  is  to  en-
hance the levels of dopamine delivered to the caudate nucleus and pu-
tamen. This is most easily done by administering the compound L-dopa 
( L-dihydroxyphenylalanine, introduced in Chapter 6), which is a precur-
sor to dopamine.  L-dopa crosses the blood–brain barrier and boosts DA 
synthesis in the cells that remain alive in the substantia nigra, thus al-
leviating  some  of  the  symptoms.  DA  agonists  are  also  useful  drugs  in 
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. However, treatments with L-dopa 
or DA agonists do not alter the progressive course of the disease, nor do 
they alter the rate at which substantia nigra neurons degenerate. They 
also  have  signiﬁ cant  side  effects.  (We  will  return  to  the  topic  of  dopa-
mine  neurons  in  Chapter  15.)  The  symptoms  of  some  Parkinson’s  dis-
ease patients can also be improved with brain surgery and stimulation 
(Box 14.4). There are also a variety of experimental treatment strategies. 
One of them is to graft DA-producing cells into the basal ganglia. A prom-
ising possibility is to use human stem cells that have been manipulated 
developmentally or genetically to produce DA. These may one day provide 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   502
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   502

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

503

neuronal death in the substantia nigra. Dopaminergic neurons 
of Parkinson’s patients may degenerate for a similar reason. 
About 5% of Parkinson’s cases are inherited, and mutations 
in several different genes are now known to cause these rarer 
types of the syndrome. One hypothesis is that Parkinsonian 
genes encode mutant proteins that are misfolded, aggregate, 

accumulate in neurons, and trigger or facilitate the death of 
dopaminergic neurons.

By  understanding  how  and  why  neurons  self-destruct, 
we  may  eventually  be  able  to  devise  strategies  of   cellular 
suicide  prevention  that  halt  or  avert  a  variety  of  terrible 
 neurological diseases.

Substantia 
nigra

Caudate
nucleus
Putamen

Figure A
 Normal (top); Parkinson’s disease (bottom). 
(Source: Strange, 1992, Fig. 10.3.)

Figure B
 Normal (left); Huntington’s disease (right). (Source: Strange, 1992, 
Fig. 11.2.)

an effective treatment, perhaps even a cure, for Parkinson’s disease, but 
we are not there yet. 

 If  Parkinson’s  disease  lies  at  one  end  of  the  spectrum  of  basal  gan-
glia disorders, Huntington’s disease lies at the other.  Huntington’s dis-
ease   is  a   hereditary,  progressive,  inevitably  fatal  syndrome  character-
ized by hyperkinesia and  dyskinesias  (abnormal movements),  dementia
(impaired  cognitive abilities), and a disorder of personality. Luckily, it is 
quite rare, afﬂ icting 5–10 people per 100,000 worldwide. The disease is 
particularly insidious because its symptoms usually do not appear until 
well  into  adulthood.  In  the  past,  patients  often  unwittingly  passed  the 
gene on to their children before they knew they had the disease. It is now 
possible to perform a genetic test that reveals whether a person carries 
the Huntington gene. People with Huntington’s disease exhibit changes 
in  mood,  personality,  and  memory.  The  most  characteristic  sign  of  the 
disease  is   chorea — spontaneous,  uncontrollable,  and  purposeless  move-
ments with rapid, irregular ﬂ ow and ﬂ icking motions of various parts of 
the body. The most obvious pathology of their brains is a profound loss 
of neurons in the caudate nucleus, putamen, and globus pallidus, with 
additional cell loss in the cerebral cortex and elsewhere (see Box 14.3). 
The damage to structures in the basal ganglia and consequent loss of its 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   503
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   503

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

504

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 14.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Destruction and Stimulation: Useful Therapies for 
Brain Disorders

Brain  disorders  can  be  very  difﬁ cult  to  treat,  and  useful

therapies  are  often  counterintuitive.  Advanced  Parkinson’s 
disease, for example, is sometimes treated with small surgi-
cal lesions of the brain or by implanting electrodes for deep 
brain stimulation (DBS). Destruction and stimulation are alter-
native strategies with the same therapeutic goal—to relieve 
patients of their severely abnormal movements.

The  most  common  treatment  for  the  early  phase  of 
Parkinson’s  disease,  L-dopa,  can  be  tremendously  helpful. 
Unfortunately, with time, the effects of the drug usually dimin-
ish, and new types of abnormal and debilitating movements, 
dyskinesias, may appear. Numerous other drugs can be use-
ful at this stage, but their effectiveness varies and they have 
side effects of their own.

Surgery  for  movement  disorders  began  in  the  1880s 
with  Victor  Horsley,  a  pioneering  British  neurosurgeon, 
who  treated  a  patient’s  uncontrollable  spontaneous  move-
ments by removing part of his motor cortex. The abnormal 
movements  ceased,  but  the  patient’s  limb  was  paralyzed. 
Between the 1940s and 1970s, surgeons found that making 
small lesions in the globus pallidus, thalamus, or subthalamic 
nucleus could often improve the tremor, rigidity, and akinesia 
of  Parkinson’s  disease  without  inducing  paralysis.  With  the 
introduction  of  L-dopa  in  1968  and  a  backlash  against  un-
justiﬁ ed types of neurosurgery (see Box 18.4), surgical treat-

ments  for  Parkinson’s  disease  fell  out  of  favor  for  a  while. 
Currently, targeted surgical lesions of basal ganglia and thala-
mus are still used in some Parkinson’s patients, but DBS has 
become an increasingly popular form of treatment.

The ancient Greeks and Egyptians were early advocates 
of the therapeutic power of electrical shocks. Their medical 
devices were electric eels and rays, and it was said that di-
rect  application  of  such  a  stimulating  ﬁ sh  could  help  allevi-
ate pain and headache, hemorrhoids, gout, depression, and 
even epilepsy. The modern use of DBS for movement disor-
ders began in the 1980s. Taking a cue from their experience 
with lesions, and noting the promising effects of stimulation 
in the operating room, surgeons began systematically test-
ing  whether  high- frequency  stimulation  (DBS)  could  reduce 
abnormal  movements  over  the  long  term.  Several  clini-
cal  trials  have  shown  that  it  can.  The  U.S.  Food  and  Drug 
Administration  approved  the  use  of  DBS  for  treatment  of 
Parkinson’s disease in 2002.

The current approach to DBS is to surgically implant bi-
lateral electrodes with their tips in the subthalamic nuclei or, 
less often, in the GPi nuclei (Figure A). Advanced brain imag-
ing  methods,  neuronal  recordings,  and  trial  stimulation  are 
used in the operating room to ensure that the electrodes are 
placed precisely. Power and control of the electrodes come 
from  small  batteries  and  computers  implanted  under  the 

inhibitory  output  to  the  thalamus  seem  to  account  for  the  disorders  of 
movement  in  Huntington’s  patients.  Cortical  degeneration  is  primarily 
responsible for their dementia and personality changes. 

 Hyperkinesia can also result from other types of lesions that affect the 
basal  ganglia.  One  example  is   ballism ,  which  is  characterized  by  vio-
lent, ﬂ inging movements of the extremities (somewhat like our baseball 
pitcher  unintentionally  throwing  the  ball  while  sitting  in  the  dugout). 
The symptoms usually occur on just one side of the body, and the condi-
tion is then called  hemiballismus . As with Parkinson’s disease, the cellu-
lar mechanisms associated with ballism are known; it is caused by dam-
age to the subthalamic nucleus (usually resulting from an interruption 
of its blood supply caused by a stroke). The subthalamic nucleus, part of 
another side loop within the basal ganglia, excites neurons in the  globus 
pallidus that project to VLo (see Figure 14.14). Remember that excitation 
of the globus pallidus inhibits VLo (see Figure 14.13). Thus, a loss of ex-
citatory drive to the globus pallidus facilitates VLo, in effect opening the 
funnel of activity to the SMA. 

 In  summary,  the  basal  ganglia  may  facilitate  movement  by  focusing 
activity  from  widespread  regions  of  cortex  onto  the  SMA.  Importantly, 
however, they also serve as a ﬁ lter that keeps inappropriate movements 
from being expressed. We saw in Roland’s PET studies that activity in the 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   504
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   504

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

505

major   depression,  obsessive-compulsive  disorder,  Tourette 
 syndrome,  schizophrenia,  epilepsy,  tinnitus,  chronic  pain, 
and Alzheimer’s disease. The best brain stimulation sites vary 
for each disorder. DBS is still an experimental treatment for 
nearly all these conditions, and only further research will de-
termine whether its beneﬁ ts outweigh its risks and costs.

Electrode
brain implant

Generator

 Figure A 

skin  below  the  collarbone.  Postoperatively,  therapists  work 
with the patients to tune the properties of the stimulation for 
 optimal effectiveness and minimal side effects.

Considering the complexities of the brain’s functions and 
dysfunctions,  DBS  is  a  very  crude  tool.  The  most  effective 
stimulation pattern tends to be a continuous stream of brief 
shocks at very high frequency (130–180 Hz). Since this does 
not resemble any natural neural pattern in the brain, how does 
DBS work? Research on this question has been intense, but 
the  answer  remains  unknown.  High-frequency  stimulation 
can  block  abnormal  ﬁ ring  in  some  cases.  Stimulation  may 
also “jam” or suppress abnormal patterns of ﬁ ring. DBS may 
activate inhibitory neurons that suppress dysfunctional brain 
activity. It may trigger release of neurotransmitters that modu-
late  cells  and  synapses.  The  mechanism  of  DBS  may  also 
vary with the brain structure being stimulated. It would not be 
surprising if all of these effects, and more, were important for 
the efﬁ cacy of DBS.

DBS can be quite effective in controlling both hyperkinetic 
and hypokinetic symptoms and improving patients’ quality of 
life overall. It is not a panacea, however. DBS is not a useful 
treatment for most of the nonmotor features of the disease, 
including disturbances of cognition, mood, gait, and speech. 
There  are  also  side  effects  and  the  usual  risks  of  surgery. 
Batteries  need  to  be  surgically  replaced  every  few  years, 
 although some DBS systems are now rechargeable.

DBS has therapeutic promise far beyond Parkinson’s dis-
ease.  It  can  reduce  the  symptoms  of  several  other  move-
ment  disorders.  It  may  be  helpful  for  a  surprising  range  of 
other  psychiatric  and  neurological  conditions,  including 

SMA does not automatically trigger movement. The initiation of  voluntary 
movement also requires activation of area 4, the subject of the next section. 

THE INITIATION OF MOVEMENT BY PRIMARY 
THE IINITIAATION OF MOVEMENT BY PRIMARY 
MOTOOR COORTEX 
MOTOR CORTEX 

 SMA is heavily interconnected with M1, cortical area 4 on the precentral 
gyrus (see Figure 14.7). The designation of area 4 as primary motor cortex 
is somewhat arbitrary because this is not the only cortical area that con-
tributes to the corticospinal tract or to movement. Nonetheless, since the 
time of Sherrington, neuroscientists have recognized that this area has the 
lowest threshold for the elicitation of movement by electrical stimulation. 
In other words, stimulation intensities that are unable to evoke movement 
in other cortical areas are still effective in evoking movement when ap-
plied to area 4, meaning that area 4 has dense, strong synaptic connections 
with the motor neurons and the spinal interneurons that drive them. Focal 
electrical stimulation of area 4 evokes the contraction of small groups of 
muscles, and, as we discussed earlier, the somatic musculature is mapped 
systematically  in  this  area.  This  ribbon  of  cortex  that  stretches  the  full 
length of the precentral gyrus is sometimes also called the  motor strip . 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   505
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   505

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

506

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

 The Input–Output Organization of M1 
 The pathway by which motor cortex activates lower motor neurons origi-
nates in cortical layer V. Layer V has a population of pyramidal neurons, 
some of which can be quite large (soma diameters approaching 0.1 mm). 
The largest cells were ﬁ rst described as a separate class by Russian anato-
mist Vladimir Betz in 1874 and are therefore called  Betz cells . In humans, 
many of the large corticospinal cells of layer V project to pools of lower 
motor neurons and excite them monosynaptically. The same corticospinal 
axons can also branch and excite local inhibitory interneurons. By con-
trolling selected groups of motor neurons and interneurons, a  single corti-
cospinal neuron may generate coordinated effects on antagonist muscles. 
For  example,  the  motor  cortex  neurons  in  Figure  14.15  excite  pools  of 
extensor motor neurons and simultaneously inhibit pools of ﬂ exor motor 
neurons. This is similar to the reciprocal inhibition that we saw in the 
spinal reﬂ ex circuitry in Chapter 13 (see Figure 13.25). 

 The layer V pyramidal cells in M1 receive their inputs primarily from 
two  sources:  other  cortical  areas  and  the  thalamus.  The  major  cortical 
inputs originate in the areas adjacent to area 4: area 6 immediately an-
terior; and areas 3, 1, and 2 immediately posterior (see Figure 14.7). The 
thalamic input to M1 arises mainly from another part of the ventral lat-
eral nucleus, called VLc, which relays information from the cerebellum. 
Besides projecting directly to the spinal cord, layer V pyramidal cells also 

Motor cortex

Corticospinal
neurons of layer V

Corticospinal tract

Inhibitory interneurons

Flexor motor
neuron pools

Extensor motor
neuron pools

Motor axons

▲ FIGURE 14.15
Corticospinal tract axons control pools of motor neurons.  Large pyramidal 
neurons in layer V of the motor cortex project axons, via the corticospinal tract, 
to the ventral horns of the spinal cord. In this case, the axons directly excite 
pools of extensor motor neurons and indirectly (via interneurons) inhibit pools of 
flexor motor neurons that serve as antagonists of the extensors. (Source: Adapted 
from Cheney et al., 1985.)

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   506
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   506

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

507

send axon collaterals to many subcortical sites involved in sensorimotor 
processing, especially the brain stem. 

 The Coding of Movement in M1 
 Researchers previously thought the motor cortex consisted of a detailed 
mapping of the individual muscles, such that the activity of a single pyra-
midal cell would lead to activity in a single motor neuron pool. However, 
the view that has emerged from more recent work is that individual pyra-
midal cells can drive numerous motor neuron pools from a group of differ-
ent muscles involved in moving a limb toward a desired goal. Recordings 
from  M1  neurons  in  behaving  animals  have  revealed  that  a  burst  of 
 activity  occurs  immediately  before  and  during  a  voluntary  movement, 
and  that  this  activity  appears  to  encode  two  aspects  of  the  movement: 
force and direction. 

 Because cortical microstimulation studies had suggested the existence 
of a ﬁ ne-grained movement map in M1, the discovery that the movement 
direction tuning of individual M1 neurons is rather broad came as a sur-
prise.  This  breadth  of  tuning  is  shown  clearly  in  a  type  of  experiment 
devised by Apostolos Georgopoulos and his colleagues, then working at 
Johns Hopkins University. Monkeys were trained to move a joystick to-
ward a small light whose position varied randomly around a circle. Some 
M1  cells  ﬁ red  most  vigorously  during  movement  in  one  direction  (180° 
in the example in Figure 14.16a) but also discharged during movement 
 angles that varied considerably from the preferred direction. The coarse-
ness in the directional tuning of the corticospinal neurons was certainly at 

90

90

180

0

180

0

270

270

(a)  

180

135

90

45

t

n
e
m
e
v
o
m

 
f

 

o
n
o

i
t
c
e
r
i

D

0
60

(c)  

Direction vector of cell

40

20

Firing rate of M1 neuron

(impulses/sec)

0

n
o
r
u
e
n
1
M

 

 
f

 

o
e

t

a
r
 
g
n
i
r
i
F

40

20

)
c
e
s
/
s
e
s
u
p
m

l

i
(

0

0

(b)  

180

t

n

90

180

270

0

Direction of movement

Direction vector of cell

▲ FIGURE 14.16
Responses of an M1 neuron during arm movements in 
 different directions.  (a) As the monkey moves a handle toward 
a small light, the responses of an M1 neuron are monitored. 
When the monkey moves in directions around the clock, the 
 relationship between the cell’s discharge rate and movement 
direction can be determined. (b) A tuning curve for an M1 
 neuron. This cell fires most during movements to the left. 
(c) Because the cell in part b responds best to leftward move-
ment, it is represented by a direction vector pointing in that 
 direction. The length of the vector is proportional to the firing 
rate of the cell. Notice that as the movement direction changes, 
the length of the direction vector changes. (Source: Adapted 
from Georgopoulos et al., 1982.)

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   507
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   507

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

508

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

odds with the high accuracy of the monkey’s movements, suggesting that 
the direction of movement could not be encoded by the activity of indi-
vidual cells that command movement in a single direction. Georgopoulos 
hypothesized  that  movement  direction  was  encoded  instead  by  the  col-
lective  activity  of  a  population  of  neurons.  Recall  the  role  of  neuronal 
  population coding  in the sensory systems, where the responses of many 
broadly tuned neurons are used to specify the properties of a particular 
stimulus  (for  example,  see  Chapter  8).  Population  coding  in  the  motor 
system implies that groups of neurons are broadly tuned for the proper-
ties of movements. 

 To test the feasibility of the idea of population coding for movement 
 direction,  Georgopoulos  and  his  colleagues  recorded  from  over  200  dif-
ferent neurons in M1; for each cell, they constructed a directional tun-
ing  curve  such  as  that  shown  in  Figure  14.16b.  From  these  data,  the 
researchers knew how vigorously each of the cells in the population re-
sponded during movement in each direction. The activity of each cell was 
represented as a  direction vector  pointing in the direction that was best 
for that cell; the length of the vector represented how active that cell had 
been during a particular movement (Figure 14.16c). The vectors repre-
senting each cell’s activity could be plotted together for each direction of 
movement, then averaged to yield what the researchers called a  popula-
tion vector  (Figure 14.17). They found a strong correlation between this 
average vector, representing the activity of the entire population of M1 
cells, and the  actual direction of movement (Figure 14.18). 

 These studies suggest three important conclusions about how M1 com-
mands  voluntary  movement:  (1)  much  of  the  motor  cortex  is  active  for 
every movement, (2) the activity of each cell represents a single “vote” for 
a particular direction of movement, and (3) the direction of movement is 
determined by a tally (and averaging) of the votes registered by each cell 
in the population. Although this population-coding scheme remains hypo-
thetical in M1, experiments on the superior colliculus by James McIlwain 
at  Brown  University  and  David  Sparks  at  the  University  of  Alabama 

i

)
c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
s
(
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

Left
180

(a)  

Cell 1

Cell 2

Movement
direction 

Direction
vector
for cell 1

Direction
vector
for cell 2

Population
vector for
cells 1 and 2

Right

Up
90
Direction of movement

0

Right

Up

(b)  

Down
270

+

+

=

=

▲ FIGURE 14.17
Direction vectors and population vectors.  (a) The tuning curves for two cells in 
the motor cortex (see Figure 14.16). Both cells fire during movement in a range of 
directions, but cell 1 fires best when movement is upward, while cell 2 responds 
best when movement is from left to right. (b) The response of each cell is repre-
sented as a direction vector, which points in the preferred direction for the neu-
ron, but its length depends on the number of action potentials the cell fires during 
movement over a range of directions. For any direction, the direction vectors of 
individual cells are averaged to yield a population vector, reflecting the strength of 
the response of both cells during this movement.

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   508
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   508

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

509

90°

180°

0°

270°

 ▲  FIGURE 14.18
Predicting the direction of movement by population vectors.  Each cluster of 
lines reflects the direction vectors of many cells in M1. Line length reflects the 
discharge rate of each cell during a movement in one of eight different directions. 
Arrows represent the average population vectors, which predict the movement 
 direction of the monkey’s arm. (Source: Georgopoulos et al., 1983.)

showed conclusively that a population code is used by this structure to 
command precisely directed eye movements (Box 14.5). 

 The  Malleable  Motor  Map.   This  scheme  for  motor  control  leads  to  an 
 interesting  prediction:  the  larger  the  population  of  neurons  represent-
ing a type of movement, the ﬁ ner the possible control. From the motor 
map shown in Figure 14.8, we would predict that ﬁ ner control should be 
possible for the hands and the muscles of facial expression, and indeed 
this is normally the case. Of course, ﬁ ne movements of other muscles can 
be learned with experience; consider the ﬁ nger, wrist, elbow, and shoul-
der movements of an  accomplished cellist. Does this mean that cortical 
cells in M1 can switch  allegiance from participation in one type of move-
ment to another as skills are learned? The answer appears to be yes. John 
Donoghue,  Jerome  Sanes,  and  their  students  at  Brown  University  col-
lected evidence indicating that such plasticity of the adult motor cortex 
is possible. For example, in one series of experiments, they used cortical 
microstimulation  in  rats  and  mapped  the  regions  of  M1  that  normally 
elicit movements of the forelimb, facial whiskers, or muscles around the 
eye  (Figure  14.19a).  Then  they  cut  the  motor  nerve  that  supplies  the 
muscles of the snout and its whiskers and found that regions of M1 that 
had evoked whisker movements now would elicit either forelimb or eye 
movements (Figure 14.19b). The motor map had been reorganized. These 
neuroscientists  speculated  that  similar  types  of  cortical  reorganization 
might provide a basis for learning ﬁ ne motor skills. 

Region of rat M1 mapped

View of dorsal
surface of rat brain

4.5

3.5

2.5

1.5

)

m
m

(
 
e

t

i

a
n
d
r
o
o
c
 
l

a
r
e
a
L

t

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
l

i

a
d
e
M

0.5

–1.5

– 0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

3.5

4.5

Posterior 

 Anterior coordinate (mm)

(a)  

)

m
m

Forelimb
Whiskers
Periocular

i

t

(
 
e
a
n
d
r
o
o
c
 
l

a
r
e
a
L

t

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
l
a
d
e
M

i

4.5

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

–1.5

– 0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

3.5

4.5

Posterior 

 Anterior coordinate (mm)

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 14.19
Malleable motor maps.  (a) This map 
represents motor cortex from a  normal 
rat. (b) This map represents a rat that 
had the motor nerve cut that supplies 
the whiskers (vibrissae). Notice the corti-
cal regions that previously evoked move-
ment of the vibrissae now cause muscle 
movement in the forelimb or around the 
eyes (periocular). (Source: Adapted from 
Sanes and Donoghue, 1997.)

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   509
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   509

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

510

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 14.5

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Distributed Coding in the Superior Colliculus
by James T. McIlwain

During  the  1960s  and  1970s,  it  became  relatively  easy  to 

record the electrical activity of single neurons in the brain. The 
power and promise of this method led to the idea of the “feature-
detector neuron,” whose discharge was thought to announce 
the presence of the stimulus feature to which it was most sensi-
tive. This view rarely tempted students of olfaction and gustation 
because they had found that the discharge of single chemosen-
sory  neurons  is  highly  ambiguous  with  respect  to  the  identity 
of the stimulus. Not so in vision research, where the cells with 
the smallest spatial receptive ﬁ elds and the most reﬁ ned prefer-
ences for speciﬁ c stimuli seemed most interesting. Any neuron 
responsive to a range of stimuli was regarded as crudely selec-
tive and unsuited to processes requiring high resolution.

Neurophysiologists who examined visual areas of the brain 
stem soon encountered a paradox. The receptive ﬁ elds of cells in 
the superior colliculus turned out to be very large, yet this struc-
ture was clearly important for the execution of highly accurate 
saccadic eye movements, which change the direction of gaze 
to a stimulus of interest. The superior colliculus receives orderly 
input from both the retina and the  visual cortex, and damage 
to it impairs an animal’s ability to direct its gaze at novel stimuli. 
Focal  electrical  stimulation  of  the   colliculus  evokes  saccades 
whose directions and amplitudes are correlated with the visual 
receptive ﬁ elds of cells at the stimulus site. A small change in 
the position of the stimulating electrode results in small changes 
in the saccade’s  direction and amplitude. Certain collicular neu-
rons discharge in association with saccadic eye movements, 
as if they are part of the control mechanism that speciﬁ es the 
dimensions of the movement. This activity occurs in association 

with saccades that terminate across a restricted zone of visual 
space called the movement ﬁ eld of the cell, by analogy to the 
sensory  receptive ﬁ eld. How could such cells specify the target 
of a saccade with any accuracy if their movement ﬁ elds and 
visual receptive ﬁ elds are very large?

The  answer  began  to  emerge  from  experiments  on  the 
cat’s superior colliculus in my laboratory at Brown University 
and from studies of the primate’s superior colliculus by David 
Sparks, then at the University of Alabama. We asked the in-
verse of the traditional receptive ﬁ eld question or  movement 
ﬁ eld question. From the sensory side, instead of asking where 
a point of light must be located to activate a collicular neuron, 
we asked where in the superior colliculus are the cells that 
have the point in their receptive ﬁ elds—that “see” the point. 
Similarly, the key consideration on the motor side is the loca-
tion of the cells that discharge before a saccade to a given 
target, rather than the size of their  individual  movement ﬁ elds. 
The analyses from both laboratories revealed that these re-
gions of activity are widespread, occupying considerable frac-
tions of the collicular tissue. As the stimulus or  target location 
moves  around  in  visual  space,  the  corresponding  patch  of 
neural activity moves around in the superior  colliculus.

A general idea of how a system of such neurons may en-
code a saccade is shown in Figure A. On the left, each arrow 
on the retinotopic map of the superior colliculus symbolizes 
the contribution of its location to the code for the direction of 
a saccade. The more closely packed the arrows, the stronger 
the signal from that region to brain stem circuits that shape 
the motor commands for the saccade. The distribution of the 

 From  the  preceding  discussion,  we  can  imagine  that  when  the  time 
has come for our baseball pitcher to wind up, his motor cortex generates 
a torrent of activity in the pyramidal tract. What could appear to be a dis-
cordant voice to a neurophysiologist recording from a single M1 neuron is 
part of a clear chorus of activity to the spinal motor neurons that generate 
the precise movements necessary to propel the baseball accurately. 

THE CEREBELLUM 
THE CCEREBBELLUM 

 It is not enough to simply command the muscles to contract. Throwing 
a  ball  requires  a  detailed   sequence   of  muscle  contractions,  each  one 
 generating exactly the right amount of force at precisely the right time. 
These critical motor control functions belong to the  cerebellum  (intro-
duced in Chapter 7). The importance of the cerebellum in this aspect of 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   510
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   510

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

511

arrows is consistent with the effects of focal electrical stimu-
lation.  Thus,  for  example,  stimulation  at  successively  lower 
points in the lower half of the map (representing the lower vi-
sual ﬁ eld) leads to downwardly directed saccades of increas-
ing amplitude. If the appearance of target 1 in the right side of 
the ﬁ gure excited cells in the lower unshaded oval of the map, 
the collective activity of the cells would specify the downward 
and horizontal components needed for a saccade to the tar-
get.  The  appearance  of  target  2  would  activate  the  upper 
unshaded area, assembling the components of the correct, 
upwardly  directed  saccade.  In  this  model,  changes  in  the 
position of the target modify the composition of the output 

signal to yield a saccade matching any position of the target.
The large size of the receptive ﬁ elds and movement ﬁ elds 
of collicular neurons means that information about the loca-
tion of a visual point or a saccade target is distributed among 
many neurons. The model of Figure A shows how the  active 
population of collicular neurons may indicate the target’s po-
sition  as  a  motor  code.  The  simple  and  incomplete  model 
shown here represents only one of several ideas about how 
the superior colliculus accomplishes its task. It seems certain, 
though, that target location and saccade measurements are 
encoded in the distribution of activity across a population of 
neurons.

Superior Colliculus 

Vertical

Eye movements

5

10

20 30 40

15
10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

Figure A

Target 2

Horizontal

Target 1

motor   control  is  plainly  revealed  by  cerebellar  lesions;  movements  be-
come  uncoordinated and inaccurate, a condition known as  ataxia . 

 Take this simple test. Lay your arms in your lap for a moment, then 
touch your nose with one ﬁ nger. Try it again with your eyes closed. No prob-
lem, right? Patients with cerebellar damage are often incapable of perform-
ing this simple task. Instead of smoothly and simultaneously moving the 
shoulder, elbow, and wrist to bring the ﬁ nger to rest on the nose, they move 
each joint sequentially—ﬁ rst the shoulder, then the elbow, and ﬁ nally the 
wrist.  This  is  called   dyssynergia ,  decomposition  of  synergistic  multijoint 
movement. Another characteristic deﬁ cit shown by these patients is that 
their ﬁ nger movement will be  dysmetric ; they will either come up short of 
the nose or shoot past it, poking themselves in the face. You may recognize 
these symptoms as similar to those that accompany ethanol intoxication. 
Indeed, much of the clumsiness that accompanies alcohol abuse is a direct 
consequence of the depression of  cerebellar circuits (Box 14.6). 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   511
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   511

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

512

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

BOX 14.6

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Involuntary Movements—Normal and Abnormal

Raise your hand in front of your face, and try to hold it as 

still as possible. You will see a very slight trembling of your 
ﬁ ngers. This is called physiological tremor, a small, rhythmic 
oscillation of about 8–12 Hz. It is perfectly normal, and there 
is nothing you can do to stop it short of resting your hand on 
the table. A variety of everyday circumstances—stress, anxi-
ety, hunger, fatigue, fever, too much caffeine—can enhance 
the tremor.

As  we  have  discussed  in  this  chapter,  some  neuro-
logical diseases lead to more dramatic involuntary move-
ments, with distinctive characteristics. Parkinson’s disease 
is  often  associated  with  a  large  resting  tremor  of  about 
3–5 Hz. Movement is at its worst when the patient is not 
attempting to move. Strangely enough, the tremor imme-
diately  disappears  during  a  voluntary  movement.  On  the 
other  hand,  people  with  cerebellar  damage  have  no  ab-
normal  tremor  at  rest  but  often  show  dramatic   intention 

tremor when they try to move. Cerebellar tremor is an ex-
pression of ataxia, the uncoordinated contractions of the 
muscles used in the movement. For example, as the pa-
tient  tries  to  move  her  ﬁ nger  from  one  point  in  space  to 
another,  or  track  a  pathway  with  her  ﬁ nger,  she  makes 
large  errors; in trying to correct an error, she makes more 
errors,  and  so  on,  as  the  ﬁ nger  wobbles  inaccurately  to-
ward its destination.

Huntington’s disease causes chorea (from the Greek for 
“dance”)—quick,  irregular,  involuntary  but  relatively  coordi-
nated movements of the limbs, trunk, head, and face. Other 
types of basal ganglia disease can lead to athetosis—much 
slower,  almost  writhing  movements  of  the  neck  and  trunk. 
The unique properties of each abnormal movement can help 
in  the  diagnosis  of  neurological  diseases,  and  they  have 
taught us volumes about the normal functions of the dam-
aged parts of the brain.

Flexion

Extension

1 sec

1 sec

1 sec

10 sec

10 min

Physiological tremor

Resting tremor

Intention tremor

Chorea

Athetosis

Abnormal

Normal

Start

Finish

Abnormal

Normal

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   512
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   512

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

513

 Anatomy of the Cerebellum 
 Cerebellar  anatomy  is  shown  in  Figure  14.20.  The  cerebellum  sits  on 
stout stalks of axons called peduncles that rise from the pons; the whole 
structure resembles a piece of cauliﬂ ower. The visible part of the cerebel-
lum  is  actually  a  thin  sheet  of  cortex,  which  is  repeatedly  folded.  The 
dorsal surface is characterized by a series of shallow ridges called folia 
(singular:  folium),  which  run  transversely  (from  side  to  side).  In  addi-
tion, there are deeper transverse ﬁ ssures, revealed by making a sagittal 
slice through the cerebellum; these divide the cerebellum into 10 lobules. 
Together,  folia  and  lobules  serve  to  greatly  increase  the  surface  area 
of the cerebellar cortex, as the gyri of the cerebrum do for the cerebral 
cortex. Neurons are also embedded deep within the white matter of the 
cerebellum, forming the  deep cerebellar nuclei , which relay most of the 
cerebellar cortical output to various brain stem structures. The cerebel-
lum constitutes only about 10% of the total volume of the brain, but its 
cortex has an astonishingly high density of neurons. The vast majority of 
these are tiny excitatory neurons called granule cells, whose somata lie in 
the granule cell layer (Figure 14.21a,b). The number of granule neurons 
in the cerebellum is about equal to the number of other neurons in the 
entire CNS. The largest neuron in the cerebellar cortex is the inhibitory 
Purkinje cell, which receives excitatory input from granule cells in the 
molecular layer and sends its inhibitory axons to the deep cerebellar nu-
clei (Figure 14.21c). 

 Unlike the cerebrum, the cerebellum is not obviously split down the 
middle. At the midline, the folia appear to run uninterrupted from one 
side to the other. The only distinguishing feature of the midline is a bump 
that runs like a backbone down the length of the cerebellum. This mid-
line region is called the  vermis  (from the Latin for “worm”), and it sep-
arates  the  two  lateral   cerebellar  hemispheres   from  each  other.  The 
 vermis  and  the  hemispheres  represent  important  functional  divisions. 
The  vermis  sends  output  to  the  brain  stem  structures  that  contribute 

Hemisphere

Vermis

(b)  

Folia

Lobules

Cerebellar
cortex

(a)  

Medulla

Spinal cord

Deep cerebellar
nuclei

(c)  

Pontine
nuclei

Fourth
ventricle

▲ FIGURE 14.20
The cerebellum. (a) A dorsal view of the human cerebellum, showing the vermis and 
hemispheres. (b) A midsagittal view of the brain, showing the lobules of the cerebel-
lum. (c) A cross section of the cerebellum, showing the cortex and deep nuclei.

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   513
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   513

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

514

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 14.21
Neurons of the cerebellar cortex. (a) A his-
tological section through the folia of the cere-
bellar cortex. Fluorescent stains color the mo-
lecular layer green and the granular cell layer 
blue. (b) A close-up of the layers of the cere-
bellar cortex. (c) A Purkinje cell after it has 
been injected with a fluorescent dye through 
the tip of a microelectrode. (Source: Parts a 
and b adapted from Tom Deerinck and Mark 
Ellisman, National Center for Microscopy and 
Imaging Research; part c adapted from Tet-
suya Tatsukawa, RIKEN Brain Science Insti-
tute, Wako, Japan)

Folia

Molecular layer

Granule cell layer

Molecular layer

Purkinje cells

Granule cell layer

Purkinje cell
dendrites

Microelectrode

Soma

Axon

to the  ventromedial descending spinal pathways, which, as already dis-
cussed,  control  the  axial  musculature.  The  hemispheres  are  related  to 
other brain structures that contribute to the lateral pathways, particu-
larly the  cerebral cortex. For the purpose of illustration, we’ll focus on the 
lateral cerebellum, which is particularly important for limb movements. 

 The Motor Loop through the Lateral Cerebellum 
 The  simplest  circuit  involving  the  lateral  cerebellum  constitutes  yet 
another loop, shown schematically in Figure 14.22. Axons arising from 
layer V pyramidal cells in the sensorimotor cortex—frontal areas 4 and 
6, somatosensory areas on the postcentral gyrus, and the posterior pari-

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   514
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   514

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

515

Prefrontal

cortex

Motor
cortex

Area

6

Area

4

Sensory
cortex

Cerebral
cortex

Basal
ganglia

VLo

VLc

Pons

Cerebellum

Cortico-
spinal
tract

Red

nucleus

Reticular

nuclei

Superior colliculus
and vestibular nuclei

Lateral
pathways

Ventromedial
pathways

Spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 14.22
A summary of the motor loop through 
the cerebellum.

etal areas—form a massive projection to clusters of cells in the pons, the 
  pontine  nuclei ,  which  in  turn  feed  the  cerebellum.  To  appreciate  the 
size of this pathway, consider that the corticopontocerebellar projection 
contains about 20 million axons; that’s  20 times  more than in the pyrami-
dal tract! The lateral cerebellum then projects back to the motor cortex 
via a relay in the ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus (VLc). 

 From the effects of lesions in this pathway, we can deduce that it is 
critical for the proper execution of planned, voluntary, multijoint move-
ments. Indeed, once the cerebellum has received the signal for movement 
intent, its activity appears to instruct the primary motor cortex with re-
spect to movement direction, timing, and force. For ballistic movements, 
these instructions are based entirely on predictions about their outcome 
(because such movements are too fast for sensory feedback to be of much 
immediate use). Such predictions are based on past experience; that is, 
they are learned. Therefore, the cerebellum is another important site for 
motor  learning;  it  is  a  place  where   what  is  intended   is  compared  with 
 what  has  happened.   When  this  comparison  fails  to  meet  expectations, 
compensatory modiﬁ cations are made in certain cerebellar circuits. 

 Programming the Cerebellum. We will return to cerebellar circuitry and 
how it is modiﬁ ed by experience in Chapter 25. But for now, think about the 
process of learning a new motor skill (e.g., skiing, piano playing, juggling, 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   515
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   515

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

516

PART TWO    SENSORY AND MOTOR SYSTEMS

knitting, throwing a curve ball). Early on, you must  concentrate on new 
movements, and you tend to perform them in a disjointed and uncoordi-
nated fashion. Practice makes perfect, however. As you master the skill, the 
movements will become smooth, and eventually you will be able to perform 
them almost unconsciously. This process  represents the creation of a new 
motor program that generates the  appropriate movement sequences on de-
mand without the need for conscious control. 

 Recall  that  the  word  “cerebellum”  derives  from  the  Latin  for  “ little 
brain.”  The  cerebellum  acts  as  a  small  brain  within  the  brain,  uncon-
sciously  determining  that  the  programs  for  skilled  movement  are  exe-
cuted properly and are adjusted whenever their execution fails to meet 
expectations. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Let’s return to the example of the baseball pitcher one last time to put the 
different pieces of the motor control puzzle together. Imagine the pitcher 
walking to the mound. The spinal circuits of the crossed extensor reﬂ ex 
are engaged and coordinated by descending commands on the ventrome-
dial pathways. Extensors contract, ﬂ exors relax; ﬂ exors contract, exten-
sors relax. 

 Once on the mound, the pitcher is joined by the umpire. Into his out-
stretched  hand  the  umpire  drops  a  new  baseball.  The  added  weight 
stretches the ﬂ exors of the arm. Group Ia axons become more active and 
cause  monosynaptic  excitation  of  the  motor  neurons  innervating  the 
 ﬂ exors. The muscles contract to hold the ball up against gravity. 

 He is now ready to pitch. His neocortex is fully engaged and active as 
he looks at the catcher for the hand signal that tells him the type of pitch 
to throw. At the same time, the ventromedial pathways are working to 
maintain his standing posture. Although his body is still, the neurons of 
the ventral horns of the spinal cord are ﬁ ring steadily under the inﬂ u-
ence of the ventromedial pathways, keeping the extensors of the lower 
leg activated. 

 The catcher ﬂ ashes the sign for the curve ball. The sensory information 
is  communicated  from  the  occipital  cortex  to  the  parietal  and  prefron-
tal cortex. These regions of cortex along with area 6 begin planning the 
movement strategy. 

 The batter steps up to the plate and is ready. Activity cycling through 
the  basal  ganglia  increases,  triggering  the  initiation  of  the  pitch.  In 
response to this input to the cerebral cortex, SMA activity increases, fol-
lowed immediately by the activation of M1. Now instructions are sweep-
ing down the axons of the lateral pathways. The cerebellum, activated by 
the  corticopontocerebellar  inputs,  uses  these  instructions  to  coordinate 
the timing and force of the descending activity so the proper sequence of 
muscle contractions can occur. Cortical input to the reticular formation 
leads to the release of the antigravity muscles from reﬂ ex control. Finally, 
lateral pathway signals engage the motor neurons and interneurons of 
the spinal cord, which cause muscles of the arms and legs to contract. 

 The  pitcher  winds  up  and  throws.  The  batter  swings.  The  ball  sails 
over the left-ﬁ eld fence. The crowd jeers; the manager curses; the team 
owner frowns. Even as the pitcher’s cerebellum goes to work making ad-
justments for the next pitch, his body reacts. His face ﬂ ushes; he sweats; 
he’s  angry  and  anxious.  But  these  latter  reactions  are  not  the  stuff  of 
the  somatic  motor  system.  These  are  topics  of  Part  III,  The  Brain  and 
Behavior. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   516
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   516

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

CHAPTER 14    BRAIN CONTROL OF MOVEMENT

517

K E Y   T E R M S

 Descending Spinal Tracts 
 lateral pathway (p. 485) 
 ventromedial pathway 

(p. 485) 

 corticospinal tract (p. 486) 
 motor cortex (p. 486) 
 pyramidal tract (p. 486) 
 rubrospinal tract (p. 486) 
 red nucleus (p. 486) 
 vestibulospinal tract (p. 489) 
 tectospinal tract (p. 489) 
 reticular formation (p. 490) 
 pontine reticulospinal tract 

 medullary reticulospinal tract 

(p. 490) 

(p. 491) 

 The Planning of Movement by 
the Cerebral Cortex 
 primary motor cortex (M1) 

(p. 492) 

 premotor area (PMA) (p. 493) 
 supplementary motor area 

(SMA) (p. 493) 

 mirror neuron (p. 495) 
 The Basal Ganglia 
 ventral lateral (VL) nucleus 

(p. 498) 

 basal ganglia (p. 498) 
 caudate nucleus (p. 498) 
 putamen (p. 498) 
 globus pallidus (p. 498) 
 subthalamic nucleus (p. 498) 

 substantia nigra (p. 498) 
 striatum (p. 498) 
 Parkinson’s disease (p. 501) 
 Huntington’s disease (p. 503) 
 ballism (p. 504) 

 The Initiation of Movement by 
the Primary Motor Cortex 
 motor strip (p. 505) 
 population coding (p. 508) 

 The Cerebellum 
 cerebellum (p. 510) 
 ataxia (p. 511) 
 vermis (p. 513) 
 cerebellar hemispheres (p. 513) 
 pontine nuclei (p. 515) 

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

 1. List the components of the lateral and ventromedial descending spinal pathways. Which type of

movement does each path control?

 2. You are a neurologist presented with a patient who has the following symptom: an inability to
independently wiggle the toes on the left foot, but with all other movements (walking, indepen-
dent ﬁ nger movement) apparently intact. You suspect a lesion in the spinal cord. Where?

 3. PET scans can be used to measure blood ﬂ ow in the cerebral cortex. What parts of the cortex

show increased blood ﬂ ow when a subject is asked to think about moving her right ﬁ nger?

 4. Why is L-dopa used to treat Parkinson’s disease? How does it act to alleviate the symptoms?
 5. Individual Betz cells ﬁ re during a fairly broad range of movement directions. How might they

work together to command a precise movement?

 6. Sketch the motor loop through the cerebellum. What movement disorders result from damage to

the cerebellum?

aaaaaa

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G 

 Alstermark B, Isa T. 2012. Circuits for skilled 

reaching and grasping.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  35:559–578. 

 Blumenfeld H. 2011.  Neuroanatomy Through 

Clinical Cases , 2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Glickstein M, Doron K. 2008. Cerebellum: con-

nections and functions.  Cerebellum  7:589–594. 
 Graziano M. 2006. The organization of behavioral 

repertoire in motor cortex.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  29:105–134. 

 Donoghue J, Sanes J. 1994. Motor areas of 
the cerebral cortex.  Journal of Clinical 
Neurophysiology  11:382–396. 

 Lemon RN. 2008. Descending pathways in 

motor control.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  
31:195–218. 

 Foltynie T, Kahan J. 2013. Parkinson’s disease: 

an update on pathogenesis and treatment. 
 Journal of Neurology  260:1433–1440. 

 Rizzolatti G, Sinigaglia C. 2008.  Mirrors in the 

Brain: How Our Minds Share Actions and 
Emotions.  New York: Oxford University Press. 

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   517
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   517

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   518
483–518_Bear_14_revised_final.indd   518

12/20/14   5:20 AM
12/20/14   5:20 AM

PART THREE

The Brain and 
Behavior

C H A P T E R   1 5
Chemical Control of the Brain and Behavior      521

C H A P T E R   1 6
Motivation      551

C H A P T E R   1 7
Sex and the Brain      579

C H A P T E R   1 8
Brain Mechanisms of Emotion      615

C H A P T E R   1 9
Brain Rhythms and Sleep      645

 C H A P T E R   2 0
Language      685

 C H A P T E R   2 1
The Resting Brain, Attention, and Consciousness      719

 C H A P T E R   2 2
Mental Illness      751

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   519
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   519

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   520
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   520

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Chemical Control of the 
Brain and Behavior

INTRODUCTION
THE SECRETORY HYPOTHALAMUS

An Overview of the Hypothalamus

Homeostasis
Structure and Connections of the Hypothalamus

Pathways to the Pituitary

Hypothalamic Control of the Posterior Pituitary
Hypothalamic Control of the Anterior Pituitary
 BOX 15.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Stress and the Brain

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM

ANS Circuits

Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Divisions
The Enteric Division
Central Control of the ANS

Neurotransmitters and the Pharmacology of Autonomic Function

Preganglionic Neurotransmitters
Postganglionic Neurotransmitters

THE DIFFUSE MODULATORY SYSTEMS OF THE BRAIN

Anatomy and Functions of the Diffuse Modulatory Systems

 BOX 15.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: You Eat What You Are
The Noradrenergic Locus Coeruleus
 BOX 15.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons, 
by Floyd Bloom
The Serotonergic Raphe Nuclei
The Dopaminergic Substantia Nigra and Ventral Tegmental Area
The Cholinergic Basal Forebrain and Brain Stem Complexes

Drugs and the Diffuse Modulatory Systems

Hallucinogens
Stimulants

CONCLUDING REMARKS

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   521
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   521

521521521

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

522

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 It should be obvious by now that knowing the organization of synaptic 
connections is essential to understanding how the brain works. It’s not 
from a love of Greek and Latin that we belabor neuroanatomy! Most of 
the connections we have described are precise and speciﬁ c. For example, 
for you to be able to read these words, there must be a very ﬁ ne-grained 
neural mapping of the light falling on your retina—how else could you see 
the dot in this question mark? The information must be carried centrally 
and dispersed precisely to many parts of the brain for processing, coor-
dinated with control of the motor neurons that closely regulate the six 
muscles of each eye as it scans the page. 

 In addition to anatomical precision, point-to-point communication in 
the sensory and motor systems requires mechanisms that restrict synap-
tic communication to the cleft between the axon terminal and its target. 
It just wouldn’t do for glutamate released in the somatosensory cortex to 
activate  neurons  in  the  motor  cortex!  Furthermore,  transmission  must 
be brief enough to allow rapid responses to new sensory inputs. Thus, at 
these synapses, only minute quantities of neurotransmitter are released 
with each impulse, and these molecules are then quickly destroyed enzy-
matically or taken up by neighboring cells. The postsynaptic actions at 
transmitter-gated ion channels last only as long as the transmitter is in 
the cleft, a few milliseconds at most. Many axon terminals also possess 
presynaptic  “autoreceptors”  that  detect  the  transmitter  concentrations 
in the cleft and inhibit release if they get too high. These mechanisms 
ensure that this type of synaptic transmission is tightly constrained, in 
both space and time. 

 The  elaborate  mechanisms  that  constrain  point-to-point  synaptic 
transmission are somewhat like those in telecommunications. Telephone 
systems make possible very speciﬁ c connections between one place and 
another so that your mother in Tacoma can talk just to you in Providence, 
reminding you that her birthday was last week. The telephone lines or 
cellular  transmissions  act  like  precise  synaptic  connections.  The  inﬂ u-
ence of one neuron (your mother) is targeted to a small number of other 
neurons (in this case, only you). The embarrassing message is limited to 
your ears only. The inﬂ uence of a neuron in one of the sensory or motor 
systems  discussed  so  far  usually  extends  to  the  few  dozen  or  few  hun-
dred cells it synapses on—a conference call, to be sure, but still relatively 
 speciﬁ c. 

 Now imagine your mother being interviewed on a television talk show 
broadcast on a satellite network. The widespread satellite transmission 
may allow her to tell millions of people that you forgot her birthday, and 
the loudspeaker in each television set will announce the message to anyone 
within  earshot.  Likewise,  certain  neurons  communicate  with  hundreds 
of thousands of other cells. These widespread systems tend to act rela-
tively slowly, over seconds to minutes. Because of their broad, protracted 
actions, such systems in the brain can orchestrate entire behaviors, rang-
ing from falling asleep to falling in love. Indeed, many of the behavioral 
dysfunctions collectively known as mental disorders are believed to result 
speciﬁ cally from imbalances of certain of these chemicals. 

 In this chapter, we look at three components of the nervous system that 
operate in expanded space and time (Figure 15.1). One component is the 
secretory hypothalamus . By secreting chemicals directly into the blood-
stream, the secretory hypothalamus can inﬂ uence functions throughout 
both the brain and the body. A second component, controlled neurally by 
the  hypothalamus,  is  the   autonomic  nervous  system    (ANS) ,  introduced 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   522
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   522

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

523

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

▲ FIGURE 15.1
 Patterns of communication in the nervous system.  (a)  Most of the systems we 
have discussed in this book may be described as point-to-point. The proper 
functioning of these systems requires restricted synaptic activation of target cells 
and signals of brief duration. In contrast, three other components of the nervous 
system act over great distances and for long periods of time.  (b)  Neurons of the 
secretory hypothalamus affect their many targets by releasing hormones directly 
into the bloodstream.  (c)  Networks of interconnected neurons of the ANS can 
work together to activate tissues all over the body.  (d)  Diffuse modulatory 
 systems extend their reach with widely divergent axonal projections. 

in  Chapter  7.  Through  extensive  interconnections  within  the  body,  the 
ANS  simultaneously  controls  the  responses  of  many  internal  organs, 
blood vessels, and glands. The third component exists entirely within the 
central nervous system (CNS) and consists of several related cell groups 
that differ with respect to the neurotransmitter they use. All of these cell 
groups  extend  their  spatial  reach  with  highly  divergent  axonal  projec-
tions and prolong their actions by using metabotropic postsynaptic recep-
tors.  Members  of  this  component  of  the  nervous  system  are  called  the 
 diffuse modulatory systems of the brain . The diffuse systems are believed 
to regulate, among other things, the level of arousal and mood. 

 This chapter serves as a general introduction to these systems. Later 
chapters will explore how they contribute to speciﬁ c behaviors and brain 
states: motivation (Chapter 16), sexual behavior (Chapter 17), emotion 
(Chapter 18), sleep (Chapter 19), and psychiatric disorders (Chapter 22). 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   523
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   523

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

524

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Dorsal thalamus
(cut edge)

Third
ventricle

Optic chiasm

Pituitary

Hypothalamus

▲ FIGURE 15.2
Locations of the hypothalamus and 
pituitary. This is a midsagittal section. 
Notice that the hypothalamus, whose 
borders are indicated with a dashed line, 
forms the wall of the third ventricle and 
sits below the dorsal thalamus.

THE SECRETORY HYPOTHALAMUS 
THE SSECREETORY HYPOTHALLAMUS 

 Recall from Chapter 7 that the hypothalamus sits below the thalamus, 
along  the  walls  of  the  third  ventricle.  It  is  connected  by  a  stalk  to  the 
 pituitary  gland,  which  dangles  below  the  base  of  the  brain,  just  above 
the roof of your mouth (Figure 15.2). Although this tiny cluster of nuclei 
makes  up  less  than  1%  of  the  brain’s  mass,  the  inﬂ uence  of  the  hypo-
thalamus on body physiology is enormous. Let’s take a brief tour of the 
hypothalamus and then focus on some of the ways in which it exerts its 
powerful inﬂ uence. 

 An Overview of the Hypothalamus 
 The hypothalamus and dorsal thalamus are adjacent to one another, but 
their functions are very different. As we saw in the previous seven chap-
ters, the dorsal thalamus lies in the path of all the point-to-point path-
ways whose destination is the neocortex. Accordingly, the destruction of a 
small part of the dorsal thalamus can produce a discrete sensory or motor 
deﬁ cit, such as a little blind spot or a lack of feeling on a portion of skin. 
In contrast, the  hypothalamus integrates somatic and visceral responses 
in accordance with the needs of the brain . A tiny lesion in the hypothala-
mus can produce dramatic and often fatal disruptions of widely dispersed 
bodily functions. 

 Homeostasis. In mammals, the requirements for life include a narrow 
range of body temperatures and blood compositions. The hypothalamus 
regulates these levels in response to a changing external environment. 
This regulatory process is called  homeostasis , the maintenance of the 
body’s internal environment within a narrow physiological range. 

 Consider temperature regulation. Biochemical reactions in many cells 
of  the  body  are  ﬁ ne-tuned  to  occur  at  about  37°C.  A  deviation  of  more 
than a few degrees in either direction can be catastrophic. Temperature-
sensitive cells in the hypothalamus detect changes in brain temperature 
and  orchestrate  the  appropriate  responses.  For  example,  if  you  stroll 
naked through the snow, the hypothalamus issues commands that cause 
you  to  shiver  (generating  heat  in  the  muscles),  develop  goose  bumps 
(a futile attempt to ﬂ uff up your nonexistent fur for better insulation—a 
reﬂ exive remnant from our hairier ancestors), and turn blue (shunting 
blood  away from  cold surface tissues to keep the sensitive core of the body 
warmer). In contrast, when you go for a jog in the tropics, the hypothala-
mus activates heat-loss mechanisms that make you turn red (shunting 
blood  to  surface tissues where heat can radiate away) and sweat (cooling 
the skin by evaporation). 

 Other examples of homeostasis are the tight regulation of blood vol-
ume, pressure, salinity, acidity, and blood oxygen and glucose concentra-
tions.  The  means  by  which  the  hypothalamus  achieves  these  different 
types of regulation are remarkably diverse. 

 Structure and Connections of the Hypothalamus. Each side of the hypo-
thalamus has three functional zones: lateral, medial, and periventricular 
(Figure  15.3). The  lateral  and  medial  zones  have  extensive  connections 
with the brain stem and the telencephalon and regulate certain types of 
behavior, as we will see in Chapter 16. Here we are concerned only with the 
third zone, which actually receives much of its input from the other two. 

 The  periventricular zone  is so named because, with the exception 
of a thin ﬁ nger of neurons that are displaced laterally by the optic tract 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   524
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   524

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

525

Hypo-
thalamus

Lateral

Medial

Periven-
tricular

Third
ventricle

▲ FIGURE 15.3
Zones of the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus has three functional zones: lat-
eral, medial, and periventricular. The periventricular zone receives inputs from the 
other zones, the brain stem, and the telencephalon. Neurosecretory cells in the 
periventricular zone secrete hormones into the bloodstream. Other periventricular 
cells control the autonomic nervous system.

(called the supraoptic nucleus), the cells of this region lie right next to 
the wall of the third ventricle. Within this zone exists a complex mix of 
neurons with different functions. One group of cells constitutes the  supra-
chiasmatic nucleus (SCN) , which lies just above the optic chiasm. These 
cells receive direct retinal innervation and function to synchronize circa-
dian rhythms with the daily light–dark cycle (see Chapter 19). Other cells 
in the periventricular zone control the ANS and regulate the outﬂ ow of 
the sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation of the visceral organs. 
The cells in a third group, called  neurosecretory neurons , extend axons 
down toward the stalk of the pituitary gland. These are the cells that now 
command our attention. 

 Pathways to the Pituitary 
 We  have  said  that  the  pituitary  dangles  below  the  base  of  the  brain, 
which is true when the brain is lifted out of the head. In a living brain, 
however, the pituitary is gently held in a cradle of bone at the base of the 
skull.  It  requires  this  special  protection  because  it  is  the  “mouthpiece” 
from which much of the hypothalamus “speaks” to the body. The pituitary 
has two lobes, posterior and anterior. The hypothalamus controls the two 
lobes in different ways. 

 Hypothalamic Control of the Posterior Pituitary. The largest of the hy-
pothalamic neurosecretory cells,  magnocellular neurosecretory cells , 
extend axons down the stalk of the pituitary and into the posterior lobe 
(Figure 15.4). In the late 1930s, Ernst and Berta Scharrer, working at the 
University of Frankfurt in Germany, proposed that these neurons release 
chemical  substances  directly  into  the  capillaries  of  the  posterior  lobe. 
At the time, this was quite a radical idea. It was well established that 
chemical messengers called hormones were released by glands into the 
bloodstream, but no one had thought that a neuron could act like a gland 
or that a neurotransmitter could act like a hormone. The Scharrers were 
correct, however. The substances released into the blood by neurons are 
now called  neurohormones . 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   525
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   525

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

526

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Hypothalamus

Optic chiasm

Magnocellular
neurosecretory
cells

Posterior
lobe of
pituitary

Anterior lobe
of pituitary

Capillary bed

▲ FIGURE 15.4
Magnocellular neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus. This is a midsagittal 
view of the hypothalamus and pituitary. Magnocellular neurosecretory cells 
 secrete oxytocin and vasopressin directly into capillaries in the posterior lobe of 
the pituitary.

 The  magnocellular  neurosecretory  cells  release  two  neurohormones 
into the bloodstream, oxytocin and vasopressin. Both of these chemicals 
are peptides, each consisting of a chain of nine amino acids. Oxytocin 
has  sometimes  been  called  the  “love  hormone”  because  levels  rise  dur-
ing sexual or intimate behaviors and promote social bonding (discussed 
further in Chapter 17). In women, it also plays a critical role during the 
ﬁ nal stages of childbirth by causing the uterus to contract and facilitat-
ing the delivery of the newborn. It also stimulates the ejection of milk 
from the mammary glands. All lactating mothers know about the complex 
“letdown” reﬂ ex that involves the oxytocin neurons of the hypothalamus. 
Oxytocin release may be stimulated by the somatic sensations generated 
by a suckling baby. But the sight or sound of a baby (even someone else’s) 
can also trigger the release of milk beyond the mother’s conscious control. 
In each case, information about a sensory stimulus—somatic, visual, or 
auditory—reaches the cerebral cortex via the usual route, the thalamus, 
and the cortex ultimately stimulates the hypothalamus to trigger oxyto-
cin release. The cortex can also suppress hypothalamic functions, such as 
when anxiety inhibits the letdown of milk. 

  Vasopressin,   also  called   antidiuretic  hormone  (ADH) ,  regulates 
blood volume and salt concentration. When the body is deprived of water, 
the blood volume decreases and blood salt concentration increases. These 
changes are detected by pressure receptors in the cardiovascular system 
and salt concentration-sensitive cells in the hypothalamus, respectively. 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   526
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   526

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

527

Vasopressin-containing neurons receive information about these changes 
and respond by releasing vasopressin, which acts directly on the kidneys 
and leads to water retention and reduced urine production. 

 Under  conditions  of  lowered  blood  volume  and  pressure,  communi-
cation between the brain and the kidneys actually occurs in both direc-
tions (Figure 15.5). The kidneys secrete an enzyme into the blood called 
 renin . Elevated renin sets off a sequence of biochemical reactions in the 
blood.   Angiotensinogen ,  a  large  protein  released  from  the  liver,  is  con-
verted by renin to  angiotensin I , which breaks down further to form an-
other  small  peptide  hormone,   angiotensin  II .  Angiotensin  II  has  direct 
effects on the kidney and blood vessels, which help increase blood pres-
sure. But angiotensin II in the blood is also detected by the  subfornical 
organ , a part of the telencephalon that lacks a blood-brain barrier. Cells 
in the subfornical organ project axons into the hypothalamus where they 
activate, among other things, the vasopressin-containing neurosecretory 
cells. In addition, the subfornical organ activates cells in the lateral area 
of  the  hypothalamus,  somehow  producing  an  overwhelming  thirst  that 

Subfornical
organ

Hypothalamus

Pituitary

ADH

Blood vessels,
kidney

Angiotensin II

Angiotensin I

Renin

Angiotensinogen

Liver

Lowered blood
pressure

Kidney

▲ FIGURE 15.5
Communication between the kidneys and the brain. Under conditions of low-
ered blood volume or pressure, the kidney secretes renin into the bloodstream. 
Renin in the blood promotes the synthesis of the peptide angiotensin II, which 
excites the neurons in the subfornical organ. The subfornical neurons stimulate 
the hypothalamus, causing an increase in vasopressin (ADH) production and a 
feeling of thirst.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   527
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   527

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

528

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 motivates drinking behavior. It may be difﬁ cult to accept, but it’s true: 
To a limited extent, our brain is controlled by our kidneys! This example 
also  illustrates  that  the  means  by  which  the  hypothalamus  maintains 
homeostasis go beyond control of the visceral organs and can include be-
havioral responses. In Chapter 16, we will explore in more detail how the 
hypothalamus incites behavior. 

 Hypothalamic Control of the Anterior Pituitary. Unlike the posterior lobe, 
which really is a part of the brain, the anterior lobe of the pituitary is an 
actual gland. The cells of the anterior lobe synthesize and secrete a wide 
range of hormones that regulate secretions from other glands throughout 
the body (together constituting the endocrine system). The pituitary hor-
mones act on the gonads, the thyroid glands, the adrenal glands, and the 
mammary glands (Table 15.1). For this reason, the anterior pituitary was 
traditionally described as the body’s “master gland.” But what controls 
the anterior pituitary? The secretory hypothalamus.  The hypothalamus 
itself is the true master gland of the endocrine system . 

 The anterior lobe is under the control of neurons in the periventricular 
area called  parvocellular neurosecretory cells . These hypothalamic 
neurons do not extend axons all the way into the anterior lobe; instead, 
they communicate with their targets via the bloodstream (Figure 15.6). 
These  neurons  secrete  what  are  called   hypophysiotropic  hormones
into a uniquely specialized capillary bed at the ﬂ oor of the third ventricle. 
These tiny blood vessels run down the stalk of the pituitary and branch 
in  the  anterior  lobe.  This  network  of  blood  vessels  is  called  the   hypo-
thalamo-pituitary portal circulation.  Hypophysiotropic hormones se-
creted by hypothalamic neurons into the portal circulation travel down-
stream  until  they  bind  to  speciﬁ c  receptors  on  the  surface  of  pituitary 
cells. Activation of these receptors causes the pituitary cells to either se-
crete or stop secreting hormones into the general circulation. 

 Regulation  of  the  adrenal  glands  illustrates  how  this  system  works. 
Located just above the kidneys, the adrenal glands consist of two parts, 
a shell called the  adrenal cortex  and a center called the  adrenal me-
dulla . The adrenal cortex produces the steroid hormone  cortisol ; when 
it is released into the bloodstream, cortisol acts throughout the body to 
mobilize energy reserves and suppress the immune system, preparing us 
to carry on in the face of life’s various stresses. In fact, a good stimulus 
for cortisol release is stress, ranging from physiological stress, such as a 
loss of blood; to positive emotional stimulation, such as falling in love; to 
psychological stress, such as anxiety over an upcoming exam. 

TABLE 15.1  Hormones of the Anterior Pituitary
Hormone
HoHormrmononee

Target
TaTargrgetet

Action
AcActitionon

Follicle-stimulating hormone 

Gonads

Ovulation, spermatogenesis

(FSH)

Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 

(TSH); also called thyrotropin
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 

(ACTH); also called 
corticotropin

Growth hormone (GH)
Prolactin

Gonads
Thyroid

Adrenal 
cortex

All cells
Mammary 

glands

Ovarian and sperm maturation
Thyroxin secretion (increases 

metabolic rate)

Cortisol secretion (mobilizes 

energy stores, inhibits immune 
system, other actions)

Stimulation of protein synthesis
Growth and milk secretion

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   528
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   528

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

529

Hypothalamus 

Capillary beds

Anterior lobe
of pituitary

Hormone-
secreting cells

Parvocellular
neurosecretory

cells 

Hypophysiotropic

hormones
released

Stimulation
or inhibition
of anterior 

pituitary
hormone
release

Action on
organs of
the body

Hormone transport
in axons

Hormone transport
in blood

Hormone transport
in blood

▲ FIGURE 15.6
Parvocellular neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus. Parvocellular 
 neurosecretory cells secrete hypophysiotropic hormones into specialized capillary 
beds of the hypothalamo-pituitary portal circulation. These hormones travel to the 
anterior lobe of the pituitary, where they trigger or inhibit the release of pituitary 
hormones from secretory cells.

 Parvocellular neurosecretory cells that control the adrenal cortex de-
termine whether a stimulus is stressful or not (as deﬁ ned by the release 
of cortisol). These neurons lie in the periventricular hypothalamus and 
release a peptide called  corticotropin-releasing hormone   (CRH)  into the 
blood of the portal circulation. CRH travels the short distance to the ante-
rior pituitary, where, within about 15 seconds, it stimulates the release of 
 corticotropin , or  adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) . ACTH enters the 
general circulation and travels to the adrenal cortex where, within a few 
minutes, it stimulates cortisol release (Figure 15.7). 

 Blood  levels  of  cortisol  are,  to  some  extent,  self-regulated.  Cortisol 
is  a   steroid ,  a  class  of  biochemicals  related  to  cholesterol.  Thus,  corti-
sol is a lipophilic (“fat-loving”) molecule, which dissolves easily in lipid 
membranes  and  readily  crosses  the  blood-brain  barrier.  In  the  brain, 
cortisol interacts with speciﬁ c receptors that lead to inhibition of CRH 
release, thus ensuring that circulating cortisol levels do not get too high. 
Physicians need to be mindful of this feedback regulation when they pre-
scribe prednisone, a synthetic form of cortisol. Prednisone is a powerful 
medicine, frequently used to suppress inﬂ ammation. When administered 
for several days, however, the prednisone circulating in the bloodstream 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   529
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   529

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

530

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Hypothalamus

Other brain
regions

Pituitary

ACTH

Cortisol

Adrenal
cortex

Adrenal
medulla

Kidney 

▲ FIGURE 15.7
The stress response. Under conditions of physiological, emotional, or psycho-
logical stimulation or stress, the periventricular hypothalamus secretes 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) into the hypothalamo-pituitary portal circu-
lation. This triggers the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) into the 
general circulation. ACTH stimulates the release of cortisol from the adrenal 
cortex. Cortisol can act directly on hypothalamic neurons, as well as on other 
neurons elsewhere in the brain.

fools the brain into thinking that naturally released levels of cortisol are 
too high and shutting down the release of CRH and the adrenal cortex. 
Abrupt discontinuation of prednisone treatment does not give the adrenal 
cortex enough time to ramp up cortisol production and can thus result in 
what is called  adrenal insufﬁ ciency . Among the symptoms of adrenal in-
sufﬁ ciency are severe abdominal pain and diarrhea, extremely low blood 
pressure, and changes in mood and personality. Adrenal insufﬁ ciency is 
also  a  feature  of  a  rare  disorder  called   Addison’s  disease ,  named  after 
Thomas Addison, the British physician who ﬁ rst described the condition 
in 1849. Addison recognized that one cause of this constellation of symp-
toms is degeneration of the adrenal gland. Perhaps the most famous suf-
ferer of Addison’s disease was U.S. President John F. Kennedy. Kennedy 
required a daily regimen of hormone replacement therapy to compensate 
for the loss of cortisol, a fact that was concealed during his presidency to 
protect his youthful and vigorous image. 

 The  ﬂ ip  side  of  adrenal  insufﬁ ciency  is  a  condition  called   Cushing’s 
disease ,  caused  by  pituitary  gland  dysfunction  that  results  in  elevated 
levels of ACTH and, consequently, cortisol. The symptoms include rapid 
weight  gain,  immune  suppression,  sleeplessness,  memory  impairment, 
and irritability. Not surprisingly, the symptoms of Cushing’s disease are 
a  common  side  effect  of  prednisone  treatment.  The  myriad  behavioral 
changes caused by too much (or too little) cortisol may be explained by 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   530
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   530

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

531

BOX 15.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Stress and the Brain

Biological  stress  is  created  by  the  brain  in  response  to

real  or  imagined  stimuli.  The  many  physiological  responses 
associated with stress help protect the body and the brain 
from the dangers that triggered the stress in the ﬁ rst place. 
But stress in chronic doses can have insidious harmful effects 
as well. Neuroscientists have only begun to understand the 
relationship between stress, the brain, and brain damage.

Stress leads to the release of the steroid hormone cortisol 
from the adrenal cortex. Cortisol travels to the brain through 
the bloodstream and binds to receptors in the cytoplasm of 
many neurons. The activated receptors travel to the cell nu-
cleus, where they stimulate gene transcription and ultimately 
protein  synthesis.  One  consequence  of  cortisol’s  action  is 
that  neurons  admit  more  Ca2⫹  through  voltage-gated  ion 
channels. This may be due to a direct change in the chan-
nels, or it may be indirectly caused by changes in the cell’s 
energy  metabolism.  Whatever  the  mechanism,  presumably 
in the short term cortisol makes the brain better able to cope 
with  the  stress—perhaps  by  helping  it  ﬁ gure  out  a  way  to 
avoid it!

But what about the effects of chronic, unavoidable stress? 
In Chapter 6, we learned that too much calcium can be a bad 
thing. If neurons become overloaded with calcium, they die 
(excitotoxicity). The question naturally arises: Can cortisol kill? 
Bruce McEwen and his colleagues at Rockefeller University, 
and  Robert  Sapolsky  and  his  colleagues  at  Stanford 
University, have studied this question in the rat brain. They 
found that daily injections of corticosterone (rat cortisol) for 

several weeks caused dendrites to wither in many neurons 
with corticosterone receptors. A few weeks later, these cells 
started  to  die.  A  similar  result  was  found  when,  instead  of 
daily hormone injections, the rats were stressed every day.

Sapolsky’s  studies  of  baboons  in  Kenya  further  reveal 
the  scourges  of  chronic  stress.  Baboons  in  the  wild  main-
tain a complex social hierarchy, and subordinate males steer 
clear  of  dominant  males  when  they  can.  During  one  year 
when the baboon population boomed, local villagers caged 
many  of  the  animals  to  prevent  them  from  destroying  their 
crops.  Unable  to  escape  the  “top  baboons”  in  the  cages, 
many of the subordinate males subsequently died—not from 
wounds or malnutrition but apparently from severe and sus-
tained stress-induced effects. They had gastric ulcers, colitis, 
enlarged adrenal glands, and extensive degeneration of neu-
rons in their hippocampus. Subsequent studies suggest that 
it is the direct effect of cortisol that damages the hippocam-
pus. These effects of cortisol and stress resemble the effects 
of aging on the brain. Indeed, research has clearly shown that 
chronic stress causes premature aging of the brain.

In  humans,  exposure  to  the  horrors  of  combat,  sexual 
abuse, and other types of extreme violence can lead to post-
traumatic stress disorder, with symptoms of heightened anxi-
ety,  memory  disturbances,  and  intrusive  thoughts.  Imaging 
studies  have  consistently  found  degenerative  changes  in 
the  brains  of  victims,  particularly  in  the  hippocampus.  In 
Chapter 22, we will see that stress, and the brain’s response 
to it, play a central role in several psychiatric disorders.

the fact that neurons with cortisol receptors are found widely distributed 
in the brain, not just in the hypothalamus. In these other CNS locations, 
cortisol has been shown to have signiﬁ cant effects on neuronal activity. 
Thus, we see that the release of hypophysiotropic hormones by cells in 
the  secretory  hypothalamus  can  produce  widespread  alterations  in  the 
physiology of both the body and the brain (Box 15.1). 

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 
THE AAUTONNOMIC NERVOUS SSYSTEM 

 Besides  controlling  the  ingredients  of  the  hormonal  soup  that  ﬂ ows  in 
our veins, the periventricular zone of the hypothalamus also controls the 
autonomic nervous system   (ANS) . The ANS is an extensive network 
of  interconnected  neurons  that  are  widely  distributed  inside  the  body. 
From  the  Greek   autonomia   (roughly  meaning  “independence”),  auto-
nomic functions are usually carried out automatically, without conscious, 
voluntary  control.  They  are  also  highly  coordinated  functions.  Imagine 
a sudden crisis. In a morning class, as you are engrossed in a crossword 
puzzle, the instructor unexpectedly calls you to the blackboard to solve an 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   531
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   531

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

532

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

impossible-looking equation. You are faced with a  classic ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight 
situation, and your body reacts accordingly, even as your conscious mind 
frantically considers whether to blunder through it or beg off in humili-
ation.  Your  ANS  triggers  a  host  of  physiological  responses,  including 
increased heart rate and blood pressure, depressed digestive functions, 
and mobilized glucose reserves. These responses are all produced by the 
 sympathetic division  of the ANS. Now imagine your relief as the class-
ending  bell  suddenly  rings,  saving  you  from  acute  embarrassment  and 
the instructor’s anger. You settle back into your chair, breathe deeply, 
and read the clue for 24 down. Within a few minutes, your sympathetic 
responses  decrease  to  low  levels,  and  the  functions  of  your   parasym-
pathetic  division   crank  up  again:  Your  heart  rate  slows  and  blood 
pressure  drops,  digestive  functions  work  harder  on  breakfast,  and  you 
stop sweating. 

 Notice that you may not have moved out of your chair throughout this 
unpleasant  event.  Maybe  you  didn’t  even  move  your  pencil.  But  your 
body’s internal workings reacted dramatically. Unlike the  somatic motor 
system , whose alpha motor neurons can rapidly excite skeletal muscles 
with  pinpoint  accuracy,  the  actions  of  the  ANS  are  typically  multiple, 
widespread, and relatively slow. Therefore, the ANS operates in expanded 
space and time. In addition, unlike the somatic motor system, which can 
only excite its peripheral targets, the ANS balances synaptic excitation 
and inhibition to achieve widely coordinated and graded control. 

 ANS Circuits 
 Together, the somatic motor system and the ANS constitute the total 
neural output of the CNS. The somatic motor system has a single func-
tion: It innervates and commands skeletal muscle ﬁ bers. The ANS has 
the  complex  task  of  commanding   every  other   tissue  and  organ  in  the 
body  that  is  innervated.  Both  systems  have  upper  motor  neurons  in 
the brain that send commands to lower motor neurons, which actually 
innervate the target structures outside the nervous system. However, 
they  have  some  interesting  differences  (Figure  15.8).  The  cell  bodies 

Somatic motor

Sympathetic

Parasympathetic

ANS

CNS

PNS

Somatic
motor
fiber

Skeletal
muscle

Smooth muscle, cardiac muscle,

gland cells

Preganglionic
fibers

Autonomic
(sympathetic)
ganglion

Autonomic
(parasympathetic)
ganglion

Postganglionic
fibers

= ACh

= NE

▲ FIGURE 15.8
The organization of the three neural 
outputs of the CNS. The sole output of 
the somatic motor system is the lower mo-
tor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal 
cord and the brain stem, which control 
skeletal muscle. Visceral functions such as 
salivating, sweating, and genital stimulation 
depend on the sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic divisions of the ANS, whose lower 
motor neurons (i.e., postganglionic neurons) 
lie outside the CNS in autonomic ganglia.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   532
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   532

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

533

of  all  somatic  lower  motor  neurons  lie  within  the  CNS  in  either  the 
ventral horn of the spinal cord or the brain stem. The cell bodies of all 
autonomic lower motor neurons lie outside the central nervous system, 
within cell clusters called  autonomic ganglia . The neurons in these 
ganglia  are  called   postganglionic  neurons .  Postganglionic  neurons 
are  driven  by   preganglionic  neurons ,  whose  cell  bodies  are  in  the 
spinal  cord  and  brain  stem.  Thus,  the  somatic  motor  system  controls 
its  targets  (skeletal  muscles)  via  a   monosynaptic    pathway ,  while  the 
ANS inﬂ uences its targets (smooth muscles, cardiac muscle, and glands) 
using a  disynaptic pathway.  

 Sympathetic  and  Parasympathetic  Divisions.  The  sympathetic  and 
parasympathetic  divisions  operate  in  parallel,  but  they  use  pathways 
that are quite distinct in structure and in their neurotransmitter sys-
tems. Preganglionic axons of the sympathetic division emerge only from 
the middle third of the spinal cord (thoracic and lumbar segments). In 
contrast,  preganglionic  axons  of  the  parasympathetic  division  emerge 
only from the brain stem and the lowest (sacral) segments of the spi-
nal  cord,  so  the  two  systems  complement  each  other  anatomically 
(Figure 15.9). 

 The preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic division lie within the 
 intermediolateral gray matter  of the spinal cord. They send their axons 
through  the  ventral  roots  to  synapse  on  neurons  in  the  ganglia  of  the 
 sympathetic  chain,   which  lies  next  to  the  spinal  column,  or  within 
collateral ganglia found within the abdominal cavity. The preganglionic 
parasympathetic neurons, on the other hand, sit within a variety of brain 
stem  nuclei  and  the  lower  (sacral)  spinal  cord,  and  their  axons  travel 
within  several  cranial  nerves  as  well  as  the  nerves  of  the  sacral  spi-
nal cord. The parasympathetic preganglionic axons travel much farther 
than  the  sympathetic  axons  because  the  parasympathetic  ganglia  are 
 typically located next to, on, or in their target organs (see Figures 15.8 
and 15.9). 

 The ANS innervates three types of tissue: glands, smooth muscle, and 
cardiac muscle. Thus, almost every part of the body is a target of the ANS, 
as shown in Figure 15.9. The ANS: 
 (cid:129) Innervates  the  secretory  glands  (salivary,  sweat,  tear,  and  various

mucus-producing glands).

 (cid:129) Innervates the heart and blood vessels to control blood pressure and

 (cid:129) Innervates the bronchi of the lungs to meet the oxygen demands of the

 (cid:129) Regulates the digestive and metabolic functions of the liver, gastroin-

testinal tract, and pancreas.

 (cid:129) Regulates the functions of the kidney, urinary bladder, large intestine,

ﬂ ow.

body.

and rectum.

organs.

 (cid:129) Is  essential  to  the  sexual  responses  of  the  genitals  and  reproductive

 (cid:129) Interacts with the body’s immune system.

 The physiological inﬂ uences of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
divisions generally oppose each other. The sympathetic division tends to 
be most active during a crisis, real or perceived. The behaviors related to 
it are summarized in the puerile (but effective) mnemonic used by medi-
cal students, called the four Fs: ﬁ ght, ﬂ ight, fright, and sex. The para-
sympathetic  division  facilitates  various  non–four-F  processes,  such  as 
digestion, growth, immune responses, and energy storage. In most cases, 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   533
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   533

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

534

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Sympathetic division

Parasympathetic division

Dilates
pupil

Inhibits
salivation

Constricts
pupil

Oculomotor
nerve (III)

Eye

Stimulates
salivation

Facial
nerve (VII)

Salivary glands

Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)

Lungs

Constricts 
blood vessels

Relaxes
airways

Accelerates
heartbeat

Constricts
airways

Slows
heartbeat

Heart

Stimulates glucose
production and
release 

Liver

Inhibits
digestion

Stimulates
secretion of 
epinephrine and
norepinephrine
from adrenal
medulla

Cranial

Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Cranial

Cervical

Thoracic

Vagus nerve (X)

Lumbar

Sacral

NE neurons

ACh neurons

Stomach

Stimulates
digestion

Pancreas

Small
intestine 

Rectum

Bladder

Stimulates pancreas
to release insulin
and digestive
enzymes

Dilates blood
vessels in gut

Sacral

Collateral
ganglia

Large
intestine 

Sympathetic
chain

Relaxes urinary
bladder 

Stimulates urinary
bladder to contract

Reproductive
organs

Stimulates orgasm

Stimulates sexual
arousal

Preganglionic

neurons

Postganglionic

neurons

Preganglionic

neurons

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   534
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   534

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

535

the activity levels of the two ANS divisions are reciprocal; when one is 
high, the other tends to be low, and vice versa. The sympathetic division 
frenetically mobilizes the body for a short-term emergency at the expense 
of  processes  that  keep  it  healthy  over  the  long  term.  The  parasympa-
thetic division works calmly for the long-term good. Both cannot be stim-
ulated strongly at the same time; their general goals are incompatible. 
Fortunately, neural circuits in the CNS inhibit activity in one division 
when the other is active. 

 Some  examples  illustrate  how  the  balance  of  activity  in  the  sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic divisions controls organ functions. The pace-
maker  region  of  the  heart  triggers  each  heartbeat  without  the  help  of 
neurons,  but  both  divisions  of  the  ANS  innervate  it  and  modulate  it; 
sympathetic activity results in an increase in the rate of beating, while 
parasympathetic activity slows it down. The smooth muscles of the gas-
trointestinal tract are also dually innervated, but the effect of each di-
vision is the opposite of its effect on the heart. Intestinal motility, and 
thus digestion, is stimulated by parasympathetic axons and inhibited by 
sympathetic  axons.  Not  all  tissues  receive  innervation  from  both  divi-
sions of the ANS, however. For example, blood vessels of the skin, and the 
sweat  glands,  are  innervated  (and  excited)  only  by  sympathetic  axons. 
Lacrimal  ( tear-producing)  glands  are  innervated  (and  excited)  only  by 
 parasympathetic input. 

 Another  example  of  the  balance  of  parasympathetic–sympathetic 
activity  is  the  curious  neural  control  of  the  male  sexual  response. 
Erection of the human penis is a hydraulic process. It occurs when the 
penis becomes engorged with blood, which is triggered and sustained 
by parasympathetic activity. The curious part is that orgasm and ejac-
ulation  are  triggered  by   sympathetic   activity.  You  can  imagine  how 
complicated it must be for the nervous system to orchestrate the entire 
sexual act; parasympathetic activity gets it going (and keeps it going), 
but  a  shift  to  sympathetic  activity  is  necessary  to  bring  it  to  a  suc-
cessful conclusion. Anxiety and worry, and their attendant sympathetic 
activity, tend to inhibit erection and promote ejaculation. Not surpris-
ingly,  impotence  and  premature  ejaculation  are  common  complaints 
of the overstressed male. (We will discuss sexual behavior further in 
Chapter 17.) 

 The Enteric Division. The “little brain,” as the  enteric division  of the 
ANS is sometimes called, is a unique neural system embedded in an un-
likely place: the lining of the esophagus, stomach, intestines, pancreas, and 

▲ FIGURE 15.9
The chemical and anatomical organization of the sympathetic and 
 parasympathetic divisions of the ANS. Notice that the preganglionic inputs of 
both divisions use ACh as a neurotransmitter. The postganglionic parasympa-
thetic innervation of the visceral organs also uses ACh, but the postganglionic 
sympathetic innervation uses NE (with the exception of innervation of the sweat 
glands and vascular smooth muscle within skeletal muscle, which use ACh). The 
adrenal medulla receives preganglionic sympathetic innervation and secretes epi-
nephrine into the bloodstream when activated. Note the pattern of innervation by 
the sympathetic division: Target organs in the chest cavity are innervated by post-
ganglionic neurons originating in the sympathetic chain, and target organs in the 
abdominal cavity are innervated by postganglionic neurons originating in the 
 collateral ganglia.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   535
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   535

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

536

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Axon

Blood
vessel

Small
intestine

Submucous
(Meissner’s)
plexus

Myenteric
(Auerbach’s)
plexus

▲ FIGURE 15.10
The enteric division of the ANS. This cross-sectional view of the small intestine 
shows the two networks of the enteric division: the myenteric plexus and the 
submucous plexus. They both contain visceral sensory and motor neurons that 
control the functions of the digestive organs.

gallbladder. It consists of two complicated networks, each with  sensory 
nerves, interneurons, and autonomic motor neurons, called the   myenteric 
(Auerbach’s)  plexus   and   submucous  (Meissner’s)  plexus   (Figure  15.10). 
These networks control many of the physiological processes involved in 
the transport and digestion of food, from oral to anal openings. The en-
teric system is not small; it contains about 500 million neurons, the same 
number of neurons as the entire spinal cord! 

 If the enteric division of the ANS qualiﬁ es as “brain” (which may be 
overstating  the  case),  it  is  because  it  can  operate  with  a  great  deal  of 
independence.  Enteric  sensory  neurons  monitor  tension  and  stretch  of 
the  gastrointestinal  walls,  the  chemical  status  of  stomach  and  intesti-
nal contents, and hormone levels in the blood. This information is used 
by  enteric  interneuronal  circuits  and  motor  neurons,  which  also  reside 
in the gut, to govern smooth muscle motility, the production of mucous 
and digestive secretions, and the diameter of the local blood vessels. For 
example, consider a partially digested pizza making its way through the 
small  intestine.  The  enteric  nervous  system  ensures  that  lubricating 
mucus and digestive enzymes are delivered, that rhythmic (peristaltic) 
muscle action works to mix the pizza and enzymes thoroughly, and that 
intestinal  blood  ﬂ ow  increases  to  provide  a  sufﬁ cient  ﬂ uid  source  and 
transport newly acquired nutrients to the rest of the body. 

 The enteric division is not entirely autonomous. It receives input indi-
rectly from the “real” brain via axons of the sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic divisions. These provide supplementary control and can supersede 
the functions of the enteric division in some circumstances. For example, 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   536
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   536

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

537

the enteric nervous system and digestive functions are inhibited by the 
strong activation of the sympathetic nervous system that occurs during 
acute stress. 

 Central Control of the ANS. As we have said, the hypothalamus is the 
main  regulator  of  the  autonomic  preganglionic  neurons.  Somehow  this 
diminutive structure integrates the diverse information it receives about 
the  body’s  status,  anticipates  some  of  its  needs,  and  provides  a  coordi-
nated set of both neural and hormonal outputs. Essential to autonomic 
control are the connections of the periventricular zone to the brain stem 
and spinal cord nuclei that contain the preganglionic neurons of the sym-
pathetic  and  parasympathetic  divisions. The   nucleus  of  the  solitary 
tract , located in the medulla and connected with the hypothalamus, is 
another important center for autonomic control. In fact, some autonomic 
functions  operate  well  even  when  the  brain  stem  is  disconnected  from 
all structures above it, including the  hypothalamus. The solitary nucleus 
integrates sensory information from the internal organs and coordinates 
output to the autonomic brain stem nuclei. 

 Neurotransmitters and the Pharmacology of 
Autonomic Function 
 Even  people  who  have  never  heard  the  word   neurotransmitter   know 
what it means to “get your adrenaline ﬂ owing.” (In the United Kingdom, 
this  compound  is  called   adrenaline ,  while  in  the  United  States,  it  is 
called   epinephrine .)  Historically,  the  autonomic  nervous  system  has 
probably taught us more than any other part of the body about how neu-
rotransmitters  work.  Because  the  ANS  is  relatively  simple  compared 
to the CNS, we understand the ANS much better. In addition, neurons 
of the peripheral parts of the ANS are outside the blood-brain barrier, 
so all drugs that enter the bloodstream have direct access to them. The 
relative  simplicity  and  accessibility  of  the  ANS  have  led  to  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  mechanisms  of  drugs  that  inﬂ uence   synaptic 
transmission. 

 Preganglionic  Neurotransmitters.  The  primary  transmitter  of  the  pe-
ripheral autonomic neurons is  acetylcholine (ACh) , the same transmitter 
used at skeletal neuromuscular junctions.  The preganglionic neurons of 
both sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions release ACh . The imme-
diate  effect  is  that  the ACh  binds  to  nicotinic ACh  receptors  (nAChR), 
which are ACh-gated channels, and evokes a fast excitatory postsynaptic 
potential  (EPSP)  that  usually  triggers  an  action  potential  in  the  post-
ganglionic  cell.  This  is  very  similar  to  the  mechanisms  of  the  skeletal 
neuromuscular junction, and drugs that block nAChRs in muscle, such as 
curare, also block autonomic output. 

 Ganglionic ACh does more than neuromuscular ACh, however. It also 
activates  muscarinic  ACh  receptors  (mAChR),  which  are  metabotropic 
(G-protein-coupled)  receptors  that  can  cause  both  the  opening  and  the 
closing of ion channels that lead to very slow EPSPs and IPSPs. These 
slow  mAChR  events  are  usually  not  evident  unless  the  preganglionic 
nerve  is  activated  repetitively.  In  addition  to  ACh,  some  preganglionic 
terminals release a variety of small, neuroactive peptides such as  neuro-
peptide Y (NPY)  and  vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP).  These also 
interact with G-protein-coupled receptors and can trigger small EPSPs 
that  last  for  several  minutes.  The  effects  of  peptides  are  modulatory; 
they do not usually bring the postsynaptic neurons to ﬁ ring threshold, 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   537
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   537

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

538

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

but they make them more responsive to the fast nicotinic effects when 
they do come along. Since more than one action potential is required to 
stimulate the release of these modulatory neurotransmitters, the pattern 
of ﬁ ring in preganglionic neurons is an important variable in determining 
the type of postganglionic activity that is evoked. 

 Postganglionic Neurotransmitters. Postganglionic cells—the autonomic 
motor neurons that actually trigger glands to secrete, sphincters to con-
tract  or  relax,  and  so  on—use  different  neurotransmitters  in  the  sym-
pathetic  and  parasympathetic  divisions  of  the  ANS.  Postganglionic 
parasympathetic  neurons  release  ACh,  but  those  of  most  parts  of  the 
sympathetic  division  use   norepinephrine  (NE) .  Parasympathetic  ACh 
has a very local effect on its targets and acts entirely through mAChRs. 
In contrast, sympathetic NE often spreads far, even into the blood where 
it can circulate widely. 

 The  autonomic  effects  of  a  variety  of  drugs  that  interact  with  cho-
linergic  and  noradrenergic  systems  can  be  conﬁ dently  predicted  once 
you  understand  some  of  the  autonomic  circuitry  and  chemistry  (see 
Figure 15.9). In general, drugs that promote the actions of norepineph-
rine  or  inhibit the muscarinic actions of acetylcholine are  sympathomi-
metic ;  they  cause  effects  that  mimic  activation  of  the  sympathetic  di-
vision  of  the  ANS.  For  example,   atropine ,  an  antagonist  of  mAChRs, 
produces signs of sympathetic activation, such as dilation of the pupils. 
This  response  occurs  because  the  balance  of  ANS  activity  is  shifted 
toward  the  sympathetic  division  when  parasympathetic  actions  are 
blocked. On the other hand, drugs that promote the muscarinic actions 
of  ACh   or   inhibit  the  actions  of  NE  are   parasympathomimetic ;  they 
cause effects that mimic activation of the parasympathetic division of 
the ANS. For example,  propranolol , an antagonist of the  ␤  receptor for 
NE, slows the heart rate and lowers blood pressure. For this reason, pro-
pranolol is sometimes used to prevent the physiological consequences of 
stage fright. 

 But what about the familiar ﬂ ow of adrenaline? Adrenaline (epineph-
rine) is the compound released into the blood from the adrenal medulla 
when activated by preganglionic sympathetic innervation. Epinephrine is 
actually made from norepinephrine (called  noradrenaline  in the United 
Kingdom), and it has effects on target tissues almost identical to those 
caused  by  sympathetic  activation.  Thus,  the  adrenal  medulla  is  really 
nothing  more  than  a  modiﬁ ed  sympathetic  ganglion.  You  can  imagine 
that as the epinephrine (adrenaline) ﬂ ows, a coordinated, body-wide set 
of sympathetic effects kicks in. 

 THE DIFFUSE MODULATORY SYSTEMS 
 THE DDIFFUUSE MODULATORY SYSTEMS 
OF THHE BRRAIN 
OF THE BRAIN 

 Consider  what  happens  when  you  fall  asleep.  The  internal  commands 
“You  are  becoming  drowsy”  and  “You  are  falling  asleep”  are  messages 
that must be received by broad regions of the brain. Dispensing this infor-
mation requires neurons with a particularly widespread pattern of axons. 
The brain has several such collections of neurons, each using a particular 
neurotransmitter  and  making  widely  dispersed,  diffuse,  almost  mean-
dering connections. Rather than carrying detailed sensory information, 
these  cells  often  perform  regulatory  functions,  modulating  vast  assem-
blies of postsynaptic neurons (in structures such as the cerebral cortex, 
the  thalamus,  and  the  spinal  cord)  so  that  they  become  more  or  less 
excitable, more or less synchronously active, and so on. Collectively, they 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   538
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   538

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

539

are a bit like the volume, treble, and bass controls on a radio, which do 
not change the lyrics or melody of a song but dramatically regulate the 
impact of both. In addition, different systems appear to be essential for 
aspects of motor control, memory, mood, motivation, and metabolic state. 
Many psychoactive drugs affect these modulatory systems, and the sys-
tems ﬁ gure prominently in current theories about the biological basis of 
certain psychiatric disorders. 

  Anatomy and Functions of the Diffuse 
Modulatory Systems  
 The  diffuse modulatory systems  differ in structure and function, yet 
they have certain principles in common: 

 (cid:129) Typically, the core of each system has a small set of neurons (several

thousand).

 (cid:129) Neurons of the diffuse systems arise from the central core of the brain,

most of them from the brain stem.

 (cid:129) Each neuron can inﬂ uence many others because each one has an axon
that  may  contact  more  than  100,000  postsynaptic  neurons  spread
widely across the brain.

 (cid:129) The synapses made by many of these systems release transmitter mol-
ecules into the extracellular ﬂ uid, so they can diffuse to many neurons
rather than be conﬁ ned to the vicinity of the synaptic cleft.

 We’ll  focus  on  the  modulatory  systems  of  the  brain  that  use  either
norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5-HT), dopamine (DA), or acetylcholine 
(ACh) as a neurotransmitter. Recall from Chapter 6 that all of these trans-
mitters activate speciﬁ c metabotropic (G-protein-coupled) receptors, and 
these receptors mediate most of their effects; for example, the brain has 
10–100 times more metabotropic ACh receptors than ionotropic nicotinic 
ACh receptors. 

 Because neuroscientists are still working hard to determine the exact 
functions of these systems in behavior, our explanations here will neces-
sarily be general. It is clear, however, that the functions of the diffuse 
modulatory systems depend on how electrically active they are, individu-
ally and in combination, and on how much neurotransmitter is available 
for release (Box 15.2). 

 The  Noradrenergic  Locus  Coeruleus.  Besides  being  a  neurotransmit-
ter in the peripheral ANS, NE is also used by neurons of the tiny  locus 
coeruleus  in the pons (from the Latin for “blue spot” because of the pig-
ment in its cells). Each human locus coeruleus has about 12,000 neurons. 
We have two of them, one on each side. 

 A  major  breakthrough  occurred  in  the  mid-1960s,  when  Nils-Åke 
Hillarp  and  Bengt  Falck  at  the  Karolinska  Institute  in  Sweden  devel-
oped a technique that enabled the catecholaminergic (noradrenergic and 
dopaminergic) neurons to be visualized selectively in histological sections 
prepared from the brain (Figure 15.11). This analysis revealed that axons 
leave the locus coeruleus in several tracts but then fan out to innervate 
just about every part of the brain: all of the cerebral cortex, the thalamus 
and the hypothalamus, the olfactory bulb, the cerebellum, the midbrain, 
and the spinal cord (Figure 15.12). The locus coeruleus makes some of 
the  most  diffuse  connections  in  the  brain,  considering  that  just  one  of 
its neurons can make more than 250,000 synapses, and it can have one 
axon branch in the  cerebral  cortex and another in the  cerebellar  cortex! 
The  organization  of  this  circuitry  is  so  different  from  what  was  then 
known about synaptic connections in the brain that it took many years 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   539
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   539

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

540

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 15.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

You Eat What You Are

Americans, it seems, are always trying to lose weight. The 

low-fat,  high-carbohydrate  diets  (think  bagels)  that  were  all 
the  rage  in  the  1990s  were  replaced  by  a  low-carb  craze 
(think  omelets).  Changing  your  diet  can  alter  caloric  intake 
and the body’s metabolism, and it can also alter how your 
brain functions.

The  inﬂ uence  of  diet  on  the  brain  is  most  clear  in  the 
case of the diffuse modulatory systems. Consider serotonin. 
Serotonin is synthesized in two steps from the dietary amino 
acid tryptophan (see Figure 6.14). In the ﬁ rst step, a hydroxyl 
group (OH) is added to tryptophan by the enzyme tryptophan 
hydroxylase.  The  low  afﬁ nity  of  the  enzyme  for  tryptophan 
makes this step rate-limiting for serotonin synthesis—that is, 
serotonin can be produced only as fast as this enzyme can 
hydroxylate tryptophan. And a lot of tryptophan is required 
to push the synthetic reaction as fast as it can go. However, 
brain  tryptophan  levels  are  well  below  the  level  required  to 
saturate  the  enzyme.  Thus,  the  rate  of  serotonin  synthesis 
is determined, in part, by the availability of tryptophan in the 
brain—more  tryptophan,  more  serotonin;  less  tryptophan, 
less serotonin.

Brain tryptophan levels are controlled by how much tryp-
tophan is in the blood and by how efﬁ ciently it is transported 
across the blood-brain barrier. Tryptophan in the blood is de-
rived from the proteins we digest in our diet, so a high-protein 
diet will lead to sharply increased blood levels of tryptophan. 
Surprisingly, however, there is a decline in brain tryptophan 
(and serotonin) for several hours after a hearty, high-protein 
meal.  The  paradox  was  resolved  by  Richard  Wurtman  and 
his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

who observed that several other amino acids (tyrosine, phe-
nylalanine, leucine, isoleucine, and valine) compete with tryp-
tophan  for  transport  across  the  blood-brain  barrier.  These 
other  amino  acids  are  rich  in  a  high-protein  diet,  and  they 
suppress the entry of the tryptophan into the brain. The situ-
ation  is  reversed  with  a  high-carbohydrate  meal  that  also 
contains some protein. Insulin, released by the pancreas in 
response to carbohydrates, decreases the blood levels of the 
competing amino acids relative to tryptophan. So the trypto-
phan in the blood is efﬁ ciently transported into the brain, and 
serotonin levels rise.

Increased brain tryptophan correlates with elevated mood, 
decreased  anxiety,  and  increased  sleepiness,  likely  due  to 
changes in serotonin levels. Inadequate tryptophan may ex-
plain the phenomenon of carbohydrate craving that has been 
reported  in  humans  with  seasonal  affective  disorder—the 
depression of mood brought on by reduced daylight during 
winter. It may also explain why clinical trials for treating obe-
sity with extreme carbohydrate deprivation had to be stopped 
because  of  complaints  of  mood  disturbances  (depression, 
irritability) and insomnia.

Based on these and other observations, Wurtman and his 
wife  Judith  made  the  intriguing  suggestion  that  our  dietary 
choices may reﬂ ect our brain’s need for serotonin. Consistent 
with this notion, drugs that elevate extracellular serotonin can 
be  effective  for  weight  loss  (as  well  as  depression),  possi-
bly by reducing the body’s demand for carbohydrates. We 
will discuss the involvement of serotonin in appetite regula-
tion further in Chapter 16, and in the regulation of mood in 
Chapter 22.

▲ FIGURE 15.11
Norepinephrine-containing neurons of the locus coeruleus. Reaction of 
noradrenergic neurons with formaldehyde gas causes them to fluoresce green, 
enabling anatomical investigation of their widespread projections. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Kjell Fuxe.)

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   540
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   540

12/20/14   5:26 AM
12/20/14   5:26 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

541

Norepinephrine system

Neocortex

Thalamus

Hypothalamus

Temporal lobe

Locus coeruleus

Cerebellum

To spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 15.12
The noradrenergic diffuse modulatory system arising from the locus 
coeruleus. The small cluster of locus coeruleus neurons projects axons that in-
nervate vast areas of the CNS, including the spinal cord, cerebellum, thalamus, 
and cerebral cortex.

of  research before the mainstream neuroscience community could accept 
that NE was a neurotransmitter in the brain (Box 15.3). 

 Locus coeruleus cells seem to be involved in the regulation of attention, 
arousal, and sleep–wake cycles as well as learning and memory, anxiety 
and  pain,  mood,  and  brain  metabolism.  This  makes  it  sound  as  if  the 
locus coeruleus may run the whole show. But the key word is “involved,” 
which can mean almost anything. For example, our heart, liver, lungs, 
and kidneys are also involved in every brain function, for without them, 
the brain cannot survive. Because of its widespread connections, the locus 
coeruleus can inﬂ uence virtually all parts of the brain. But to understand 
its actual functions, we start by determining what activates its neurons. 
Recordings from awake, behaving rats and monkeys show that locus coe-
ruleus neurons are most strongly activated by new, unexpected, nonpain-
ful  sensory  stimuli  in  the  animal’s  environment.  They  are  least  active 
when the animals are not vigilant, just sitting around quietly, digesting 
a meal. The locus coeruleus may participate in a general arousal of the 
brain  during  interesting  events  in  the  outside  world.  Because  NE  can 
make neurons of the cerebral cortex more responsive to salient sensory 
stimuli, the locus coeruleus may function generally to increase brain re-
sponsiveness, speeding information processing by the point-to-point sen-
sory and motor systems and making them more efﬁ cient. 

 The Serotonergic Raphe Nuclei. Serotonin-containing neurons are mostly 
clustered within the nine  raphe nuclei .  Raphe  means “ridge” or “seam” 
in Greek, and, indeed, the raphe nuclei lie to either side of the midline 
of the brain stem. Each nucleus projects to different regions of the CNS 
(Figure 15.13). Those more caudal, in the medulla, innervate the spinal 
cord, where they modulate pain-related sensory signals (see Chapter 12). 
Those more rostral, in the pons and midbrain, innervate most of the brain 
in much the same diffuse way as do the locus coeruleus neurons. 

 Similar to neurons of the locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei cells ﬁ re most 
rapidly during wakefulness, when an animal is aroused and active. Raphe 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   541
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   541

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

542

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 15.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons
Exploring the Central Noradrenergic Neurons
by Floyd Bloom
by Floyd Bloom

Norepinephrine (NE) was accepted as the neurotransmit-

ter for the peripheral autonomic sympathetic nervous system 
by the 1930s, but identiﬁ cation of this catecholamine’s sta-
tus in the brain remained uncharacterized for another three 
decades.  By  the  late  1950s,  central  chemical  neurotrans-
mission was conceived as an extension to the brain of the 
then best studied synapse, the neuromuscular junction. Here 
acetylcholine had satisﬁ ed the four identiﬁ cation criteria of a 
neurotransmitter: localization, mimicry of nerve action, identi-
cal pharmacology, and ionic permeability changes. But what 
other brain chemicals did the brain use for those synapses 
not mediated by acetylcholine? NE was detected in the brain 
and was regionally distributed (rich in hypothalamus, low in 
cortex), which was incompatible with it being simply the sym-
pathetic  innervation  of  the  brain’s  blood  vessels,  but  what 
did it do?

When I went to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in 
1962  to  avoid  the  “Doctor’s  Draft”  into  the  Army,  I  spent 
2 years assessing how neurons in the hypothalamus, olfac-
tory bulb, and striatum respond to NE applied by microiono-
phoresis. The results appeared random: A third ﬁ red faster, a 
third ﬁ red slower, and the remaining third were unresponsive. 
What was missing was knowledge of which neurons, if any, 
were actually innervated by NE ﬁ bers. This critical information 
was  provided  when  the  Swedish  scientists  Nils-Åke  Hillarp 

and Bengt Falck developed a histochemical method, called 
formaldehyde-induced  ﬂ uorescence,  which  caused  mono-
amines (NE, dopamine, and serotonin) to ﬂ uoresce when il-
luminated with the appropriate wavelength of light. But in the 
humid climate of Washington D.C., I could not replicate their 
ﬁ ndings. I therefore went to Yale to try different approaches 
using electron microscopy and autoradiography to see which 
nerve terminals could concentrate radioactive NE, as Julius 
Axelrod had done for the sympathetic innervation of the pi-
neal body.

When  I  returned  to  NIH  in  1968,  I  had  learned  enough 
to suspect that cerebellar Purkinje neurons were targets of 
synapses  utilizing  NE  as  a  neurotransmitter.  This  was  also 
the best understood region of the brain in terms of cellular cir-
cuitry. Together with Barry Hoffer, who had studied cerebellar 
development,  and  George  Siggins,  who  was  expert  in  the 
sympathetic innervation of peripheral blood vessels, we set 
about to test how Purkinje neurons respond to NE. We found 
that they responded consistently by slowing their spontane-
ous activity. This effect was blocked by norepinephrine beta 
receptor  antagonists  and  was  prolonged  by  NE  reuptake 
inhibitors, and both effects were lost when the NE neurons 
were destroyed with the toxin 6-hydroxydopamine.

While  visiting  the  Karolinska  Institute  in  1971  (the  year 
Axelrod was awarded the Nobel Prize), I learned from Lars 

neurons  are  the  most  quiet  during  sleep.  The  locus  coeruleus  and  the 
raphe nuclei are part of a venerable concept called the  ascending reticular 
activating system , which implicates the reticular “core” of the brain stem 
in processes that arouse and awaken the forebrain. This simple idea has 
been reﬁ ned and redeﬁ ned in countless ways since it was introduced in 
the 1950s, but its basic sense remains. Raphe neurons seem to be inti-
mately involved in the control of sleep–wake cycles, as well as the differ-
ent stages of sleep. It is important to note that several other transmitter 
systems are involved in a coordinated way as well. We will discuss the 
involvement of the diffuse modulatory systems in sleep and wakefulness 
in Chapter 19. 

 Serotonergic raphe neurons have also been implicated in the control of 
mood and certain types of emotional behavior. We will return to serotonin 
and mood when we discuss clinical depression in Chapter 22. 

 The  Dopaminergic  Substantia  Nigra  and  Ventral  Tegmental  Area.  For 
many years, neuroscientists thought that dopamine existed in the brain 
only  as  a  metabolic  precursor  for  norepinephrine.  However,  research 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   542
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   542

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

543

Olson  and  Kjell  Fuxe  that  the  locus  coeruleus  in  the  pons 
provided  the  NE  innervation  of  the  cerebellum  as  well  as 
the  entire  forebrain  (Figure  A).  When  Siggins,  Hoffer,  and  I 
electrically stimulated the locus coeruleus, Purkinje cell ﬁ ring 
slowed, thus mimicking the effects of NE by microionopho-
resis. The effect of locus coeruleus stimulation was lost when 
NE was depleted using inhibitors of tyrosine hydroxylase, or 
eradicated  with  6-hydroxydopamine.  At  last,  we  were  con-
vinced that NE satisﬁ ed the neurotransmitter identiﬁ cation cri-
teria. But clearly, the CNS actions of NE differed dramatically 
from  those  of  “classical”  fast  central  transmitter  systems. 
Instead of being strictly excitatory or inhibitory, NE seemed to 
act to enhance the effects of other afferent projections to the 
same  postsynaptic  targets.  Menahem  Segal,  working  with 
me at the NIH, reached a similar conclusion for the actions of 
NE in the hippocampus.

After  moving  to  the  Salk  Institute,  I  worked  with  Steve 
Foote  and  Gary  Aston-Jones  to  record  the  ﬁ ring  patterns 
of the locus coeruleus neurons in awake behaving rats and 
squirrel monkeys. These experiments revealed that the locus 
coeruleus neurons have brief phasic responses to novel sen-
sory signals of all modalities, progressively slowing with loss 
of attention and becoming silent during rapid eye movement 
sleep. The phasic and tonic discharge modes correlate with 
the chemical thresholds for alpha (highly sensitive) and beta 
(less sensitive) adrenergic receptors.

Subsequently, using immunohistochemistry with antibod-
ies to the enzyme dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, found only in 
NE-containing neurons, Steve Foote, John Morrison, David 
Lewis, and I generated detailed NE circuit maps in the nonhu-
man primate brain. In contrast to the diffuse rodent cortical 
innervations, their data showed differences in the amount of 

innervation in architectonically deﬁ ned areas of the cerebral 
cortex, particularly in the cingulate and orbitofrontal cortex. 
This  map  suggested  that  the  locus  coeruleus-NE  afferents 
have a greater inﬂ uence on spatial and visuomotor detection 
than  on  detailed  sensory  feature  detection.  My  interests  in 
the  central  catecholamine  systems  and  brain  disease  con-
tinue today and have been intensiﬁ ed by the computational 
and theoretical concepts now being developed from studies 
of  the  roles  of  these  systems  in  awake  behaving  primates, 
including normal cognitive declines with aging.

Figure A
 Green ﬂ uorescent NE neurons in a sagittal section of the rat locus 
coeruleus. (Source: Courtesy of Dr. Floyd Bloom, The Scripps 
Research Institute.)

 conducted in the 1960s by Arvid Carlsson of the University of Gothenburg 
in Sweden proved that dopamine was indeed a crucial CNS neurotrans-
mitter. This discovery was honored with the 2000 Nobel Prize in Medicine. 
 Although there are dopamine-containing neurons scattered throughout 
the CNS, including some in the retina, the olfactory bulb, and the periven-
tricular hypothalamus, two closely related groups of dopaminergic cells 
have the characteristics of the diffuse modulatory systems (Figure 15.14). 
One of these arises in the  substantia nigra  in the midbrain. Recall from 
Chapter  14  that  these  cells  project  axons  to  the  striatum  (the  caudate 
nucleus and the putamen), where they somehow facilitate the initiation 
of voluntary movements. Degeneration of the dopamine-containing cells 
in the substantia nigra is all that is necessary to produce the progressive, 
dreadful motor disorders of Parkinson’s disease. Although we do not en-
tirely understand the function of DA in motor control, in general it facili-
tates the initiation of motor responses by environmental stimuli. 

 The  midbrain  is  also  the  origin  of  the  other  dopaminergic  modula-
tory system, a group of cells that lie very close to the substantia nigra, 
in  the   ventral  tegmental  area .  Axons  from  these  neurons  innervate  a 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   543
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   543

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

544

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Serotonin system

Basal ganglia

Neocortex

Thalamus

Hypothalamus

Temporal lobe

Raphe nuclei

Cerebellum

To spinal cord

▲ FIGURE 15.13
The serotonergic diffuse  modulatory systems arising from the raphe nuclei. 
 The raphe nuclei are clustered along the midline of the brain stem and project ex-
tensively to all levels of the CNS.

 circumscribed region of the telencephalon that includes the frontal cortex 
and parts of the limbic system. (The limbic system will be discussed in 
Chapter  18.)  This  dopaminergic  projection  from  the  midbrain  is  some-
times  called  the   mesocorticolimbic  dopamine  system.   A  number  of  dif-
ferent  functions  have  been  ascribed  to  this  complicated  projection.  For 
example, evidence indicates that it is involved in a “reward” system that 
somehow assigns value to, or  reinforces , certain behaviors that are adap-
tive. We will see in Chapter 16 that if rats (or humans) are given a chance 
to do so, they will work to electrically stimulate this pathway. In addition, 

Dopamine system

Frontal
lobe

Striatum

Substantia
nigra

Ventral tegmental area

▲ FIGURE 15.14
The dopaminergic diffuse modulatory systems arising from the substantia 
nigra and the ventral tegmental area. The substantia nigra and ventral tegmen-
tal area lie close together in the midbrain. They project to the striatum (caudate 
nucleus and putamen) and limbic and frontal cortical regions, respectively.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   544
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   544

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

545

this  projection has been implicated in psychiatric disorders, as we will 
discuss in Chapter 22. 

 The Cholinergic Basal Forebrain and Brain Stem Complexes. Acetylcho-
line is the familiar transmitter at the neuromuscular junction, at synapses 
in autonomic ganglia, and at postganglionic parasympathetic synapses. 
Cholinergic interneurons also exist within the brain—in the striatum and 
the cortex, for example. In addition, there are two major diffuse modula-
tory  cholinergic  systems  in  the  brain,  one  of  which  is  called  the   basal 
forebrain complex . It is a “complex” because the cholinergic neurons lie 
scattered among several related nuclei at the core of the telencephalon, 
medial and ventral to the basal ganglia. The best known of these are the 
 medial septal nuclei , which provide the cholinergic innervation of the hip-
pocampus, and the  basal nucleus of Meynert , which provides most of the 
cholinergic innervation of the neocortex. 

 The function of the cells in the basal forebrain complex remains mostly 
unknown. But interest in this region has been fueled by the discovery that 
these are among the ﬁ rst cells to die during the course of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, which is characterized by a progressive and profound loss of cognitive 
functions. (However, there is widespread neuronal death in Alzheimer’s 
disease, and no speciﬁ c link between the disease and cholinergic neurons 
has been established.) Like the noradrenergic and serotonergic systems, 
the cholinergic system has been implicated in regulating general brain ex-
citability during arousal and sleep–wake cycles. The basal forebrain com-
plex may also play a special role in learning and memory formation. 

 The second diffuse cholinergic system is called the  pontomesencephalo-
tegmental complex . These are ACh-utilizing cells in the pons and midbrain 
tegmentum. This system acts mainly on the dorsal thalamus, where, to-
gether with the noradrenergic and serotonergic systems, it regulates the 
excitability of the sensory relay nuclei. These cells also project up to the 
telencephalon, providing a cholinergic link between the brain stem and 
basal forebrain complexes. Figure 15.15 shows the cholinergic systems. 

Acetylcholine system

Neocortex

Thalamus

Medial
septal nuclei

Basal nucleus
of Meynert

Hippocampus

Pontomesencephalo-
tegmental complex

▲ FIGURE 15.15
The cholinergic diffuse modulatory systems arising from the basal forebrain 
and brain stem. The medial septal nuclei and basal nucleus of Meynert project 
widely upon the cerebral cortex, including the hippocampus. The pontomesen-
cephalotegmental complex projects to the thalamus and parts of the forebrain.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   545
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   545

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

546

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Drugs and the Diffuse Modulatory Systems 
  Psychoactive drugs , compounds with “mind-altering” effects, all act on the 
central nervous system, and most do so by interfering with chemical synaptic 
transmission. Many abused drugs act directly on the modulatory systems, 
particularly the noradrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic systems. 

 Hallucinogens. The use of  hallucinogens,  drugs that produce hallucina-
tions, goes back thousands of years. Hallucinogenic compounds are con-
tained  in  a  number  of  plants  consumed  as  part  of  religious  ritual,  for 
example,  the   Psilocybe   mushroom  by  the  Maya  and  the  peyote  cactus 
by  the  Aztec.  The  modern  era  of  hallucinogenic  drug  use  was  unwit-
tingly  ushered  in  at  the  laboratory  of  Swiss  chemist  Albert  Hofmann. 
In 1938, Hofmann chemically synthesized a new compound,  lysergic acid 
diethylamide   (LSD) . For 5 years, the LSD sat on the shelf. Then one day 
in 1943, Hofmann accidentally ingested some of the powder. His report 
on the effects attracted the immediate interest of the medical community. 
Psychiatrists began to use LSD in attempts to unlock the subconscious of 
mentally disturbed patients. Later the drug was discovered by intellectu-
als, artists, students, and the U.S. Defense Department, who investigated 
its “mind-expanding”  effects.  (A  chief  advocate  of  LSD  use  was  former 
Harvard psychologist Timothy Leary.) In the 1960s, LSD made its way to 
the street and was widely abused. It is illegal to possess LSD today. 

 LSD is extremely potent. A dose of only 25 ␮g is sufﬁ cient to produce a 
full-blown hallucinogenic effect (compared to a normal dose of aspirin at 
650 mg, which is 25,000 times larger). Among the reported behavioral ef-
fects of LSD are a dreamlike state with heightened awareness of sensory 
stimuli, often with a mixing of perceptions such that sounds can evoke 
images, images can evoke smells, and so on. 

 The chemical structure of LSD (and the active ingredients of  Psilocybe  
mushrooms and peyote) is very close to that of serotonin, suggesting that 
it acts on the serotonergic system. Indeed, LSD is a potent agonist at the 
serotonin receptors on the presynaptic terminals of neurons in the raphe 
nuclei. Activation of these receptors markedly inhibits the ﬁ ring of raphe 
neurons. Thus, one known CNS effect of LSD is a reduction in the outﬂ ow 
of  the  brain’s  serotonergic  diffuse  modulatory  system.  It  is  interesting 
to note in this regard that decreased activity of the raphe nuclei is also 
characteristic of dream-sleep (see Chapter 19). 

 Can  we  conclude  that  LSD  produces  hallucinations  by  silencing  the 
brain’s  serotonin  systems?  If  only  drug  effects  on  the  brain  were  that 
simple. Unfortunately, there are problems with this hypothesis. For one, 
silencing  neurons  in  the  raphe  nuclei  by  other  means—by  destroying 
them, for example—does not mimic the effects of LSD in experimental 
animals.  Furthermore,  animals  still  respond  as  expected  to  LSD  after 
their raphe nuclei have been destroyed. 

 In  recent  years,  researchers  have  focused  on  direct  LSD  actions  at 
serotonin  receptors  in  the  cerebral  cortex.  Current  research  suggests 
that LSD causes hallucinations by superseding the naturally modulated 
release  of  serotonin  in  cortical  areas  where  perceptions  normally  are 
formed and interpreted. 

 Stimulants.  In  contrast  to  the  uncertainties  about  hallucinogens  and 
serotonin,  it  is  clear  that  the  powerful  CNS  stimulants   cocaine   and 
 amphetamine  both exert their effects at synapses made by dopaminergic 
and noradrenergic systems. Both drugs give users a feeling of increased 
alertness and self-conﬁ dence, a sense of exhilaration and euphoria, and a 

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   546
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   546

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

547

decreased appetite. Both are also sympathomimetic—they cause periph-
eral effects that mimic activation of the sympathetic division of the ANS: 
increased heart rate and blood pressure, dilation of the pupils, and so on. 
 Cocaine  is  extracted  from  the  leaves  of  the  coca  plant  and  has  been 
used  by  Andean  indigenous  peoples  for  hundreds  of  years.  In  the  mid-
nineteenth  century,  cocaine  turned  up  in  Europe  and  North  America 
as the magic ingredient in a wide range of concoctions touted as having 
 medicinal value. (An example is Coca-Cola, originally marketed in 1886 as 
a therapeutic agent, which contained both cocaine and caffeine.) Cocaine 
use fell out of favor early in the twentieth century, only to reemerge in 
the late 1960s as a popular recreational drug. Ironically, one of the main 
reasons for the rise in cocaine use during this period was the tightening of 
regulations against amphetamines. First chemically synthesized in 1887, 
amphetamines did not come into wide use until World War II, when they 
were taken by soldiers (particularly aviators) to sustain them in combat. 
Following the war, amphetamines became available as nonprescription 
diet  aids,  as  nasal  decongestants,  and  as  “pep  pills.”  Regulations  were 
ﬁ nally tightened after recognition that amphetamines are, like cocaine, 
highly addictive and dangerous in large doses. 

 The  neurotransmitters  dopamine  and  norepinephrine  are   catechol-
amines,  named for their chemical structure (see Chapter 6). The actions of 
catecholamines released into the synaptic cleft are normally terminated 
by speciﬁ c uptake mechanisms. Cocaine and amphetamine both block this 
catecholamine uptake (Figure 15.16). However, recent work suggests that 
cocaine targets DA reuptake more selectively; amphetamine blocks NE 
and DA reuptake  and  stimulates the release of DA. Thus, these drugs can 
prolong and intensify the effects of released DA or NE. Is this the means 
by which cocaine and amphetamine cause their stimulant effects? There is 
good reason for thinking so. For example, experimental depletion of brain 
catecholamines by using synthesis  inhibitors (such as  ␣ - methyltyrosine) 
will abolish the stimulant effects of both cocaine and amphetamine. 

 Besides  having  a  similar  stimulant  effect,  cocaine  and  amphetamine 
share another, more insidious behavioral action: psychological dependence, 
or addiction. Users will develop powerful cravings for prolonging and con-
tinuing  drug-induced  pleasurable  feelings.  These  effects  are   believed  to 

Tyrosine
–
Dopa

Dopamine

␣-Methyltyrosine

Tyrosine

–
Dopa

Norepinephrine (NE)

Dopamine (DA) 

NE

DA

NE

–

–

NE

DA

NE

Cocaine or

amphetamine

DA

Activates postsynaptic and

presynaptic receptors

Activates postsynaptic and

presynaptic receptors

▲ FIGURE 15.16
Stimulant drug action on the catecholamine 
axon terminal. On the left is a noradrenergic 
terminal, and on the right is a dopaminergic 
terminal. Both neurotransmitters are catechol-
amines synthesized from the dietary amino acid 
tyrosine. Dopa (3, 4-dihydroxypheynylalanine) is 
an intermediate in the synthesis of both. The 
actions of NE and DA are usually terminated 
by uptake back into the axon terminal. Amphet-
amine and cocaine block this uptake, thereby 
allowing NE and DA to remain in the synaptic 
cleft longer.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   547
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   547

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

548

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 result speciﬁ cally from the enhanced transmission in the mesocorticolimbic 
dopamine system during drug use. Remember, this system may normally 
function  to  reinforce  adaptive  behaviors.  By  short-circuiting  the  system, 
these drugs instead reinforce drug-seeking behavior. Indeed, just as rats 
will work to electrically stimulate the mesocorticolimbic projection, they will 
also work to receive an injection of cocaine. We’ll discuss the involvement 
of dopamine pathways in motivation and addiction further in Chapter 16. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 In this chapter, we have examined three components of the nervous sys-
tem  that  are  characterized  by  the  great  reach  of  their  inﬂ uences.  The 
secretory  hypothalamus  and  autonomic  nervous  system  communicate 
with cells all over the body, and the diffuse modulatory systems commu-
nicate with neurons in many different parts of the brain. They are also 
characterized by the duration of their direct effects, which can range from 
minutes to hours. Finally, they are characterized by their chemical neu-
rotransmitters.  In  many  instances,  the  transmitter   deﬁ nes   the  system. 
For  example,  in  the  peripheral  nervous  system,  we  can  use  the  words 
“noradrenergic” and “sympathetic” interchangeably. The same thing goes 
for “raphe” and “serotonin” in the forebrain, and “substantia nigra” and 
“dopamine”  in  the  basal  ganglia.  These  chemical  idiosyncrasies  have 
allowed interpretations of drug effects on behavior that are not possible 
with most other neural systems. Thus, we have a good idea where in the 
brain amphetamine and cocaine exert their stimulant effects, and where 
outside the CNS, they act to raise blood pressure and heart rate. 

 At a detailed level, each of the systems discussed in this chapter per-
forms different functions. But at a general level, they all  maintain brain 
homeostasis :  They  regulate  different  processes  within  a  certain  physi-
ological  range.  For  example,  the  ANS  regulates  blood  pressure  within 
a range that is appropriate. Blood pressure variations optimize an ani-
mal’s performance under different conditions. In a similar way, the nor-
adrenergic locus coeruleus and serotonergic raphe nuclei regulate levels 
of consciousness and mood. These levels also vary within a range that is 
adaptive to the organism. In the next several chapters, we will encounter 
these systems again in the context of speciﬁ c functions. 

hypothalamo-pituitary portal 

circulation (p. 528)
adrenal cortex (p. 528)
adrenal medulla (p. 528)
cortisol (p. 528)

preganglionic neuron (p. 533)
sympathetic chain (p. 533)
enteric division (p. 535)
nucleus of the solitary tract 

(p. 537)

The Autonomic Nervous System
autonomic nervous system 

(ANS) (p. 531)

sympathetic division (p. 532)
parasympathetic division 

(p. 532)

autonomic ganglia (p. 533)
postganglionic neuron (p. 533)

The Diffuse Modulatory Systems 
of the Brain
diffuse modulatory system 

(p. 539)

locus coeruleus (p. 539)
raphe nuclei (p. 541)
basal forebrain complex 

(p. 545)

K E Y   T E R M S

The Secretory Hypothalamus
homeostasis (p. 524)
periventricular zone (p. 524)
magnocellular neurosecretory 

cell (p. 525)

neurohormone (p. 525)
oxytocin (p. 526)
vasopressin (p. 526)
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) 

(p. 526)

parvocellular neurosecretory 

cell (p. 528)

hypophysiotropic hormone 

(p. 528)

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   548
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   548

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

CHAPTER 15    CHEMICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

549

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1. Battleﬁ eld trauma victims who have lost large volumes of blood often express a craving to drink

water. Why?

2. You’ve stayed up all night trying to meet a term paper deadline. You now are typing frantically,
keeping one eye on the paper and the other on the clock. How has the periventricular zone of
the  hypothalamus  orchestrated  your  body’s  physiological  response  to  this  stressful  situation?
Describe in detail.

3. An “Addisonian crisis” describes a constellation of symptoms that include extreme weakness,
mental confusion, drowsiness, low blood pressure, and abdominal pain. What causes these symp-
toms and what can be done to treat them?

4. Why is the adrenal medulla often referred to as a modiﬁ ed sympathetic ganglion? Why isn’t the

adrenal cortex included in this description?

5. A  number  of  famous  athletes  and  entertainers  have  accidentally  killed  themselves  by  taking
large quantities of cocaine. Usually the cause of death is heart failure. How would you explain
the peripheral actions of cocaine?

6. How do the diffuse modulatory and point-to-point synaptic communication systems in the brain

differ? List four ways.

7. Under what behavioral conditions are the noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus active?

The noradrenergic neurons of the ANS?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G 

Bloom FE. 2010. The catecholamine neuron: 

historical and future perspectives. Progress in 
Neurobiology 90:75–81.

Carlsson A. 2001. A paradigm shift in brain 

research. Science 294:1021–1024.

McEwen BS. 2002. Sex, stress and the hippocam-

pus: allostasis, allostatic load and the aging 
process. Neurobiology of Aging 23(5):921–939.

Meyer JS, Quenzer LF. 2004. 

Psychopharmacology: Drugs, the Brain, and 
Behavior. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.

Wurtman RJ, Wurtman JJ. 1989. Carbohydrates 

and depression. Scientiﬁ c American 260(1):
68–75.

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   549
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   549

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   550
519–550_Bear_15_revised_final.indd   550

12/20/14   5:27 AM
12/20/14   5:27 AM

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Motivation

 INTRODUCTION 
 THE HYPOTHALAMUS, HOMEOSTASIS, AND MOTIVATED 
BEHAVIOR 
 THE LONG-TERM REGULATION OF FEEDING BEHAVIOR 

 Energy Balance 
 Hormonal and Hypothalamic Regulation of Body Fat and Feeding 

 Body Fat and Food Consumption 
  BOX 16.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Starving Brains of the Obese 
 The Hypothalamus and Feeding 
 The Effects of Elevated Leptin Levels on the Hypothalamus 
 The Effects of Decreased Leptin Levels on the Hypothalamus 
 The Control of Feeding by Lateral Hypothalamic Peptides 

 THE SHORT-TERM REGULATION OF FEEDING BEHAVIOR 

 Appetite, Eating, Digestion, and Satiety 

  BOX 16.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Marijuana and the Munchies 
 Ghrelin 
 Gastric Distension 
 Cholecystokinin 
 Insulin 
  BOX 16.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Diabetes Mellitus and Insulin Shock 

 WHY DO WE EAT? 

 Reinforcement and Reward 

  BOX 16.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Self-Stimulation of the Human Brain 

 The Role of Dopamine in Motivation 

  BOX 16.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Dopamine and Addiction 
  BOX 16.6   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Learning to Crave, by Julie Kauer 

 Serotonin, Food, and Mood 

 OTHER MOTIVATED BEHAVIORS 

 Drinking 
 Temperature Regulation 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 

  BOX 16.7   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Neuroeconomics 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   551
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   551

551

12/20/14   5:29 AM
12/20/14   5:29 AM

552

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION  
INTRODUCCTION  

 Behavior happens. But why? In Part II of this book, we discussed  various 
types  of  motor  responses.  At  the  lowest  level  are  unconscious  reﬂ exes 
initiated by sensory stimulation—dilation of the pupils when the lights 
go out, sudden removal of the foot from a thumbtack, and so on. At the 
highest  level  are  conscious  movements  initiated  by  the  neurons  of  the 
frontal lobe—for example, the ﬁ nger movements that tap this text into 
the computer. Voluntary movements are incited to occur, or  motivated , 
in order to satisfy a need. The motivation can be very abstract (the “need” 
to go sailing on a warm and breezy summer afternoon), but it can also be 
quite concrete (the need to go to the bathroom when your bladder is full). 
 Motivation can be thought of as a driving force on behavior. By analogy, 
consider the driving force on sodium ions to cross the neuronal membrane 
(an odd analogy, perhaps, but not for a neuroscience text). As we learned 
back in Chapters 3 and 4, ionic driving force depends on a number of fac-
tors, including the concentration of the ion on both sides of the membrane 
and the electrical membrane potential. Variations in driving force make 
transmembrane ionic current in a particular direction more or less likely. 
But the driving force alone does not determine whether the current ﬂ ows; 
the transmembrane movement of ions also requires the appropriate gated 
ion channels to be opened and capable of conducting the current. 

 Of  course,  human  behavior  will  never  be  described  by  anything  as 
 simple  as  Ohm’s  law.  Still,  it  is  useful  to  consider  that  the  probability 
and direction of a behavior will vary with the level of driving force to per-
form that behavior. And while motivation may be required for a certain 
 behavior,  it  does  not  guarantee  that  behavior.  The  membrane  analogy 
also allows us to highlight the fact that a crucial part of the control of 
behavior  is  to  appropriately  gate  the  expression  of  different  motivated 
actions  that  have  conﬂ icting  goals—tapping  on  the  computer  keyboard 
versus spending the afternoon sailing, for example. 

 Despite tangible progress in recent years, neuroscience cannot yet pro-
vide a detailed explanation for why the sailing expedition was abandoned 
in  favor  of  writing  this  chapter.  Nonetheless,  much  has  been  learned 
about what motivates certain behaviors that are basic to survival. 

 THE HYPOTHALAMUS, HOMEOSTASIS, AND 
THE HHYPOTTHALAMUS, HOMEEOSTASIS, AND 
MOTIVATED BEHAVIOR 
MOTIVATED BEHAVIOR 

 The  hypothalamus  and  homeostasis  were  introduced  in  Chapter  15. 
Recall that homeostasis refers to the processes that maintain the internal 
environment of the body within a narrow physiological range. Although 
homeostatic  reﬂ exes  occur  at  many  levels  of  the  nervous  system,  the 
 hypothalamus  plays  a  key  role  in  the  regulation  of  body  temperature, 
ﬂ uid balance, and energy balance. 

 The hypothalamic regulation of homeostasis starts with sensory trans-
duction. A regulated parameter (e.g., temperature) is measured by special-
ized sensory neurons, and deviations from the optimal range are detected 
by neurons concentrated in the periventricular zone of the hypothalamus. 
These neurons then orchestrate an integrated response to bring the param-
eter back to its optimal value. The response generally has three components: 
 1.  Humoral response : Hypothalamic neurons respond to sensory signals 
by stimulating or inhibiting the release of pituitary hormones into the 
bloodstream. 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   552
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   552

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

553

 2.  Visceromotor response : Neurons in the hypothalamus respond to sen-
sory signals by adjusting the balance of sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic outputs of the autonomic nervous system (ANS).

 3.  Somatic  motor  response :  Hypothalamic  neurons  (particularly  within
the  lateral  hypothalamus)  respond  to  sensory  signals  by  inciting  an
appropriate somatic motor behavioral response.
 You are cold, dehydrated, and depleted of energy. The appropriate hu-
moral and visceromotor responses kick in automatically. You shiver, blood 
is shunted away from the body surface, urine production is inhibited, body 
fat reserves are mobilized, and so on. But the fastest and most effective 
way to correct these disturbances of brain homeostasis is to actively seek 
or generate warmth by moving, to drink water, and to eat. These are exam-
ples of  motivated behaviors  generated by the somatic motor system, and 
they are incited to occur by the activity of the lateral hypothalamus. Our 
goal in this chapter is to explore the neural basis for this type of motivation. 
To illustrate, we will concentrate on a subject dear to our hearts: eating. 

THE LONG-TERM REGULATION OF 
THE LLONG-TERM REGULATIOON OF 
FEEDDING BBEHAVIOR 
FEEDING BEHAVIOR 

 As you know, even a brief interruption in a person’s oxygen supply can lead 
to serious brain damage and death. You may be surprised to learn that the 
brain’s requirement for food, in the form of glucose, is no less urgent. Only 
a few minutes of glucose deprivation will lead to a loss of consciousness, 
eventually followed by death if glucose is not restored. While the external 
environment normally provides a constant source of oxygen, the availabil-
ity of food is less assured. Thus, complex internal regulatory mechanisms 
have evolved to store energy in the body so that it is available when needed. 
One primary reason we are motivated to eat is to keep these reserves at a 
level sufﬁ cient to ensure that there will not be an energy shortfall. 

 Energy Balance 
 The body’s energy stores are replenished during and immediately after 
consuming a meal. This condition, in which the blood is ﬁ lled with nu-
trients, is called the  prandial state  (from the Latin word for “breakfast”). 
During this time, energy is stored in two forms: glycogen and triglycer-
ides (Figure 16.1). Glycogen reserves have a ﬁ nite capacity, and they are 
found mainly in the liver and skeletal muscle. Triglyceride reserves are 
found in adipose (fat) tissue, and they have a virtually unlimited capa-
city. The assembly of macromolecules such as glycogen and triglycerides 
from simple precursors is called  anabolism , or anabolic metabolism. 

 During the fasting condition between meals, called the  postabsorptive 
state , stored glycogen and triglycerides are broken down to provide the 
body with a continuous supply of the molecules used as fuel for cellular 
metabolism (glucose for all cells, and fatty acids and ketones for all cells 
other than neurons). The process of breaking down complex macromol-
ecules is called  catabolism , or catabolic metabolism; it is the opposite of 
anabolism. The system is in proper balance when energy reserves are re-
plenished at the same average rate that they are expended. If the intake 
and storage of energy consistently exceed the usage, the amount of body 
fat,  or   adiposity ,  increases,  eventually  resulting  in   obesity .  (The  word 
obese   is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  for  “fat.”)  If  the  intake  of  energy 
consistently fails to meet the body’s demands, loss of fat tissue occurs, 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   553
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   553

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

554

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Skeletal 
muscle

Liver 

Glycogen

Neurons

Intestines (full)

Absorbed
nutrients

Blood

Intestines (empty)

Glucose

Fatty acids

All cells

Ketones

Liver 

Glycogen

Blood

Glucose
Glucose
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
Ketones
Ketones

Neurons

All cells

Triglycerides

Triglycerides

Adipose (fat) tissue

Adipose (fat) tissue

(a)  Anabolism during the prandial state

(b)  Catabolism during the postabsorptive state

▲ FIGURE 16.1
Loading and emptying the body’s energy reserves.  (a) After a meal, when we 
are in the prandial state, excess energy is stored as glycogen or as triglycerides. 
(b) During the time between meals, when we are in the postabsorptive state, the 
glycogen and triglycerides are broken down (catabolized) into smaller molecules 
that can be used as fuel by the cells of the body.

eventually resulting in  starvation . Figure 16.2 summarizes the concept 
of energy balance and body fat. 

 For the system to stay in balance, there must be some means of regu-
lating feeding behavior, based on the size of the energy reserves and their 
rate  of  replenishment.  In  recent  decades,  research  has  made  substan-
tial progress in understanding the various means by which this regula-
tion  occurs—and none too soon, because eating disorders and obesity are 
widespread health problems. It is now apparent that there are multiple 
regulatory mechanisms, some acting over a long period of time to main-
tain the body’s fat reserves, and others acting over a shorter time period 
to regulate meal size and frequency. We begin our investigation by look-
ing at long-term regulation. 

 Hormonal and Hypothalamic Regulation of Body Fat 
and Feeding 
 The study of the homeostatic regulation of feeding behavior has a long 
history, but the pieces of the puzzle have only recently fallen into place. 
As we will see, feeding is stimulated when neurons in the hypothalamus 
detect a drop in the level of a hormone released by fat cells. These hypo-
thalamic cells are concentrated in the periventricular zone; those neurons 
that incite feeding behavior are in the lateral hypothalamus. 

 Body Fat and Food Consumption.  If you’ve ever dieted, you don’t need to 
be told that the body works hard to frustrate any efforts to alter adiposity. 

Energy balance

Body fat

(a)

Intake = expenditure

Normal

(b)

Intake > expenditure

Obesity

(c)

Intake < expenditure

Starvation

▲ FIGURE 16.2
Energy balance and body fat. 
 (a) Normal energy balance leads to 
normal adiposity. (b) Prolonged posi-
tive energy balance leads to obesity. 
(c) Prolonged negative energy balance 
leads to starvation.

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   554
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   554

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

555

Period of
starvation

Period of

forced feeding

i

)
g
(
 
t
h
g
e
w
 
y
d
o
B

500

400

300

200

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

Time (days)

▲ FIGURE 16.3
The maintenance of body weight 
around a set value.   Body weight is nor-
mally very stable. Weight lost during a 
period of starvation is rapidly gained 
when food is freely available. Similarly, if 
an animal is force fed, it will gain weight, 
but the weight is lost as soon as the an-
imal can regulate its own food intake.

Consider Figure 16.3, showing that a rat can be induced to lose body fat 
by severely restricting its caloric intake. However, once free access to food 
is  restored,  the  animal  overeats  until  the  original  level  of  body  fat  has 
fully returned. It also works the other way around. Animals force fed in 
order to gain fat mass, once given the chance to regulate their own diet, 
eat less until their fat levels return to normal. The heavy rat’s behavioral 
response is obviously not a reﬂ ection of vanity; it is a mechanism for main-
taining energy homeostasis. The idea that the brain monitors the amount 
of body fat and acts to “defend” this energy store against perturbations, 
ﬁ rst proposed in 1953 by British scientist Gordon Kennedy, is called the 
 lipostatic hypothesis . 

 The connection between body fat and feeding behavior suggests that 
there must be communication from adipose tissue to the brain. A blood-
borne  hormonal  signal  was  immediately  suspected,  and  this  suspicion 
was conﬁ rmed in the 1960s by Douglas Coleman and his colleagues at 
the Jackson Laboratories in Bar Harbor, Maine, working with genetically 
obese mice. The DNA of one strain of an obese mouse lacked both copies 
of a gene called  ob  (these mice are therefore called  ob/ob  mice). Coleman 
hypothesized that the protein encoded by the  ob  gene is the hormone tell-
ing the brain that fat reserves are normal. Thus, in the  ob/ob  mice that 
lack this hormone, the brain is fooled into thinking that the fat reserves 
are low, and the animals are abnormally motivated to eat. To test this 
idea, a parabiosis experiment was performed.  Parabiosis  is the long-term 
anatomical and physiological union of two animals, as in Siamese twins. 
Fusion can also be achieved surgically, thereby resulting in parabiosed 
animals  sharing  a  common  blood  supply.  Coleman  and  his  colleagues 
found that when  ob/ob  animals were parabiosed with normal mice, their 
feeding behavior and obesity were greatly reduced, as if the missing hor-
mone had been replaced (Figure 16.4). 

 Then the search was on for the protein encoded by the  ob  gene. In 1994, 
a  group  of  scientists  led  by  Jeffrey  Friedman  at  Rockefeller  University 
ﬁ nally isolated the protein, which they called  leptin  (from the Greek for 
“slender”). Treating  ob/ob  mice with leptin completely reverses the obesity 
and the eating disorder (Figure 16.5). The hormone leptin, released by adi-
pocytes (fat cells), regulates body mass by acting directly on neurons of the 
hypothalamus that decrease appetite and increase energy expenditure. 

Normal mouse

ob/ob mouse

Parabiosis

▲ FIGURE 16.4
The regulation of body fat by a circulating hormone.  If a genetically obese 
ob/ob mouse is surgically fused with a normal mouse so that bloodborne signals 
are shared between the animals, the obesity of the ob/ob mouse is greatly 
 moderated.

▲ FIGURE 16.5
The reversal of obesity in ob/ob mice 
by leptin.  Both of these mice have a de-
fect in the ob gene that encodes the fat 
hormone leptin. The animal on the right 
received daily hormone replacement 
treatment, which prevented the obesity 
that is apparent in the animal on the left. 
(Courtesy of John Sholtis, Rockefeller 
University.)

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   555
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   555

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

556

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 16.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Starving Brains of the Obese

Like the ob/ob mouse, humans lacking leptin crave food, 

have  slowed  metabolism,  and  become  morbidly  obese. 
For  these  individuals,  leptin  replacement  therapy  can  be 
a  “miracle  cure”  (Figure  A).  While  mutations  affecting  the 
leptin gene are rare, there is evidence for a genetic basis 
for many forms of human obesity. The hereditability of obe-
sity is equivalent to that of height and greater than that of 
many other conditions, including heart disease and breast 
cancer. Many genes are involved, and the search is on to 
discover them.

Obesity is a major human health problem. In the United 
States, two-thirds of the population is overweight, and mil-
lions  are  morbidly  obese.  Many  obese  people  experience 
intense cravings for food but at the same time have slowed 
metabolism. In the case of leptin deﬁ ciency, the brain and 
body respond as if the person is starving, despite massive 
obesity.

Leptin  offered  tremendous  promise  as  a  treatment  for 
obesity. By supplementing leptin, the logic went, the brain 
could be fooled into decreasing appetite and increasing me-
tabolism. Unfortunately, other than the rare individuals who 
congenitally  lack  the  hormone,  most  obese  patients  have 
failed to respond to leptin therapy. Indeed, many have been 
found to have abnormally elevated blood levels of leptin. It 
appears that the problem for these patients stems from de-
creased sensitivity of brain neurons to the leptin circulating 
in the blood. The problem can arise from decreased pene-
tration of the leptin through the blood-brain barrier, reduced 
expression  of  the  leptin  receptor  in  the  neurons  of  the 
 periventricular hypothalamus, or altered CNS responses to 

changes in hypothalamic activity. Intensive efforts are now 
underway to identify drug targets in the feeding circuits of 
the brain that are downstream of leptin.

Figure A 
 The effect of hormone replacement in a leptin-deﬁ cient human. 
Daily leptin treatment begun at age 5 (left) brought this girl’s weight 
down to a near-normal level, shown here at age 9 (right). (Source: 
Gibson, et al., 2004, p. 4823.)

 Well-fed humans tend to focus on how increased leptin can ﬁ ght obe-
sity (Box 16.1). However, more signiﬁ cant for survival is how leptin deple-
tion ﬁ ghts starvation. Leptin deﬁ ciency stimulates hunger and feeding, 
suppresses energy expenditure, and inhibits reproductive competence—
adaptive responses when food is scarce and energy reserves are low. 

 The Hypothalamus and Feeding. A.W. Hetherington and S.W. Ranson of 
Northwestern University made the seminal discovery, published in 1940, 
that small lesions made on both sides of a rat’s hypothalamus can have 
large effects on subsequent feeding behavior and adiposity. Bilateral lesions 
of the  lateral  hypothalamus caused  anorexia , a severely diminished appe-
tite for food. In contrast, bilateral lesions of the  ventromedial  hypothalamus 
caused the animals to overeat and become obese (Figure 16.6). This basic 
scenario applies to humans as well. Anorexia caused by damage to the lat-
eral hypothalamus is commonly referred to as the  lateral hypothalamic 
syndrome ; overeating and obesity caused by lesions to the ventromedial 
hypothalamus is called the  ventromedial hypothalamic syndrome . 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   556
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   556

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

557

(a)  Lateral hypothalamic
       syndrome 

Normal

(b)  Ventromedial hypothalamic
       syndrome

▲ FIGURE 16.6
Altered feeding behavior and body weight 
resulting from bilateral lesions of the rat 
hypothalamus.  (a) The lateral hypothalamic 
syndrome, characterized by anorexia, is 
caused by lesions of the lateral hypothala-
mus. (b) The ventromedial hypothalamic 
syndrome, characterized by obesity, is 
caused by lesions of the ventromedial 
 hypothalamus.

Lesions 
of lateral
hypothalamus

Lesions of 
ventromedial
hypothalamus

 For  a  time,  it  was  a  popular  idea  that  the  lateral  hypothalamus  is  a 
“ hunger center” acting in opposition to the ventromedial hypothalamus “sa-
tiety center” and that lesions of the medial or lateral hypothalamus bring the 
system out of balance. Destruction of the lateral  hypothalamus leaves the 
animals  inappropriately  satiated,  so  they  do  not  eat;  destruction  of  the 
ventromedial hypothalamus leaves the animals insatiable, so they overeat. 
However, this “dual center” model has proven to be overly simplistic. We 
now have a better idea why hypothalamic lesions affect body fat and feed-
ing behavior; it has much to do with leptin signaling. 

 The Effects of Elevated Leptin Levels on the Hypothalamus. Although 
still sketchy in places, a picture is beginning to emerge of how the hypo-
thalamus  participates  in  body  fat  homeostasis.  First,  let’s  consider  the 
response when leptin levels are high, as they are right after several days 
of “forced” holiday feasting. 

 Circulating leptin molecules, released into the bloodstream by fat cells, 
activate leptin receptors on neurons of the  arcuate nucleus  of the hypo-
thalamus, which lies near the base of the third ventricle (Figure 16.7). The 
arcuate neurons that are activated by a rise in blood leptin levels contain 
peptide neurotransmitters called  ␣ MSH and  CART , and the levels of these 
peptides in the brain vary in proportion to the level of leptin in the blood. 
(To  explain  the  alphabet  soup:  Peptides  are  often  named  by  their  ﬁ rst 
 discovered  function,  and  these  names  can  lead  to  confusion  when  other 
roles are recognized. Therefore, neuropeptides are usually referred to sim-
ply by their abbreviations. For the record,  ␣ MSH stands for  alpha-mela-
nocyte - stimulating hormone , and CART stands for  cocaine- and amphet-
amine-regulated transcript . Like other neurotransmitters, the functional 
role of these molecules depends on the circuits in which they participate.) 
 Before going any further, let’s take a moment to consider the body’s in-
tegrated response to excessive adiposity, high leptin levels, and activation 
of the  ␣ MSH/CART neurons of the arcuate nucleus. The  humoral response  
consists of increased secretion of TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) and 
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone) (see Table 15.1 in Chapter 15). These 
pituitary hormones act on the thyroid and adrenal glands and have the 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   557
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   557

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

558

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Third ventricle

Paraventricular
nucleus

Hypothalamus

Lateral hypothalamic
area

Arcuate nucleus

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 16.7
Hypothalamic nuclei important for the control of feeding.  (a) A midsagittal 
view of the human brain, showing the location of the hypothalamus. (b) A coronal 
section, taken in the plane indicated in part a, showing three important nuclei for 
the control of feeding: the arcuate nucleus, the paraventricular nucleus, and the 
lateral hypothalamic area.

effect of raising the metabolic rate of cells throughout the body. The  viscero-
motor response  increases the tone of the sympathetic division of the ANS, 
which also raises metabolic rate, in part by raising body temperature. The 
 somatic motor response  decreases feeding behavior. The  ␣ MSH/CART neu-
rons of the arcuate nucleus project their axons directly to the regions of the 
nervous system that orchestrate this coordinated response (Figure 16.8). 

  ␣ MSH/CART neurons trigger the humoral response by the activating 
neurons in the  paraventricular nucleus  of the hypothalamus, which 
in  turn  causes  the  release  of  the  hypophysiotropic  hormones  that  reg-
ulate  the  secretion  of  TSH  and  ACTH  from  the  anterior  pituitary  (see 
Chapter 15). The paraventricular nucleus also controls the activity of the 
sympathetic division of the ANS with direct axonal projections to neu-
rons in the lower brain stem and to preganglionic neurons in the spinal 
cord. Additionally, there is also a direct path for arcuate control of the 
sympathetic response: The  ␣ MSH and CART neurons themselves project 
axons  directly  down  to  the  intermediolateral  gray  matter  of  the  spinal 
cord. Finally, feeding behavior is inhibited via connections of the arcuate 
nucleus neurons with cells in the lateral hypothalamus. We will take a 
closer look at the lateral hypothalamus in a moment. 

 The injection of  ␣ MSH or CART into the brain mimics the response to 
elevated  leptin  levels.  Thus,  these  are  said  to  be   anorectic    peptides ; 
they diminish appetite. The injection of drugs that block the actions of 
these  peptides  increases  feeding  behavior.  These  ﬁ ndings  suggest  that 
 ␣ MSH and CART normally participate in the regulation of energy bal-
ance, in part by acting as the brain’s own appetite suppressants. 

 The  Effects  of  Decreased  Leptin  Levels  on  the  Hypothalamus.   In ad-
dition to turning off the responses mediated by  ␣ MSH/CART neurons, a 
 fall  in leptin levels actually  stimulates  another type of arcuate nucleus 
neuron. These neurons contain their own mix of peptides:  NPY  ( neuro-
peptide  Y )  and   AgRP   ( agouti-related  peptide ).  The  NPY/AgRP  neurons 
of  the  arcuate  nucleus  also  have  connections  with  the  paraventricular 
nucleus  and  the  lateral  hypothalamus  (Figure  16.9),  and  the  effects  of 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   558
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   558

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

Paraventricular nucleus

Third 
ventricle

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

559

Lateral 
hypothalamic 
area

▲ FIGURE 16.8
The response to elevated leptin levels.  A rise in leptin 
levels in the blood is detected by neurons in the arcuate 
nucleus that contain the peptides ␣MSH and CART. These 
neurons project axons to the lower brain stem and spinal 
cord, the paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus, and 
the lateral hypothalamic area. Each of these connections 
contributes to the coordinated humoral, visceromotor, and 
somatic motor responses to increased leptin levels. 
(Source: Adapted from Sawchenko, 1998, p. 437.)

Inhibit
feeding
behavior

αMSH/CART neurons
of arcuate nucleus

Stimulate release
of ACTH and 
thyrotropin from
anterior pituitary

Activate brain stem neurons
and preganglionic neurons 
of sympathetic ANS

Third 
ventricle

Paraventricular nucleus

Inhibit secretion of 
hypophysiotropic hormones 
controlling ACTH and TSH

Lateral 
hypothalamic 
area

Stimulate
feeding
behavior

NPY/AgRP neurons
of arcuate nucleus

▲ FIGURE 16.9
The response to decreased leptin levels.  A reduction in 
blood levels of leptin is detected by neurons in the arcu-
ate nucleus that contain the peptides NPY and AgRP. 
These arcuate nucleus neurons inhibit the neurons in the 
paraventricular nuclei that control the release of TSH and 
ACTH from the pituitary. In addition, they activate the 
neurons in the lateral hypothalamus that stimulate feed-
ing behavior. Some of the activated lateral hypothalamic 
neurons contain the peptide MCH (melanin-concentrating 
hormone).

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   559
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   559

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

560

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Fat

Lean

Blood leptin level

αMSH/CART neuron activity

NPY/AgRP neuron activity

Arcuate nucleus response

TSH and ACTH release

Humoral response

Sympathetic NS activity

Parasympathetic NS activity

Visceromotor response

Feeding behavior

Somatic motor response

Leptin

αMSH

AgRP

MC4 receptor
MC4 receptor
MC4 receptor
on neuron in lateral
on neuron in lateral
on neuron in lateral
hypothalamic area
hypothalamic area
hypothalamic area

Inhibit feeding

behavior

▲ FIGURE 16.11
Competition for activation of the MC4 
receptor.  One way that ␣MSH, an ano-
rectic peptide, and AgRP, an orexigenic 
peptide, exert opposite effects on me-
tabolism and feeding behavior is via an 
interaction with the MC4 receptor on 
some hypothalamic neurons. While 
␣MSH stimulates the MC4 receptor, 
AgRP inhibits it.

▲ FIGURE 16.10
Summary of the responses to increased and decreased adiposity (fat).  The 
arcuate nucleus senses changes in blood levels of leptin. A rise in leptin in-
creases activity in the aMSH/CART neurons, and a fall in leptin increases activity 
in the NPY/AgRP neurons. These two populations of arcuate nucleus neurons or-
chestrate the humoral, visceromotor, and somatic motor responses to increased 
or decreased adiposity, respectively.

these   neuropeptides  on  energy  balance  are  the  opposite  of  the  effects 
caused by the  ␣ MSH/CART neurons. NPY and AgRP  inhibit  the secre-
tion of TSH and ACTH, they activate the  parasympathetic  division of the 
ANS, and they  stimulate  feeding behavior. They are therefore referred to 
as   orexigenic peptides  (from the Greek for “appetite”). The brain’s coor-
dinated response to changing leptin levels is summarized in Figure 16.10. 
 AgRP  and   ␣ MSH  are  literally  antagonistic  neurotransmitters.  Both 
peptides bind to the  MC4 receptor  on postsynaptic neurons in the hypo-
thalamus.  ␣ MSH activates the receptor and AgRP inhibits it. Activation 
of MC4 receptors on lateral hypothalamic neurons inhibits feeding; inhib-
iting the receptors stimulates feeding (Figure 16.11). 

 The Control of Feeding by Lateral Hypothalamic Peptides.  We now come 
to the mysterious lateral hypothalamus, which appears to have a special 
role in motivating us to eat. Because this region of the brain is not orga-
nized into well-deﬁ ned nuclei, it has the nondistinctive name  lateral hypo-
thalamic area  (see Figure 16.7). As mentioned earlier, the ﬁ rst indication 
that the lateral hypothalamus is involved in motivating feeding behavior 
was that a lesion here causes animals to stop eating. Moreover, electrical 
stimulation of this area triggers feeding behavior, even in satiated animals. 
These basic ﬁ ndings apply to all mammals that have been examined, in-
cluding humans. However, crude lesions and electrical stimulation not only 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   560
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   560

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

561

affect the neurons with cell bodies in this region but also affect many differ-
ent axonal pathways passing through the lateral hypothalamus. Modern 
experiments using optogenetic methods to stimulate and silence speciﬁ c 
types of neurons (see Chapter 4) reveal that both neurons intrinsic to the 
lateral  hypothalamus   and   axons  passing  through  the  lateral  hypothala-
mus contribute to the motivation of feeding behavior. Let’s ﬁ rst concentrate 
on the role of the neurons within the lateral  hypothalamic area. 

 One group of neurons in the lateral hypothalamus that receives direct input 
from the leptin-sensitive cells of the arcuate nucleus has yet another peptide 
neurotransmitter called  MCH  ( melanin-concentrating hormone ). These cells 
have extremely widespread connections in the brain, including direct mono-
synaptic innervation of most of the cerebral cortex. The cortex is involved in 
organizing and initiating goal-directed behaviors, such as raiding the refrig-
erator. The MCH system is in a strategic position to inform the cortex of leptin 
levels in the blood and therefore could contribute signiﬁ cantly to motivating 
the search for food. Supporting this idea, the injection of MCH into the brain 
stimulates feeding behavior. Moreover, mutant mice that lack this peptide ex-
hibit reduced feeding behavior, have an elevated metabolic rate, and are lean. 
 A second population of lateral hypothalamic neurons with widespread 
cortical connections has been identiﬁ ed, containing another peptide called 
orexin . These cells also receive direct inputs from the arcuate nucleus. As 
is the case for MCH, and as the name suggests, orexin is an orexigenic pep-
tide (i.e., it stimulates feeding behavior). The levels of both MCH and orexin 
rise in the brain when leptin levels in the blood fall. These two peptides are 
complementary, not redundant. For example, orexin promotes meal initia-
tion, whereas MCH prolongs consumption. Additionally, orexin, also called 
 hypocretin , plays a very important role in the regulation of wakefulness. 
As we will learn in Chapter 19, gene mutations that disable orexin (hypo-
cretin) signaling not only lead to weight loss but also to excessive daytime 
sleepiness. Perhaps it is obvious that sleep inhibits feeding behavior; after 
all, it is difﬁ cult to eat when you are asleep. However, you might be sur-
prised to learn that insomnia and obesity also often go together. Orexin 
(hypocretin) provides an interesting link between these conditions. 

 To  conclude  this  section,  let’s  brieﬂ y  summarize  hypothalamic  re-
sponses to blood leptin levels. Remember, leptin levels rise when body fat 
is increased, and they fall when body fat is decreased: 
 •  A  rise  in leptin levels stimulates the release of  ␣ MSH and CART from 
arcuate nucleus neurons. These anorectic peptides act on the brain, in 
part by activating the MC4 receptor, to inhibit feeding behavior and 
increase metabolism. 

 •  A  fall  in leptin levels stimulates the release of NPY and AgRP from 
arcuate nucleus neurons, and the release of MCH and orexin from neu-
rons in the lateral hypothalamic area. These orexigenic peptides act on 
the brain to stimulate feeding behavior and decrease  metabolism. 

 THE SHORT-TERM REGULATION OF 
THE SSHORT-TERM REGULATTION OF 
FEEDDING BBEHAVIOR 
FEEDING BEHAVIOR 

 Regulation of the tendency to seek and consume food by the body’s levels 
of leptin is very important, but it is not the whole story. Setting aside so-
cial and cultural factors (such as a mother’s command: “Eat!”), the moti-
vation to eat depends on how long it has been since the last meal and how 
much we ate at that time. Moreover, the motivation to continue eating 
once a meal starts depends on how much food (and what type) has already 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   561
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   561

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

562

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Food consumption

Satiety signals

Orexigenic signals

Food

Orexigenic
and satiety
signals

i

r
o
v
a
h
e
b
 
g
n
d
e
e
F

i

Meal

Time

Meal

▲ FIGURE 16.12
A hypothetical model for the short-term regulation of feeding behavior.  This 
graph shows a possible means of regulating food consumption by satiety signals. 
Satiety signals rise in response to feeding. When satiety signals are high, food 
consumption is inhibited. When the satiety signals fall to zero, the inhibition is 
eliminated, and food consumption ensues.

been  eaten.  These  are  examples  of  what  we  are  calling  the  short-term 
regulation of feeding behavior. 

 A useful way to think about this regulatory process is to imagine that 
the drive to eat, which may vary rather slowly with the rise and fall of 
leptin, is increased by orexigenic signals generated in response to a pe-
riod of fasting, and inhibited by  satiety signals  that occur when we eat 
and begin the process of digestion (i.e., the prandial period). These sa-
tiety signals both terminate the meal and inhibit feeding for some time 
afterward. During this postabsorptive (fasting) period, the satiety signals 
slowly dissipate, and the orexigenic signals build, until the drive to eat 
again takes over (Figure 16.12). We will use this model to explore the bio-
logical basis for the short-term regulation of feeding behavior. 

 Appetite, Eating, Digestion, and Satiety 
 You  have  awakened  in  the  morning  after  a  long  night’s  slumber.  You 
come to the kitchen to ﬁ nd pancakes cooking on the stove; when they are 
ready,  you  enthusiastically  eat  them  until  you’re  satiated.  Your  body’s 
reactions during this process can be divided into three phases: cephalic, 
gastric, and substrate (also called the intestinal phase): 
 1.  Cephalic phase . The sight and smell of the pancakes trigger a number of
physiological processes that anticipate the arrival of breakfast. The para-
sympathetic and enteric divisions of the ANS are activated, causing the
secretion of saliva into your mouth and digestive juices into your stomach.
 2.  Gastric  phase .  These  responses  grow  much  more  intense,  when  you

start chewing, swallowing, and ﬁ lling your stomach with food.

 3.  Substrate phase . As your stomach ﬁ lls and the partially digested pan-
cakes move into your intestines, nutrients begin to be absorbed into
your bloodstream.
 As you pass through these phases, signals that motivate consumption
of the pancakes are replaced by those that terminate your meal. Let’s look 
at some of the orexigenic and satiety signals that shape eating behavior 
during a meal (Box 16.2). 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   562
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   562

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

563

BOX 16.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Marijuana and the Munchies

A  well-known  consequence  of  marijuana 

intoxica-
tion  is  stimulation  of  appetite,  an  effect  known  by  users 
as  “the  munchies.”  The  active  ingredient  in  marijuana  is 
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC),  which  alters  neuronal  func-
tions  by  stimulating  a  receptor  called  cannabinoid  receptor 
1 (CB1). CB1 receptors are abundant throughout the brain, 
so  it  is  overly  simplistic  to  view  these  receptors  as  serving 
only appetite regulation. Nevertheless, “medical marijuana” is 
often  prescribed  (where  legal)  as  a  means  to  stimulate  ap-
petite in patients with chronic diseases, such as cancer and 
AIDS. A compound that inhibits CB1 receptors, rimonabant, 
was  also  developed  as  an  appetite  suppressant.  However, 
human  drug  trials  had  to  be  discontinued  because  of  psy-
chiatric  side  effects.  Although  this  ﬁ nding  underscores  the 
fact  that  these  receptors  do  much  more  than  mediate  the 
munchies, it is still of interest to know where in the brain CB1 
receptors act to stimulate appetite. Not surprisingly, the CB1 
receptors are associated with neurons in many regions of the 
brain  that  control  feeding,  such  as  the  hypothalamus,  and 
some of the orexigenic effects of THC are related to changing 
the activity of these neurons. However, neuroscientists were 
surprised to learn in 2014 that much of the appetite stimula-
tion  comes  from  enhancing  the  sense  of  smell,  at  least  in 

mice. Collaborative research conducted by neuroscientists in 
France and Spain, countries incidentally known for their ap-
preciation of good tastes and smells, revealed that activation 
of CB1 receptors in the olfactory bulb increases odor detec-
tion and is necessary for the increase in food intake stimu-
lated in hungry mice by cannabinoids.

In Chapter 8, we discussed how smells activate neurons 
in the olfactory bulb which, in turn, relay information to the ol-
factory cortex. The cortex also sends feedback projections to 
the bulb that synapse on inhibitory interneurons called gran-
ule cells. By activating the inhibitory granule cells, this feed-
back from the cortex dampens ascending olfactory activity. 
These corticofugal synapses use glutamate as a neurotrans-
mitter. The brain’s own endocannabinoids (anandamide and 
2-arachidonoylglycerol) are synthesized under fasting condi-
tions,  and  they  inhibit  glutamate  release  by  acting  on  CB1 
receptors on the corticofugal axon terminals. Reducing gran-
ule cell activation by glutamate in the bulb has the net effect 
of enhancing the sense of smell (Figure A). It remains to be 
determined if the munchies arise from enhanced olfaction in 
marijuana  users,  but  a  simple  experiment,  such  as  holding 
your  nose  while  eating,  conﬁ rms  that  much  of  the  hedonic 
value of food derives from the sense of smell.

Olfactory bulb

Second-order
olfactory neuron

Inhibitory
granule cell

To olfactory cortex

From olfactory cortex

CB1 receptor

Inhibitory
granule
cell

Glutamatergic
excitatory
synapse

Olfactory
receptor cells

Figure A 
 Activation of CB1 receptors by THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, enhances olfaction by suppressing the release of glutamate 
from corticofugal inputs to inhibitory granule cells in the olfactory bulb. (Source: Adapted from Soria-Gomez et al., 2014.)

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   563
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   563

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

564

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Ghrelin.  You don’t need to be told that the meal begins because you are 
 hungry . Until recently, scientists believed that hunger was merely the ab-
sence of satiety. This view changed in 1999 with the discovery of a peptide 
called   ghrelin .  Ghrelin  was  isolated  originally  as  a  factor  that  stimu-
lates growth hormone release. However, researchers quickly found that 
the  peptide  is  highly  concentrated  in  the  stomach  and  is  released  into 
the  bloodstream  when  the  stomach  is  empty.  Your  “growling”  stomach 
releases  ghrelin  (“ghrrrrrrrelin”).  Intravenous  administration  of  ghre-
lin strongly stimulates appetite and food consumption by activating the 
NPY/AgRP-containing neurons of the arcuate nucleus (the same neurons 
activated by a drop in leptin in the bloodstream). 

 Gastric Distension.  We all know what it is like to feel “full” after a big 
meal; as you might expect, the stretching of the stomach wall is a powerful 
satiety signal. The stomach wall is richly innervated by mechanosensory 
axons, and most of these ascend to the brain via the  vagus nerve . Recall 
from the appendix to Chapter 7 that the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) 
contains a mixture of sensory and motor axons, originates in the medulla, 
and meanders through much of the body cavity ( vagus  is from the Latin 
for “wandering”). The  vagal  sensory  axons  activate  neurons  in  the   nu-
cleus of the solitary tract  in the medulla. These signals inhibit feeding 
behavior. 

 You may recall that the nucleus of the solitary tract has been men-
tioned several times in different contexts. The gustatory nucleus, which 
receives direct sensory input from the taste buds (see Chapter 8), is actu-
ally a subdivision of the nucleus of the solitary tract. The nucleus of the 
solitary tract is also an important center in the control of the ANS (see 
Chapter 15). Now we ﬁ nd that the same nucleus receives visceral sen-
sory input from the vagus nerve. It is easy to see how a nucleus with such 
widespread connections could serve as an important integration center 
in the control of feeding and metabolism. As you know, satiety induced 
by a full stomach can be delayed quite a while if what you are eating is 
tasty enough. 

 Cholecystokinin.  In the 1970s, researchers discovered that the adminis-
tration of the peptide  cholecystokinin (CCK)  inhibits meal frequency 
and size. CCK is present in some of the cells that line the intestines and 
some of the neurons of the enteric nervous system. It is released in re-
sponse to stimulation of the intestines by certain types of food, especially 
fatty ones. The major action of CCK as a satiety peptide is exerted on the 
vagal sensory axons. CCK acts synergistically with gastric distension to 
inhibit feeding behavior (Figure 16.13). Curiously, CCK, like many other 
gastrointestinal peptides, is also contained within selected populations of 
neurons within the central nervous system (CNS). 

 Insulin.   Released  into  the  bloodstream  by  the   ␤   cells  of  the  pancreas, 
  insulin  is a vitally important hormone (Box 16.3). Although glucose is 
always readily transported into neurons,  glucose transport into the other 
cells of the body requires insulin . This means that insulin is important 
for anabolic metabolism when glucose is transported into liver, skeletal 
muscle, and adipose cells for storage as well as for catabolic metabolism 
when the glucose liberated from storage sites is taken up as fuel by the 
other cells of the body. Thus, the level of glucose in the blood is tightly 
regulated by the level of insulin: Blood glucose levels are elevated when 

Satiety

Nucleus of the
solitary tract

Vagus
nerve

Gastric
distension

CCK

▲ FIGURE 16.13
The synergistic action of gastric 
 distension and CCK on feeding 
 behavior.  Both signals converge on 
 axons in the vagus nerve that trigger 
 satiety.

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   564
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   564

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

565

BOX 16.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Diabetes Mellitus and Insulin Shock

Insulin, released by the ␤ cells of the pancreas, plays a piv-

otal role in maintaining energy balance. After a meal, glucose 
levels in the blood rise. To be used by the cells of the body, 
glucose must be shuttled across the plasma membrane by 
specialized  proteins  called  glucose  transporters.  In  all  cells 
other than neurons, the insertion of glucose transporters into 
the membrane occurs when insulin binds to cell surface insu-
lin receptors. Thus, for the glucose to be utilized or stored by 
these cells, a rise in blood insulin levels must accompany the 
rise in blood glucose levels. In the clinical condition known as 
diabetes mellitus, defects in insulin production and release, 
or in the cellular response to insulin, prevent the normal reac-
tion to elevated glucose. The consequence is elevated blood 
sugar levels (hyperglycemia) because the glucose absorbed 
from  the  intestines  cannot  be  taken  up  by  the  cells  of  the 
body (other than neurons). The excess glucose passes to the 
urine, making it sweet. Indeed, the disorder’s name is from 
the Latin for “siphoning honey.”

An effective treatment for some types of diabetes mellitus 
is hypodermic injections of insulin. However, this treatment 
has risks. An overdose of insulin causes blood glucose lev-
els to plummet (hypoglycemia), starving the neurons of the 
brain. The resulting condition is called insulin shock, charac-
terized by sweating, tremor, anxiety, dizziness, and double 
vision. If it is not corrected promptly, these early signs are 
followed  by  delirium,  convulsions,  and  loss  of  conscious-
ness.  The  sudden  neurological  response  to  hypoglycemia 
illustrates  how  vital  energy  balance  is  for  the  normal  func-
tioning of the brain (Figure A).

Figure A
 A PET image superimposed on an MRI image of the human body. The hot 
colors (red to yellow) show regions with high glucose utilization. Note that 
the brain, even at rest, has a very high demand for fuel. When glucose lev-
els in the blood fall, as they do during insulin shock, brain functions are very 
rapidly lost. (Source: Siemens Healthcare and Professor Marcus Raichle, 
Washington University, St. Louis.)

insulin levels are reduced; blood glucose levels fall when insulin levels 
rise. 

 Insulin  release  by  the  pancreas  is  controlled  in  a  number  of  ways 
(Figure 16.14). Consider the example of your pancake breakfast. During 
the  cephalic  phase,  when  you  are  anticipating  food,  the  parasympa-
thetic innervation of the pancreas (delivered by the vagus nerve) stimu-
lates the  ␤  cells to release insulin. In response, blood glucose levels fall 
slightly, and this change, detected by the neurons of the brain, increases 
your drive to eat (in part, by activation of the NPY/AgRP neurons of the 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   565
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   565

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

566

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Cephalic phase

Gastric phase

Substrate phase

arcuate nucleus). During the gastric phase, when food enters your stom-
ach, insulin secretion is stimulated further by gastrointestinal hormones, 
such as CCK. Insulin release is maximal when the food is ﬁ nally absorbed 
in the intestines and blood glucose levels rise, during the substrate phase. 
Indeed, the primary stimulus for insulin release is increased blood  glucose 
levels. This rise in insulin, coupled with the elevated blood glucose levels, 
is a satiety signal and causes you to stop eating. 

 In contrast to the other satiety signals we’ve discussed, which commu-
nicate with the brain mainly via the vagus nerve, bloodborne insulin acts 
to inhibit feeding behavior by acting directly on the arcuate and ventro-
medial nuclei of the hypothalamus. It appears that insulin acts in much 
the same way as leptin to regulate feeding behavior. 

l

e
v
e
l
 
n

i
l

u
s
n
i
 
d
o
o
B

l

Time

WHY DO WE EAT? 
WHYY DO WWE EAT? 

Food

presented

Food
eaten

▲ FIGURE 16.14
Changes in blood insulin levels before, 
during, and after a meal. (Source: 
Adapted from Woods and Stricker, 1999, 
p. 1094.)

▲ FIGURE 16.15
Electrical self-stimulation by a 
rat. When the rat presses the lever, it 
 receives a brief electrical current to an 
electrode in its brain.

 We  have  talked  about  the  signals  that  motivate  feeding  behavior,  but 
we  still  have  not  discussed  what  that  really  means  in  psychological 
terms. Obviously, we eat because we  like  food. This aspect of motivation 
is  hedonic: It feels good, so we do it. We derive pleasure from the taste, 
smell, sight, and feel of food and from the act of eating. However, we also 
eat because we are hungry and we want food. This aspect of motivation 
can be considered as a  drive reduction : satisfying a craving. A reasonable 
assumption  is  that  “liking”  and  “wanting”  are  two  aspects  of  a  uniﬁ ed 
process; after all, we typically crave food that we like. However, research 
on humans and animals suggests that liking and wanting are mediated 
by separate circuits in the brain. 

 Reinforcement and Reward 
 In  experiments  performed  in  the  early  1950s,  James  Olds  and  Peter 
Milner at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, implanted electrodes 
in the brains of rats to investigate the effect of electrical brain stimula-
tion  on  the  animals’  behavior.  The  animals  were  allowed  to  freely  ex-
plore a box about 3 ft2. Every time the rats wandered into one corner of 
the box, the researchers delivered brain stimulation. They observed that 
when the electrodes were lodged in certain parts of the brain, the stimula-
tion appeared to cause the animals to spend all their time in the corner 
that led to stimulation. In a brilliant twist on this experiment, Olds and 
Milner set up a new box with a lever on one side that, when depressed, 
caused the brain to be stimulated (Figure 16.15). At ﬁ rst, the rats wan-
dered about the box, stepping on the lever occasionally by accident. But 
before  long,  the  rats  were  pressing  the  lever  repeatedly  to  receive  the 
electrical   stimulation.  This  behavior  is  called   electrical  self-stimula-
tion . Sometimes the rats would become so involved in pressing the lever 
that they would shun food and water, stopping only after collapsing from 
exhaustion (Box 16.4). 

 Electrical  self-stimulation  appeared  to  provide  a   reward   that   rein-
forced  the habit to press the lever. By systematically moving the stimu-
lating electrode to different regions of the brain, researchers were able to 
identify speciﬁ c sites that were reinforcing. It became apparent that the 
most effective sites for self-stimulation fell along the trajectory of dopa-
minergic axons arising in the ventral tegmental area, projecting through 
the  lateral  hypothalamus  to  several  forebrain  regions  (Figure  16.16). 
Drugs that block dopamine receptors reduced self-stimulation, suggest-
ing that the animals were working to stimulate the release of dopamine 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   566
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   566

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

567

BOX 16.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Self-Stimulation of the Human Brain

To determine the sensations evoked by brain stimulation, it 

would be desirable to stimulate a person’s brain by inserting 
electrodes  and  ask  how  it  feels.  Obviously,  this  is  not  nor-
mally feasible or ethical. However, as treatments of last resort 
for debilitating medical conditions, humans have occasionally 
been ﬁ tted with intracranial electrodes they can self- stimulate. 
Let’s consider two patients studied by Robert Heath at the 
Tulane University School of Medicine in the 1960s.

The ﬁ rst patient had severe narcolepsy; he would abruptly go 
from being awake into a deep sleep. (Narcolepsy and sleep will 
be discussed in Chapter 19.) The condition signiﬁ cantly interfered 
with his life and obviously made it difﬁ cult to hold a job. He was 
implanted with 14 electrodes in different areas of the brain in the 
hope of ﬁ nding a self-stimulation site that might keep him alert. 
When he stimulated his hippocampus, he reported feeling mild 
pleasure. Stimulation of his midbrain tegmentum made him feel 
alert but unpleasant. The site he chose to frequently self-stimulate 
was the septal area of the forebrain (Figure A). Stimulating this 
area made him more alert and gave him a good feeling, which he 
described as building toward orgasm. He reported that he would 
sometimes push the button over and over, trying unsuccessfully 
to achieve orgasm, ultimately ending in frustration.

The second patient’s case is a bit more complex. This person 
had electrodes implanted at 17 brain sites in the hope of learning 
something about the location of his severe epilepsy. He reported 
pleasurable feelings with stimulation of the septal area and the 
midbrain tegmentum. Consistent with the ﬁ rst case above, sep-
tal  stimulation  was  associated  with  sexual  feelings.  The  mid-
brain stimulation gave him a “happy drunk” feeling. Other mildly 
positive feelings were produced by stimulation of the amygdala 
and caudate nucleus. Interestingly, the site he most frequently 

Basal forebrain 
area

 stimulated was in the medial thalamus, even though stimulation 
here induced an irritable feeling, one that was less pleasurable 
than stimulation at other locations. The patient stated that he 
stimulated this area the most because it gave him the feeling 
he was about to recall a memory. He repeated the stimulation 
in a futile attempt to fully bring the memory into his mind, even 
though, in the end, this process proved to be frustrating.

These two speciﬁ c cases and many others suggest that 
self-stimulation is not synonymous with pleasure. Often some 
reward or anticipated reward is associated with the stimula-
tion, but the experience is not always pleasant.

Lateral ventricle

Septal area

Figure A
 The septal area, a site of electrical self-stimulation in humans, is in 
the rostral forebrain below the lateral ventricle.

Ventral tegmental area

▲ FIGURE 16.16
The mesocorticolimbic dopamine system. Animals are motivated 
to  behave in ways that stimulate the  release of dopamine in the 
basal  forebrain area.

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   567
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   567

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

568

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

in the brain. This idea was further supported when researchers discov-
ered  that  animals  will  press  a  lever  to  receive  an  injection  of  amphet-
amine,  a  drug  that  releases  dopamine  in  the  brain.  Although  there  is 
more to electrical self-stimulation than dopamine, there is little question 
that dopamine release in the brain will reinforce the behavior that causes 
it. These experiments suggested a mechanism by which natural rewards 
(food, water, sex) reinforce particular behaviors. Indeed, a hungry rat will 
press a lever to receive a morsel of food, and this response is also greatly 
reduced by dopamine receptor blockers. 

 The Role of Dopamine in Motivation 
 For  many  years,  this  dopamine  projection,  from  the  ventral  tegmental 
area  to  the  forebrain,  was  believed  to  serve  hedonic  reward—in  other 
words,  pleasure.  In  the  case  of  feeding,  it  was  believed  that  dopamine 
was released in response to palatable foods, making the sensation plea-
surable. Animals were motivated to seek palatable food for the hedonic 
reward: a squirt of dopamine in the forebrain. 

 However,  this  simple  idea  has  been  challenged  in  recent  years. 
Destruction  of  the  dopamine  axons  passing  through  the  lateral  hypo-
thalamus fails to reduce the hedonic responses to food, even though ani-
mals stop eating. If a tasty morsel is placed on the tongue of a rat that 
has  sustained  such  a  lesion,  the  animal  will  still  behave  as  if  the  food 
evokes a pleasurable sensation (the rat equivalent of lip smacking), and 
the  morsel  will  be  consumed.  The  dopamine-depleted  animal  behaves 
as  though  it   likes   food  but  does  not   want   food.  The  animal  apparently 
lacks the  motivation to seek food, even though it seems to enjoy it when 
it is available. Conversely, stimulation of the dopamine axons in the lat-
eral hypothalamus of normal rats appears to produce a craving for food 
without increasing the food’s hedonic impact. Not surprisingly, recent re-
search on the cravings associated with addiction (to drugs and alcohol, as 
well as to chocolate) has focused on the role of this dopaminergic pathway 
(Box  16.5).  It  is  no  coincidence  that  some  of  the  most  highly  addictive 
drugs (cocaine and amphetamine, for example) act directly on dopamine 
synapses in the brain. 

 Clues  into  how  dopamine  signaling  inﬂ uences  behavior  have  come 
from animal studies in which the activity of dopamine neurons in the 
ventral  tegmental  area  of  the  midbrain  is  monitored  with  microelec-
trodes. In one important study, Wolfram Schultz and colleagues at the 
University  of  Cambridge,  England,  explored  what  happens  to  dopa-
mine  neurons  when  a  sip  of  juice  is  given  to  a  monkey  shortly  after 
a  light  was  turned  on.  Initially,  before  the  monkey  learned  that  the 
light  predicts  the  delivery  of  juice,  Schultz  found  that  the  dopamine 
neurons had no response to light but became brieﬂ y active when the 
juice was delivered. This is what one might expect if the dopamine neu-
rons  were  simply  registering  the  occurrence  of  a  pleasurable  experi-
ence. After the light and the juice were repeatedly paired, however, the 
dopamine  neurons  had  changed  ﬁ ring  patterns.  They  now  responded 
brieﬂ y when the light came on but had no response when the juice was 
delivered. Furthermore, if Schultz and colleagues tricked the trained 
monkey and failed to deliver juice after the light, they found that the 
dopamine  neuron  ﬁ ring  decreased  at  the  time  of  anticipated  reward 
(Figure 16.17). These ﬁ ndings have led to the concept that activity of 
dopamine neurons signals errors in  reward prediction : Events that are 
“better than expected” cause dopamine neurons to come to life, those 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   568
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   568

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

569

BOX 16.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Dopamine and Addiction

What do the drugs heroin, nicotine, and cocaine have in 

common?  They  act  on  different  neurotransmitter  systems 
in  the  brain—heroin  on  the  opiate  system,  nicotine  on  the 
cholinergic  system,  and  cocaine  on  the  dopaminergic  and 
noradrenergic systems—and they produce different psycho-
active effects. However, all three drugs are highly addictive. 
This common quality is explained by the fact that they all act 
on the brain circuitry that motivates behavior—in this case, 
drug-seeking behavior. We can learn much about the brain 
mechanisms  of  motivation  by  studying  drug  addiction  and 
vice versa.

Rats, like humans, will self-administer drugs and will de-
velop clear signs of drug dependence. Studies using micro-
infusions of drugs directly into the brain have mapped out 
the  sites  where  the  drugs  cause  addiction.  In  the  case  of 
heroin and nicotine, the key site of action is the ventral teg-
mental area (VTA), home of the dopamine neurons that proj-
ect axons through the lateral hypothalamus to the forebrain. 
These  dopaminergic  neurons  have  both  opiate  and  nico-
tinic acetylcholine receptors. In the case of cocaine, a key 
site of action is the nucleus accumbens, one of the major 
targets  of  the  ascending  dopaminergic  axons  in  the  fore-
brain (Figure A). Recall from Chapter 15 that cocaine pro-
longs the actions of dopamine at its receptors. Thus, these 
three drugs either stimulate dopamine release (heroin, nico-
tine) or enhance dopamine actions (cocaine) in the nucleus 
accumbens.

The exact role of dopamine in motivating behavior con-
tinues to be explored. However, much evidence suggests 
that animals are motivated to perform behaviors that stimu-

Parasagittal section of rat brain

Anterior

Posterior

Nucleus
accumbens

+

Cocaine

+

+

Dopamine 
neurons of
ventral tegmental area

Heroin Nicotine

Figure A
 Addictive drugs act on the dopaminergic pathway from the ventral 
tegmental area to the nucleus accumbens. (Source: Adapted from 
Wise, 1996, p. 248, Fig. 1.)

late  dopamine  release  in  the  nucleus  accumbens  and  re-
lated structures. Behaviors associated with the delivery of 
drugs that act to stimulate dopamine release are therefore 
strongly  reinforced.  However,  chronic  overstimulation  of 
this  pathway  causes  a  homeostatic  response:  The  dopa-
mine  “reward”  system  is  downregulated.  This  adaptation 
leads to the phenomenon of drug tolerance; it takes more 
and  more  of  the  drug  to  get  the  desired  (or  required)  ef-
fect.  Indeed,  drug  discontinuation  in  addicted  animals  is 
accompanied by a marked decrease in dopamine release 
and  function  in  the  nucleus  accumbens.  And,  of  course, 
one withdrawal symptom is the powerful craving for the dis-
continued drug.

that are “worse than expected” cause them to be inhibited, and those 
that occur “as expected” cause no change in ﬁ ring, even if these events 
still  provide  hedonic  reward  (the  juice  still  tastes  good  even  if  you 
have come to expect it). Behaviors that cause expected or better-than- 
expected outcomes are repeated; those with outcomes that are worse 
than expected are not. 

 Just as the monkey learned that the light predicted delivery of juice, 
you have learned that the smell or sight of pancakes and coffee predict 
the delivery of breakfast. This type of learning is integral to the body’s 
“cephalic” preparation for ingestion of a meal. Dopamine is intimately 
involved in the mechanism behind this learning. Synaptic connections 
that are active during and shortly before a rise in dopamine are per-
sistently  changed  to  store  this  memory.  While  this  type  of  learning 
is  clearly  beneﬁ cial  under  normal  circumstances,  it  is  hijacked  dur-
ing exposure to addictive drugs, often with devastating consequences. 
As  earlier  mentioned,  addictive  drugs  have  in  common  the  fact  that 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   569
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   569

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

570

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Recording
electrode in 
the VTA

Restraint
chair

Dispenser

Light

No prediction
Reward occurs

Before teaching the
monkey that light
predicts reward:

(no Light)

Reward

Reward predicted
Reward occurs

After teaching the
monkey that light
predicts reward:

Light

Reward

Reward predicted
No reward occurs

Light

1

(no Reward)

2s

▲ FIGURE 16.17
Dopamine neurons in the VTA fire when reward is unexpected.

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   570
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   570

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

571

they act on the central dopaminergic system in the brain. By studying 
how synapses are modiﬁ ed by drug exposure, researchers have gained 
insight  not  only  into  the  neurobiology  of  addiction  and  its  possible 
treatments but also into how the brain creates memories (Box 16.6). 
We will take a closer look at the mechanisms of memory formation in 
Chapter 25. 

)
e
n

i
l

l

 
n
i
 
d
e
s
a
e
e
r
 
n
n
o
t
o
r
e
S

i

e
s
a
b
 
%

l

(
 
s
u
m
a
a
h
t
o
p
y
h

200

100

0

1

2

3

Eat food

4
Time (h)

See,
smell 
food

▲ FIGURE 16.18
Changes in hypothalamic serotonin 
levels before and during a meal. The 
mood-elevating effects of eating are be-
lieved to be related to the release of se-
rotonin in the brain. (Source: Adapted 
from Schwartz et al., 1990.)

 Serotonin, Food, and Mood 
 Mood  and  food  are  connected.  Consider  how  grouchy  you  are  when 
you’re on a restricted diet or how good you feel with a whiff and a bite 
of a freshly baked chocolate chip cookie. As mentioned in Chapter 15, 
one system in the brain involved in the control of mood uses serotonin 
as a neurotransmitter. Serotonin provides one of the links between food 
and mood. 

 Measurements  of  serotonin  in  the  hypothalamus  reveal  that  levels 
are  low  during  the  postabsorptive  period,  rise  in  anticipation  of  food, 
and  spike  during  a  meal,  especially  in  response  to  carbohydrates 
(Figure 16.18). Serotonin is derived from the dietary amino acid tryp-
tophan,  and  tryptophan  levels  in  the  blood  vary  with  the  amount  of 
carbohydrate in the diet (see Box 15.2 in Chapter 15). The rise in blood 
tryptophan and brain serotonin is one likely explanation for the mood-
elevating effects of a chocolate chip cookie. This effect of “carbs” on mood 
is particularly evident during periods of stress, possibly explaining the 
food-seeking  behavior  and  subsequent  weight  gain  of  many  ﬁ rst-year 
college students. 

 It is interesting to note that drugs that elevate serotonin levels in the 
brain are powerful appetite suppressants. One of these drugs is dexfen-
ﬂ uramine (trade name Redux), which was used successfully as a treat-
ment for human obesity. Unfortunately, the drug had toxic side effects, 
leading to its withdrawal from the market in 1997. 

 Abnormalities  in  brain  serotonin  regulation  are  believed  to  be 
one  factor  that  contributes  to  eating  disorders.  The  deﬁ ning  charac-
teristic  of   anorexia  nervosa   is  the  voluntary  maintenance  of  body 
weight  at  an  abnormally  low  level,  while   bulimia  nervosa   is  char-
acterized by frequent eating binges, often compensated for by forced 
vomiting. These disorders are also commonly accompanied by  depres-
sion ,  a  severe  disturbance  of  mood  that  has  been  linked  to  lowered 
brain serotonin levels (we will discuss mood disorders in Chapter 22). 
The  serotonin  connection  is  clearest  in  the  case  of  bulimia.  In  addi-
tion to depressing mood, low serotonin levels reduce satiety. Indeed, 
antidepressant  drugs  that  act  to  elevate  brain  serotonin  levels  (e.g., 
ﬂ uoxetine, or Prozac) are also an effective treatment for most bulimia 
 nervosa patients. 

OTHER MOTIVATED BEHAVIORS 
OTHEER MOOTIVATED BEHAVIOORS 

 We have used eating and the regulation of energy balance to give you a 
fairly detailed picture of the brain mechanisms that incite behavior. The 
systems involved in motivating several other behaviors that are basic for 
survival have also been intensively studied. Although we will not cover 
these other systems in depth, a quick overview will show that the basic 
principles are the same as those for eating. We will see that the transduc-
tion of physiological stimuli in the blood occurs in specialized regions of 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   571
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   571

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

572

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 16.6

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Learning to Crave
by Julie Kauer

After  college,  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  work  as  a  lab 

technician in Anne Bekoff’s lab at the University of Colorado. 
Anne  studied  motor  pattern  generators,  the  simple  circuits 
in the spinal cord that allow coordinated muscle movements 
to take place. Anne and I researched what happens to the 
hatching  pattern  generator  in  chicks  after  the  bird  hatches 
and has no apparent further use for it. When a chick is ready 
to hatch from the egg, it is tightly curled with its head under 
the wing pointing up toward the shell. Every 20 seconds or 
so,  it  executes  two  strong  leg  movements  that  propel  the 
body  slightly  within  the  egg.  The  beak  gradually  makes  a 
circular hole, and when this is large enough, the strong leg 
movements allow the chick to hatch out. To test the fate of 
the hatching pattern generator, my job was to place record-
ing electrodes in the leg muscles and then carefully fold an 
already-hatched  chick  back  into  the  hatching  position,  this 
time in a glass egg. Remarkably, the chick became quiet and 
soon  began  making  leg  movements  indistinguishable  from 
normal hatching movements. More amazing, we found that 
chicks even up to 2 months old can be induced to “hatch”; 
the hatching pattern generator appeared to remain available 
even weeks after the last time it was needed. While I had a 
ball  putting  weeks-old  chickens  back  in  glass  eggs,  I  was 
simultaneously  hatching  my  own  scientiﬁ c  approach.  I  de-
veloped  a  great  appreciation  for  Anne’s  strategy  of  asking 
simple questions that could generate thorough answers, and 
breaking a complex problem into smaller parts that could be 

understood  clearly.  This  approach  has  remained  a  driving 
principle in my scientiﬁ c life ever since.

How  does  the  nervous  system  store  information?  This 
question  has  been  the  focus  of  my  work  since  graduate 
school, where I ﬁ rst investigated the cellular basis of persis-
tent  changes  in  the  nervous  system  of  Aplysia,  a  giant  sea 
slug  [will  be  discussed  in  Chapter  25].  My  fascination  with 
long-lasting changes in neuronal excitability led me to post-
doctoral  work  on  long-term  potentiation  (LTP)  of  synaptic 
transmission, a recently discovered phenomenon—and I was 
hooked forever! Excitatory synapses, when stimulated only for 
a second or two, increase their strength persistently, for many 
hours. The opportunity to study how individual synapses are 
persistently modiﬁ ed was just what I was looking for.

To  store  information,  the  brain  needs  to  change  in  re-
sponse to environmental stimuli, so it makes sense that many 
circuits  would  have  the  capability  of  synaptic  modiﬁ cation. 
When I began my own lab in 1991, this idea became more 
and  more  interesting  to  me,  and  led  directly  to  our  ongo-
ing  work  at  Brown  University  on  circuits  that  underlie  mo-
tivation. My best friend from graduate school, Marina Wolf, 
had  been  studying  addiction-related  brain  alterations  and 
suggested that drugs of abuse might alter synaptic plasticity 
in the motivational circuit that includes the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA) and nucleus accumbens. Her hunch launched our 
lab and others on a quest for the synaptic basis of addictive 
 behaviors.

the  hypothalamus,  that  humoral  and  visceromotor  responses  are  initi-
ated by activation of the periventricular and medial hypothalamus, and 
that behavioral action depends on the lateral hypothalamus. 

 Drinking 
 Two  different  physiological  signals  stimulate  drinking  behavior.  As 
men tioned in Chapter 15, one of these is a decrease in blood volume, or 
  hypovolemia . The other is an increase in the concentration of dissolved 
substances (solutes) in the blood, or  hypertonicity . These two stimuli trig-
ger thirst by different mechanisms. 

 Thirst  triggered  by  hypovolemia  is  called   volumetric  thirst .  In 
Chapter 15, we used the example of decreased blood volume to illustrate 
when  and  how  vasopressin  is  released  in  the  posterior  pituitary  by  the 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   572
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   572

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

573

Animals will self-administer the same drugs that humans 
abuse, and their drug-seeking behavior closely resembles that 
of  human  substance  abusers.  Rodents  will  press  a  lever  to 
receive cocaine, for example, and will do work or even suffer 
painful shocks in order to press the lever for the drug, much 
as  substance  abusers  will  suffer  tremendous  personal  loss 
to acquire the drug. A critical idea in the ﬁ eld has been that 
drugs of abuse hijack the midbrain dopamine neurons, part 
of the motivational control system, and by doing so produce 
an  overwhelming  craving  for  the  drug,  analogous  perhaps 
to the craving for water if one is deprived for a long period. 
Intriguingly, we found that inhibitory, GABAergic synapses on 
dopamine cells lost their normal ability to exhibit LTP after a 
single drug exposure. It had been known for some time that all 
drugs of abuse increase dopamine release from VTA neurons, 
and  the  loss  of  LTP  at  inhibitory  synapses  (and  net  loss  of 
inhibition) on dopamine neurons is likely a contributing factor.
We  next  made  two  key  ﬁ ndings.  First,  multiple  differ-
ent drugs of abuse all erased the GABAergic synapse LTP. 
Secondly, a brief stressor (5-minute exposure to cold water) 
had exactly the same effect. What could this mean, when the 
rewarding effects of drugs seem so different from the aver-
sive effects of stress? Previous work had shown that in rats 
that  had  “recovered”  from  cocaine  self-administration  (they 
had learned that the lever press no longer caused drug deliv-
ery), either a small dose of the drug or a stressful experience 
restores  powerful  drug-seeking  behavior,  a  process  known 
as  reinstatement.  Human  patients  also  report  that  minimal 
drug exposure or stress can trigger relapse and drug crav-
ing. It has been suggested that by activating the motivational 
circuitry, either drugs or stress promote drug seeking.

How could our reductionist approach of studying the de-
tails of synaptic function tell us anything about a complex dis-
order like drug addiction? We did many experiments to tease 

out  which  molecules  and  pathways  are  needed  for  stress 
to block LTP at the inhibitory VTA synapses. We found one 
molecule that was clearly required: the kappa opioid recep-
tor.  If  we  used  an  inhibitor  to  block  kappa  receptors  prior 
to stress, we found that LTP was unaffected by the stress-
ful experience. Thus, we had found a pharmacological tool 
that prevents this brain alteration triggered by acute stress. 
Might the kappa receptor blocker affect relapse behavior as 
well? Our colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania, Chris 
Pierce and Lisa Briand, taught rats to self-administer cocaine 
in  response  to  a  lever  press;  then  they  no  longer  provided 
cocaine when the lever was pressed. Over several days, the 
rats pressed the lever less and less, and as expected, a brief 
stressful experience at this point restored robust lever press-
ing,  even  when  no  cocaine  was  forthcoming.  If  the  kappa 
receptor inhibitor was administered before the stress, how-
ever, we saw no such reinstatement! These exciting ﬁ ndings 
support  the  idea  that  kappa  opiate  receptors  are  normally 
activated during a stressful experience and contribute directly 
to the initiation of drug-seeking behavior in animals, and per-
haps  to  relapse  in  humans.  Kappa  receptor  inhibitors  may 
therefore  have  clinical  utility  in  treating  stress-induced  drug 
relapse. Despite the brain’s complexity, the approach of un-
derstanding  component  parts  and  processes  proved  to  be 
powerful in unpredictable and surprising ways.

Working with this team of outstanding scientists for many 
years has been tremendous fun. Together we have shared 
ups and downs and dry periods as well as periods of exciting 
discovery. Our project demonstrates how understanding the 
building  blocks  of  a  complex  system  not  only  help  us  un-
derstand how the brain works but can also suggest ways to 
control brain plasticity. In our case, a reductionist approach 
gave insight into a possible therapeutic strategy for addicted 
individuals.

magnocellular  neurosecretory  cells.  Vasopressin  (also  called  antidiuretic 
hormone, or ADH) acts directly on the kidneys to increase water retention 
and inhibit urine production. The release of vasopressin associated with 
volumetric thirst is triggered by two types of stimuli (Figure 16.19). First, 
a rise in blood levels of angiotensin II occurs in response to reduced blood 
ﬂ ow to the kidneys (see Figure 15.5 in Chapter 15). The circulating angio-
tensin II acts on the neurons of the subfornical organ in the telencephalon, 
which in turn directly stimulate the magnocellular neurosecretory cells of 
the hypothalamus to release vasopressin. Second, mechanoreceptors in the 
walls of the major blood vessels and heart signal the loss of blood pressure 
that accompanies a loss of blood volume. These signals make their way to 
the hypothalamus via the vagus nerve and the nucleus of the solitary tract. 
 In addition to this humoral response, reduced blood volume (1) stimu-
lates the sympathetic division of the ANS, which helps correct the drop 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   573
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   573

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

574

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Subfornical organ

Hypothalamus

Bloodborne
angiotensin II
signals reduced
blood flow to
kidneys

Nucleus of the
solitary tract

Vagus nerve

Mechanoreceptors in walls
of major blood vessels
and heart detect drop in 
blood pressure

Heart

Kidney

▲ FIGURE 16.19
Pathways triggering volumetric thirst.  Hypovolemia is 
 detected in two ways. First, angiotensin II, released into the 
bloodstream in response to decreased blood flow to the 
 kidneys, activates neurons in the subfornical organ. Second, 
mechanosensory axons in the vagus nerve, detecting a drop 
in blood pressure, activate neurons in the nucleus of the soli-
tary tract. The subfornical organ and nucleus of the solitary 
tract relay this information to the hypothalamus, which 
 orchestrates the coordinated response to reduced blood 
 volume.

in  blood  pressure  by  constricting  arterioles,  and  (2)  powerfully  moti-
vates animals to seek and consume water. Not surprisingly, the lateral 
hypothalamus has been implicated in inciting the behavioral response, 
 although the details of this process are still poorly understood. 

 The other stimulus for thirst, hypertonicity of the blood, is sensed by 
neurons  in  yet  another  specialized  region  of  the  telencephalon  lacking 
a blood–brain barrier, the  vascular organ of the lamina terminalis 
(OVLT) . When the blood becomes hypertonic, water leaves cells by the 
process of osmosis. This loss of water is transduced by the OVLT neurons 
into a change in action potential ﬁ ring frequency. The OVLT neurons (1) 
directly excite the magnocellular neurosecretory cells that secrete vaso-
pressin, and (2) stimulate  osmometric thirst , the motivation to drink 
water when dehydrated (Figure 16.20). Lesions of the OVLT completely 
prevent the behavioral and humoral responses to dehydration (but not 
the responses to loss of blood volume). 

 The motivation to drink and the secretion of vasopressin from the hypo-
thalamus (and the retention of water by the kidneys) normally go hand in 
hand. However, selective loss of the vasopressin-secreting neurons of the 
hypothalamus  produces  a  curious  condition  called   diabetes  insipidus ,  in 
which the body works against the brain. As a consequence of the loss of 
vasopressin, the kidneys pass too much water from the blood to the urine. 
The resulting dehydration stimulates the strong motivation to drink water; 
however, the water absorbed from the intestines passes quickly through the 
kidneys into the urine. Thus, diabetes insipidus is characterized by extreme 
thirst  coupled  with  frequent  excretion  of  a  large  amount  of  pale,  watery 
urine. This condition can be treated by replacing the missing vasopressin. 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   574
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   574

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

575

Lateral 
hypothalamic area

Vasopressin-secreting
magnocellular 
neurosecretory cells

OVLT

Blood in

Posterior lobe
of pituitary

Blood out

▲ FIGURE 16.20
Osmometric thirst: the hypothalamic response to 
 dehydration.  Blood becomes hypertonic when it loses water. 
Blood hypertonicity is sensed by neurons of the vascular organ 
of the lamina terminalis (OVLT). The OVLT activates magnocellular 
neurosecretory cells and cells in the lateral hypothalamus. The 
neurosecretory cells secrete vasopressin into the blood, and the 
neurons of the lateral hypothalamus trigger osmometric thirst.

 Temperature Regulation 
 You are hot; you seek a cool place. You are cold; you seek warmth. We are all 
motivated to interact with our environment to keep our bodies within a nar-
row range of temperatures. The need for such regulation is clear: The cells 
of the body are ﬁ ne-tuned for a constant temperature, 37°C (98.6°F), and 
deviations from this temperature interfere with cellular functions. 

 Neurons  that  change  their  ﬁ ring  rate  in  response  to  small  changes  in 
temperature are found throughout the brain and spinal cord. However, the 
most important neurons for temperature homeostasis are found clustered 
in the anterior hypothalamus. These cells transduce small changes in blood 
temperature into changes in their ﬁ ring rate. Humoral and visceromotor re-
sponses are subsequently initiated by neurons in the  medial preoptic area  of 
the hypothalamus; somatic motor (behavioral) responses are initiated by the 
neurons of the lateral hypothalamic area. Lesions in these different regions 
can selectively abolish different components of the integrated response. 

 A fall in temperature is detected by cold-sensitive neurons of the anterior 
hypothalamus. In response, TSH is released by the anterior pituitary. TSH 
stimulates the release of the hormone thyroxin from the thyroid gland, which 
causes a widespread increase in cellular metabolism. The visceromotor re-
sponse is constricted blood vessels in the skin and piloerection (goose bumps). 
An involuntary somatic motor response is shivering (to generate heat in the 
muscles), and, of course, the other somatic response is to seek warmth. 

 A rise in temperature is detected by warm-sensitive neurons of the an-
terior hypothalamus. In response, metabolism is slowed by reducing TSH 
 release, blood is shunted toward the body periphery to dissipate heat, and 
behavior is initiated to seek shade. In some mammals, an involuntary motor 
response is panting—in humans, it is sweating—which helps cool the body. 
 The strong parallels between the hypothalamic control of energy bal-
ance, water balance, and temperature should now be clear. In each case, 
specialized  neurons  detect  variations  in  the  regulated  parameter.  The 

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   575
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   575

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

576

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

TABLE 16.1  Hypothalamic Responses to Stimuli That Motivate Behavior
Bloodborne 
Bloooodbdboro nee 
Stimulus
Stimulus

Visceromotor 
Viscscere omo ototoro  
Response
Response

Site of 
SiS tete oof 
Transduction
Transduction

Humoral 
Huumooraal 
Response
Response

Eating signals
↓ Leptin

↓ Insulin

Drinking signals
↑ Angiotensin II
↑ Blood tonicity
Thermal signals
↑ Temperature
↓ Temperature

Arcuate nucleus

Arcuate nucleus

↓ ACTH
↓ TSH
↓ ACTH
↓ TSH

↑ Parasympathetic activity

↑ Parasympathetic activity

Subfornical organ
OVLT

↑ Vasopressin
↑ Vasopressin

↑ Sympathetic activity

Somatic Motor 
SoSomaatit c c Moototor 
Response
Response

Feeding

Feeding

Drinking
Drinking

Medial  preoptic area
Medial  preoptic area

↓ TSH
↑ TSH

↑ Parasympathetic activity
↑ Sympathetic activity

Sweating, seeking cold
Shivering, seeking warmth

hypothalamus orchestrates responses to these challenges, which always 
include adjustments in physiology and the stimulation of different types 
of behavior. Table 16.1 summarizes some of the hypothalamic responses 
we have discussed in this chapter. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 In the motor system chapters of Part II, we addressed “how” questions re-
lated to behavior. How do muscles contract? How is movement initiated? 
How are the actions of our different muscles coordinated? The discussion 
of motivation, however, asks a different question: Why? Why do we eat 
when our energy reserves become depleted? Why do we drink when we are 
dehydrated? Why do we seek warmth when our blood temperature falls? 
 Neuroscientists have found concrete answers to both the “how” and the 
“why” of behavior in the body’s periphery. We  move  because of the release 
of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. We  drink  because we are 
thirsty, and we are thirsty when angiotensin II levels rise in response to 
decreased blood ﬂ ow to the kidneys. However, we remain largely igno-
rant about the convergence of “how” and “why” in the brain. In this chap-
ter, we chose to focus on feeding behavior, in part because the trail leads 
farthest  into  the  brain.  The  discovery  of  orexigenic  peptide  neurons  in 
the lateral hypothalamus that respond to changes in leptin levels was a 
major breakthrough. We are now able to frame the question of how these 
neurons act elsewhere in the brain to initiate feeding behavior. Advances 
in this research will have a signiﬁ cant impact on how we interpret our 
own behavior and the behavior of those around us. 

 After reading about the bloodborne signals that motivate eating and 
drinking, you might begin to feel that, indeed, we are ruled by our hor-
mones. However, while bloodborne signals do have a strong effect on the 
probability of speciﬁ c types of behavior, we are not their slaves. Clearly, 
one of the great triumphs of human evolution is the ability to exert cog-
nitive,  cortical  control  over  our  more  primitive  instincts.  This  is  not  to 
say that we humans make decisions solely on rational thought, however 
(Box 16.7). In addition to the powerful forces of self-preservation and he-
redity, our behaviors are molded by many factors that include our per-
sonal fears, ambitions, incentives, and history. In the coming chapters, 
we will explore additional inﬂ uences on behavior, including how past ex-
periences leave their mark on the brain.  

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   576
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   576

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER 16    MOTIVATION

577

BOX 16.7

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Neuroeconomics

The ﬁ eld of economics was born in 1776 with the publica-

tion of Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations. Among other 
endeavors, economists attempt to understand how choices 
are made about the allocation of resources. Economics was 
called “the dismal science” in the nineteenth century, initially 
because of dire predictions by economists that humanity was 
doomed to unending poverty because the food supply could 
not keep up with population growth. However, that phrase 
might also apply to how difﬁ cult it has been to understand 
and predict how  humans make choices, economic and oth-
erwise (Figure A).

What if we could get under the hood and ﬁ nd out what 
goes  on  in  the  brain  during  a  decision?  Advances  in  the 
technology of neuroscience, particularly the ability to mea-
sure and inﬂ uence brain activity in awake behaving animals, 
including humans, make this an attainable goal. In the past 
decade, economists have increasingly looked to studies of 
the brain to test the validity of their theoretical assumptions, 
and   neurophysiologists  and  psychologists  have  embraced 

economic  theories  to  interpret  their  data  on  the  neural 
basis  of  choice.  The  mutual  attraction  of  these  disciplines 
spawned  a  new  ﬁ eld,  called  neuroeconomics.  The  central 
goal of neuroeconomics is to combine the tools and insights 
from  economics,  neuroscience,  and  psychology  to  deter-
mine how individuals make economic decisions. The history 
of science shows that great advances often occur when tra-
ditional disciplines come together to solve a common prob-
lem.  There  is  perhaps  no  more  urgent  scientiﬁ c  challenge 
than  understanding  human  behavior.  More  than  any  other 
factor, our individual and collective behaviors will determine 
the destiny of our species and our planet. Although success 
in this endeavor is by no means assured, it is certain that the 
understanding of behavior will require the understanding of 
neuroscience.

Further Reading
 Glimcher PW, Fehr E. 2014.  Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and 

the Brain , 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 

Figure A
 To sail or not to sail?

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   577
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   577

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

578

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

K E Y   T E R M S

The Hypothalamus, 
Homeostasis, and Motivated 
Behavior
motivated behavior (p. 553)

The Long-Term Regulation of 
Feeding Behavior
anabolism (p. 553)
catabolism (p. 553)
obesity (p. 553)
starvation (p. 554)
lipostatic hypothesis (p. 555)
leptin (p. 555)
anorexia (p. 556)
lateral hypothalamic syndrome 

(p. 556)

ventromedial hypothalamic 

syndrome (p. 556)

arcuate nucleus (p. 557)
paraventricular nucleus (p. 558)
anorectic peptide (p. 558)
orexigenic peptide (p. 560)
lateral hypothalamic area 

(p. 560)

cholecystokinin (CCK) (p. 564)
insulin (p. 564)

Why Do We Eat?
electrical self-stimulation 

(p. 566)

anorexia nervosa (p. 571)
bulimia nervosa (p. 571)

The Short-Term Regulation of 
Feeding Behavior
satiety signal (p. 562)
ghrelin (p. 564)
vagus nerve (p. 564)
nucleus of the solitary tract 

(p. 564)

Other Motivated Behaviors
volumetric thirst (p. 572)
vascular organ of the lamina 
terminalis (OVLT) (p. 574)

osmometric thirst (p. 574)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  A surgical approach to reducing excessive body fat is liposuction—the removal of adipose tis-
sue. Over time, however, body adiposity usually returns to precisely the same value as before 
surgery. Why does liposuction not work permanently? Contrast this with the effect of gastric 
surgery to treat obesity.

2.  Bilateral lesions of the lateral hypothalamus lead to reduced feeding behavior. Name three types 
of neurons, distinguished by their neurotransmitter molecules, which contribute to this syndrome.
3.  What neurotransmitter agonists and antagonists would you design to treat obesity? Consider 
drugs that could act on the neurons of the brain as well as drugs that could act on the peripheral 
nervous system.

4.  Name one way the axons of the vagus nerve might stimulate feeding behavior and one way they 

inhibit it.

5.  What does it mean, in neural terms, to be addicted to chocolate? How could chocolate elevate mood?
6.  Compare  and  contrast  the  functions  of  these  three  regions  of  the  hypothalamus:  the  arcuate 

nucleus, the subfornical organ, and the vascular organ of the lamina terminalis.

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Berridge KC. 2009. ‘Liking’ and ‘wanting’ food 

rewards: brain substrates and roles in eating 
disorders. Physiology and Behavior 97:
537–550.

Flier JS. 2004. Obesity wars: molecular prog-
ress confronts an expanding epidemic. Cell 
116:337–350.

Friedman JM. 2004. Modern science versus the 

stigma of obesity. Nature Medicine 10:
563–569.

Gao Q, Hovath TL. 2007. Neurobiology of feed-

ing and energy expenditure. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 30:367–398.

Kauer JA, Malenka RC. 2007. Synaptic plasticity 

and addiction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
8:844–858.

Schultz W. 2002. Getting formal with dopamine 

and reward. Neuron 36:241–263.

Wise RA. 2004. Dopamine, learning, and motiva-
tion. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5:483–494.

551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   578
551–578_Bear_16_revised_final.indd   578

12/20/14   5:30 AM
12/20/14   5:30 AM

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Sex and the Brain

INTRODUCTION
SEX AND GENDER
The Genetics of Sex

Sex Chromosome Abnormalities

Sexual Development and Differentiation

THE HORMONAL CONTROL OF SEX
The Principal Male and Female Hormones
The Control of Sex Hormones by the Pituitary and Hypothalamus

THE NEURAL BASIS OF SEXUAL BEHAVIORS

Reproductive Organs and Their Control
Mammalian Mating Strategies
The Neurochemistry of Reproductive Behavior

 BOX 17.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Bonding with Voles, by Thomas Insel

Love, Bonding, and the Human Brain

WHY AND HOW MALE AND FEMALE BRAINS DIFFER

Sexual Dimorphisms of the Central Nervous System
Sexual Dimorphisms of Cognition
Sex Hormones, the Brain, and Behavior

Masculinization of the Fetal Brain
 BOX 17. 2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Bird Songs and Bird Brains
Mismatches between Genetic Sex and Hormone Action

Direct Genetic Effects on Behavior and Sexual Differentiation of the Brain

 BOX 17.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: David Reimer and the Basis of 
Gender Identity

The Activational Effects of Sex Hormones

Brain Changes Associated with Maternal and Paternal Behavior
Estrogen Effects on Neuron Function, Memory, and Disease

Sexual Orientation

CONCLUDING REMARKS

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   579
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   579

579579
579579

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

580

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Without sex, there is no human reproduction. And without offspring, no 
species can survive. Those are the simple facts of life, and over millions of 
years, the human nervous system evolved for the survival of the species. 
The  drive  to  reproduce  can  be  compared  to  the  powerful  motivation  to 
eat or drink, which we discussed in Chapter 16. For the sake of survival, 
life-maintaining functions, such as reproduction and eating, are not left 
entirely to the whims of conscious thought. They are regulated by sub-
cortical structures, and thoughtful conscious control is provided by the 
cerebral cortex. 

 In this chapter, we will explore what is known about sex and the brain. 
Our goal is not a discussion of the birds and the bees; we will assume 
you have picked up the basics about human sexual behavior from your 
parents, teachers, friends, or the Internet. Instead, we will look at the 
 neural machinery that makes reproduction possible. For the most part, 
the  neural  control  of  sexual  organs  uses  the  same  somatosensory  and 
motor pathways we have examined in earlier chapters. Sexual and repro-
ductive behaviors are clearly different in men and women, but just how 
different are the brains of the two sexes? We will explore this question 
and see whether brain differences pertain to only reproductive behaviors 
or more generally to behavior and cognition. 

 Ultimately, the origin of most distinctions between males and females 
is the genes inherited from the parents. Under the guidance of certain 
genes, the human body produces a small number of sex hormones that 
have  powerful  effects  on  the  sexual  differentiation  of  the  body,  as  well 
as  adult  sexual  physiology  and  behavior.  The  reproductive  organs  (the 
 ovaries and testes), which secrete sex hormones, are outside the nervous 
system, but they are activated by the brain. Recall from Chapter 15 that 
the hypothalamus controls the release of diverse hormones from the ante-
rior pituitary. In the case of reproductive function, the hormones released 
by the anterior pituitary regulate secretions from the ovaries and testes. 
Sex hormones have obvious effects on the human body, but they also in-
ﬂ uence the brain. There appear to be effects of hormones on gross brain 
structure and also at the level of neurites on individual neurons. Sex hor-
mones may even inﬂ uence resistance to certain neurological diseases. 

 Another  point  to  consider  is  what  it  means  to  be  male  or  female.  Is 
gender determined by genetics, anatomy, or behavior? The answer is not 
simple; there are cases of gender identities that do not correlate with bio-
logical and behavioral factors. And what about sexual orientation? Is an 
attraction to members of the opposite or same sex determined by experi-
ences in childhood or the structure of the brain? These are challenging 
questions  that  address  how  we  perceive  ourselves  and  others.  We  will 
examine the extent to which we can answer such questions by looking at 
the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system. 

▲ FIGURE 17.1
Biological and behavioral gender 
differences.  Pheasants are just one of 
countless animal examples of highly di-
vergent sex traits. The male is dramati-
cally colored and large with a long tail 
and wattle; it plays little role in raising 
offspring. The female is small and brown-
ish and an involved mother. (Source: 
ChrisO at the English Wikipedia.)

SEX AND GENDER 
SEX AAND GGENDER 

 The  words   sex   and   gender   both  concern  distinctions  between  male  and 
female and are often used synonymously. However, there is disagreement 
about the meanings of the two terms and the distinction between them. 
For the sake of clarity, our starting point is the deﬁ nitions accepted by 
the World Health Organization. Thus, sex is the biological state of being 
male  or  female,  and  it  is  determined  by  chromosomes,  hormones,  and 
body anatomy (Figure 17.1). Gender is the set of behaviors and attributes 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   580
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   580

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

581

a culture associates with men and women (i.e., masculine and feminine). 
Of course, it is not always easy or possible to determine whether an expec-
tation or behavior of men and women is a consequence of biology (nature), 
society (nurture), or both. And, as we will discuss, there are situations in 
which sex and gender assessments conﬂ ict. 

 The behavioral and cultural implications of a person’s sex start at birth. 
With a newborn we ask the parents, “Is the baby a boy or a girl?” The 
answer  to  this  question  often  leads  to  innumerable  assumptions  about 
the life experiences the child will have. We don’t typically inquire about 
an  adult’s  sex  because  it’s  usually  obvious  from  appearance.  However, 
identifying someone as female or male still involves many assumptions, 
as our ideas about sex and gender are associated with numerous biologi-
cal and behavioral traits. Gender-speciﬁ c behaviors result from complex 
interactions  among  introspection,  upbringing,  life  experiences,  societal 
expectations,  genetics,  and  hormones.  These  behaviors  are  related  to 
 gender identity —our perception of our own gender. In this section, we 
will discuss some of the genetic and developmental origins of sex. 

 The Genetics of Sex 
 Within the nucleus of every human cell, DNA provides a person’s genetic 
blueprint,  all  the  information  needed  to  build  an  individual.  The  DNA 
is organized into 46 chromosomes: 23 from the father and 23 from the 
mother. Each of us has two versions of the chromosomes 1 through 22, con-
ventionally numbered in order of decreasing size (Figure 17.2). The only 
exceptions to this pair system are the sex chromosomes, X and Y. Thus, it 
is usually stated that there are 44 autosomes (22 pairs of  matching chro-
mosomes) and two sex chromosomes. Females have two X chromosomes, 
one from each parent. Males have an X chromosome from the mother and 
a Y chromosome from the father. Therefore, the female  genotype  is de-
noted XX and the male genotype XY. These genotypes specify a person’s 
 genetic sex . Because the mother contributes an X chromosome to every 
child regardless of sex, the child’s genetic sex is determined by the X or Y 
contribution from the father. In some nonhuman animals, such as birds, 
it is instead the mother’s contribution that determines the genetic sex of 
the offspring. 

 The DNA molecules that make up chromosomes are some of the larg-
est molecules known, and they contain genes, the basic units of heredi-
tary information. The piece of DNA comprising a single gene provides the 
unique information needed to construct a particular protein. There are 
about 25,000 genes in the human genome, although the number varies 
depending on the technique used to make the estimate (see Box 2.2). 

 As you can see in Figure 17.2, the X chromosome is signiﬁ cantly larger 
than the Y chromosome. Corresponding to this size difference, scientists 
estimate that the X chromosome contains about 800 genes, whereas the 
Y chromosome probably contains about 50. You might joke that men are 
genetically shortchanged, and in a sense, that’s right: The XY genotype 
has  serious  medical  consequences.  If  a  female  has  a  defective  gene  on 
an  X  chromosome,  she  may  experience  no  negative  consequence  if  her 
gene on the other X chromosome is normal. However, any defect in the 
single X chromosome of a male can lead to a developmental defect. Such 
a defect is called an  X-linked disease , and there are many. For example, 
red–green  color  blindness  is  relatively  common  in  males  (see  Box  9.5). 
Other X-linked diseases that occur more often in men than women are 
hemophilia and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

X Y

▲ FIGURE 17.2
Human chromosomes.  These 23 pairs 
of chromosomes are from a man. Notice 
how much smaller the Y chromosome is 
than the X chromosome. (Source: Yunis 
and Chandler, 1977.)

 Compared to the X chromosome, the smaller Y chromosome has fewer 
genes and less diverse functions. Most importantly for sex  determination, 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   581
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   581

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

582

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

it contains a gene called the  sex-determining region of the Y chromo-
some  (SRY) ,  which  codes  for  a  protein  called   testis-determining  factor 
(TDF) .  A  human  with  a  Y  chromosome  and  the   SRY   gene  develops  as 
a  male,  and  without  it,  the  individual  develops  as  a  female.  The   SRY  
gene was found to be located on the short arm of the Y chromosome in 
1990  by  Peter  Goodfellow,  Robin  Lovell-Badge,  and  their  colleagues  at 
the Medical Research Council in London (Figure 17.3). If this bit of the 
Y  chromosome  is  artiﬁ cially  incorporated  into  the  DNA  of  a  fetal  XX 
mouse, the mouse will develop as a male instead of a female. However, 
this doesn’t mean that  SRY  is the only gene involved in sex determina-
tion,  as   SRY   is  known  to  regulate  genes  on  other  chromosomes.  Also, 
male-speciﬁ c physiology, such as sperm production, relies on other genes 
on the Y chromosome. Nonetheless, we will see shortly that expression 
of the  SRY  gene causes the development of the testes, and the hormones 
from the testes are largely responsible for making a male fetus develop 
differently from a female fetus. 

 Sex Chromosome Abnormalities. In rare cases, a  person has too few or 
too  many  sex  chromosomes,  with  health  consequences  that  range  from 
minimal to lethal.  Turner syndrome  is a partial or complete absence of 
one X chromosome in a female (XO genotype), affecting about one in 2500 
female births. Miscarriage is thought to occur with most XO fetuses. The 
girls who survive have a variety of characteristics, including short stature, 
a receding jaw, a webbed neck, and visuospatial and memory  difﬁ culties. 
Their  ovaries  are  abnormal,  and  estrogen  replacement  therapy  is  gen-
erally  needed  for  breast  development  and  menstruation.  Presumably 
 because the loss of the X chromosome in a male is lethal, there are no 
known individuals with a YO genotype. 

 In some cases, people are born with additional sex chromosomes. When 
this occurs, the sex is always determined by the presence or absence of 
the Y chromosome. In about one in 1000 male births, there is an extra 
X  chromosome;  this  defect  is  known  as   Klinefelter  syndrome .  These 
XXY  individuals  are  male  because  of  the  presence  of  the  SRY  gene  on 
the Y chromosome. In some cases, there are no obvious indications of the 

SRY

Y chromosome

Yp

Yq

1959

1966

1986

1990

▲ FIGURE 17.3
The location of the SRY gene on the Y chromosome.  In 
1959, researchers found that TDF depended on the Y chromo-
some, and in 1966, the important location was further  restricted 
to the short (p) arm. Research in the 1980s established that 
TDF is coded by the SRY gene, a small segment near the tip of 
the short arm of the Y chromosome. 
(Source: Adapted from McLaren, 1990, p. 216.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   582
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   582

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

583

XXY genotype, but possible symptoms include a less muscular body, less 
body hair, and increased breast tissue because of lower testosterone pro-
duction. XYY and XXYY genotypes also occur, and these individuals are 
male, whereas an XXX person is female. 

 Sexual Development and Differentiation 

 Differences  between  males  and  females  are  numerous,  from  average 
body size and muscle development to endocrine function. We know it is 
 ultimately  the  genes  of  the  child  that  normally  determine  its  sex.  But 
during development, when and how does the fetus differentiate into one 
sex or the other? How does the genotype of the child lead to the male or 
female development of the gonads? 

 The answer involves the unique characteristics of the gonads during 
development. Unlike organs such as the lung and liver, the rudimentary 
cells that develop into the gonads are not committed to a single develop-
mental pathway. During the ﬁ rst 6 weeks of pregnancy, the gonads are in 
an indifferent stage that can develop into either ovaries or testes. The un-
committed gonads possess two key structures, the  Müllerian duct  and the 
 Wolfﬁ an duct  (Figure 17.4). If the fetus has a Y chromosome with an  SRY  
gene, testosterone is produced, and the Wolfﬁ an duct develops into the 

(a)  Sexually undifferentiated

Gonads

Kidney

Ureter

 ··
Mullerian duct

Wolffian duct

Kidneys

Ovaries

Testes

Wolffian duct
(vas deferens)

Degenerated
 ··
Mullerian duct

Ureters

Degenerated
Wolffian duct

Urinary
bladder

Urethra

Urethra

(b)  Male

(c)  Female

 ··

Mullerian duct
(oviduct)

Uterus

Vagina

▲ FIGURE 17.4
Development of the reproductive or-
gans.  (a) The undifferentiated urogenital 
system has both Müllerian and Wolffian 
ducts. (b) If an SRY gene is present, the 
Wolffian duct develops into the male re-
productive organs. (c) If there is no SRY 
gene, the Müllerian duct develops into the 
female reproductive organs. (Source: 
Adapted from Gilbert, 1994, p. 759.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   583
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   583

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

584

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

HO

Cholesterol

CH3
C O

O

O

Progesterone

OH

Testosterone

Aromatase

OH

HO

Estradiol

▲ FIGURE 17.5
Cholesterol and the synthesis of the 
principal steroid sex hormones.  
Broken arrows indicate where one or 
more intermediate reactions occur. The 
enzyme aromatase converts testosterone 
into estradiol.

male internal reproductive system. At the same time, the Müllerian duct 
is prevented from developing by a hormone called Müllerian-inhibiting 
factor. Conversely, if there is no Y chromosome and no upsurge of testos-
terone, the Müllerian duct develops into the female internal reproductive 
system, and the Wolfﬁ an duct degenerates. 

 The external genitals of both males and females develop from the same 
undifferentiated urogenital structures. This is why it is possible for a per-
son to be born with genitals intermediate in form between those of typical 
males and females, a condition known as hermaphroditism. 

THE HORMONAL CONTROL OF SEX 
THE HHORMMONAL CONTROL OOF SEX 

 Hormones are chemicals, released into the bloodstream, that regulate 
physiological  processes.  The  endocrine  glands  we  are  primarily  inter-
ested in are the ovaries and testes because they release sex hormones 
and the pituitary because it regulates this release. The sex hormones 
are  crucial  to  the  development  and  function  of  the  reproductive  sys-
tem and sexual behavior. The sex hormones are steroids (mentioned in 
Chapter 15), and some of them are familiar, such as testosterone and 
estrogen. Steroids are molecules synthesized from cholesterol that have 
four  carbon  rings.  Small  alterations  in  the  basic  cholesterol  structure 
have profound consequences for the effects of hormones. For  example, 
testosterone is the most crucial hormone for male development, but it 
differs from the important female steroid estradiol in only a few places 
on the molecule. 

 The Principal Male and Female Hormones 
 Steroid sex hormones are often referred to as “male” or “female,” but men 
also have “female” hormones and women also have “male” hormones. The 
designation reﬂ ects the fact that men have higher concentrations of  an-
drogens,  or male hormones, and women have more  estrogens,  or female 
hormones. For example,  testosterone  is an androgen and  estradiol  is an 
estrogen. In the series of chemical reactions that lead from cholesterol to 
sex hormones, one of the principal female hormones, estradiol, is actually 
synthesized from the male hormone testosterone (Figure 17.5). This reac-
tion takes place with the aid of an enzyme called  aromatase . 

 Steroids  act  differently  from  other  hormones  because  of  their  struc-
ture.  Some  hormones  are  proteins  and  therefore  cannot  cross  the  lipid 
bilayer of a cell membrane. These hormones act at receptors with extra-
cellular binding sites. In contrast, steroids are fatty and can easily pass 
through cell membranes and bind to receptors within the cytoplasm, giv-
ing them direct access to the nucleus and gene expression. Differences in 
the concentration of various receptors result in steroid effects localized to 
different areas of the brain (Figure 17.6). 

 The testes are primarily responsible for the release of androgens, al-
though small amounts are secreted in the adrenal glands and elsewhere. 
Testosterone is by far the most abundant androgen and is responsible for 
most  masculinizing  hormonal  effects.  Prenatally,  elevated  testosterone 
levels are essential for the development of the male reproductive system. 
Increases in testosterone much later, at puberty, regulate the develop-
ment of secondary sex characteristics, ranging from increased muscular 
development and facial hair in human males to the mane of a lion. Oddly, 
for those with a genetic predisposition, testosterone also causes baldness 
in men. Female concentrations of testosterone are roughly 10% of those 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   584
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   584

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

Corpus callosum

Midbrain

Cerebellum

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

585

Olfactory bulb

Preoptic area

Hypothalamus

Pituitary

▲ FIGURE 17.6
The distribution of estradiol receptors in a sagittal 
section of the rat brain.  High concentrations of these 
receptors are found in the pituitary and hypothalamus, 
including the preoptic area of the anterior hypothala-
mus. These brain areas are all involved in sexual and 
reproductive behaviors.

found in males. Male testosterone levels vary during the course of the day 
because of numerous factors, including stress, exertion, and aggression. 
It is not clear whether an increase in testosterone is a cause or an effect, 
but it is correlated with social challenges, anger, and conﬂ ict. 

 The principal female hormones are estradiol and  progesterone , which 
are secreted by the ovaries. As already mentioned, estradiol is an estro-
gen; progesterone is a member of another class of female steroid hormones 
called   progestins .  Quite  low  during  childhood,  estrogen  levels  increase 
dramatically at puberty and control the maturation of the female repro-
ductive system and the development of breasts. As in the male, blood con-
centrations of sex hormones are quite variable in the female. However, 
whereas in men ﬂ uctuations occur rapidly each day, in women, hormonal 
levels follow a regular cycle of approximately 28 days. 

 The Control of Sex Hormones by the Pituitary and 
Hypothalamus 
 The anterior pituitary gland secretes two hormones that are particularly 
important  for  normal  sexual  development  and  function  in  both  women 
and  men:   luteinizing  hormone  (LH)   and   follicle-stimulating  hor-
mone (FSH) . These hormones are also called  gonadotropins . LH and 
FSH are secreted by specialized cells scattered throughout the anterior 
pituitary, comprising about 10% of the total cell population. Recall from 
Chapter 15 that the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary is 
under the control of hypophysiotropic hormones released by the hypothal-
amus.  Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)  from the hypothal-
amus does what the name suggests, causing the release of LH and FSH 
from  the  pituitary.  GnRH  is  also  referred  to  as  LHRH,  for  luteinizing 
hormone-releasing  hormone  because  it  causes  a  much  greater  increase 
in LH than FSH. Neuronal activity in the hypothalamus is inﬂ uenced by 
numerous psychological and environmental factors that indirectly affect 
the secretion of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary. 

 The  chain  of  events  from  hypothalamic  input  to  the  secretion  of  go-
nadal  hormones  is  illustrated  in  Figure  17.7.  Neural  input  from  the 
 retina to the hypothalamus causes changes in the release of GnRH based 
on daily variations in light level. In some nonhuman species, strong sea-
sonal  variations  in  reproductive  behavior  and  gonadotropin  secretion 
occur. Light inhibits the production of the hormone  melatonin  in the pi-
neal gland, increasing gonadotropin secretion because of the inhibitory 
effect of  melatonin on gonadotropin release. By means of this circuit, re-

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   585
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   585

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

586

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Psychological and
sensory influences

Hypothalamus

GnRH

Anterior
pituitary

LH
FSH

Ovaries
(or testes)

Estradiol or
testosterone

Cellular targets
throughout body

▲ FIGURE 17.7
Bidirectional interactions be-
tween the brain and the 
 gonads.  The hypothalamus is in-
fluenced by both psychological 
factors and sensory information, 
such as light hitting the retina. 
GnRH from the hypothalamus 
regulates gonadotropin (LH and 
FSH) release from the anterior 
 pituitary. The testes secrete tes-
tosterone and the ovaries secrete 
estradiol, as directed by the go-
nadotropins. The sex hormones 
have diverse effects on the body 
and also send feedback to the 
pituitary and hypothalamus.

productive activity can be inﬂ uenced by the length of daylight during the 
course of the year, and offspring are born seasonally when they have the 
best chance of survival. In humans, there is also an inverse relationship 
between gonadotropin release and melatonin levels, but whether melato-
nin actually modulates reproductive behavior is not known. 

 In  males,  LH  stimulates  the  testes  to  produce  testosterone.  FSH  is 
involved  in  the  maturation  of  sperm  cells  within  the  testes.  Sperm 
 maturation also requires testosterone, meaning that both LH and FSH 
play key roles in male fertility. Because there is cortical input to the hypo-
thalamus, it is possible for psychological factors to decrease male fertility 
by inhibiting gonadotropin secretion and sperm production. 

 In  females,  LH  and  FSH  cause  the  secretion  of  estrogens  from  the 
ovaries. In the absence of gonadotropins, the ovaries are inactive, which 
is the situation throughout childhood. Cyclic variations in LH and FSH 
levels  in  adult  females  cause  periodic  changes  in  the  ovaries,  and  the 
timing and duration of LH and FSH secretion determine the nature of 
the reproductive cycle, or  menstrual cycle . In the follicular phase of the 
cycle, these hormones (particularly FSH) increase the growth of a small 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   586
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   586

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

587

 number of follicles, the cavities in the ovaries that enclose and maintain 
the ova (egg cells). In the luteal phase after egg expulsion, the small cells 
that surround the egg undergo chemical changes in a process called lu-
teinization, which depends on LH release from the pituitary. The dura-
tion of the follicular and luteal phases of the reproductive cycle vary sig-
niﬁ cantly for different mammals. The phases are roughly equal in length 
in the primate menstrual cycle. 

 In the  estrous cycle  of non-primate mammals, such as rats and mice, 
the luteal phase is much shorter. In other estrous animals, such as dogs, 
cats, and farm animals, the phases are more nearly equal in duration. 
Many estrous animals have only one cycle per year, usually in the spring. 
Presumably,  this  timing  is  for  the  production  of  offspring  when  the 
weather and food supply are optimal. At the other extreme are animals 
such as rats, which are said to be  polyestrous  because they have short 
periods of estrus, or “heat,” throughout the year. 

 THE NEURAL BASIS OF SEXUAL BEHAVIORS 
THE NNEURAAL BASIS OF SEXUUAL BEHAVIORS 

 Sexual behavior is a vast, complex, and provocative topic, ranging from 
the mechanical and biological facts of copulation to the myriad cultural 
practices of human societies. Here, we will touch on only certain aspects 
of  this  subject.  We  begin  with  the  autonomic  and  spinal  neurons  that 
control the genitals, then discuss various strategies of mating, and con-
clude with some research about brain mechanisms that are important for 
monogamy and parenting. 

 Reproductive Organs and Their Control 
 Despite the obvious structural differences between female and male re-
productive organs, their neural regulation (to the extent it is understood) 
is surprisingly similar. Sexual arousal of adult men and women can result 
from erotic psychological and sensory stimuli (including visual,  olfactory, 
and somatosensory), as well as from tactile stimulation of the external 
sex organs. A full sexual response cycle consists of  arousal  followed by 
plateau ,   orgasm ,  and   resolution   phases.  Although  the  duration  of  each 
phase  can  vary  widely,  the  physiological  changes  associated  with  each 
are relatively consistent. Neural control of the sexual response comes in 
part from the cerebral cortex—where erotic thoughts occur—but the spi-
nal  cord  coordinates  this  brain  activity  with  sensory  information  from 
the genitals and generates the critical outputs that mediate the sexual 
responses of the genital structures. 

 The major external and internal sex organs are shown in Figure 17.8. 
Research  on  the  physiology  of  the  human  sexual  response  has  tended 
to focus unduly on men, but we will try to summarize some of what is 
known about both sexes. Sexual arousal causes certain parts of the exter-
nal genitals of both women and men to become engorged with blood, and 
thus to swell. In women, these structures include the  labia  and the  cli-
toris ; in men, it is primarily the  penis . The external genitals are densely 
innervated by mechanoreceptors, particularly within the clitoris and the 
glans  of  the  penis.  Stimulation  of  these  sensory  endings  can,  by  itself, 
be  enough  to  cause  engorgement  and  erection.  The  best  evidence  that 
engorgement can be generated by a simple spinal reﬂ ex is that most men 
who have suffered a complete transection of the spinal cord at the thoracic 
or lumbar level can nevertheless experience an erection when their penis 
is   mechanically  stimulated.  The  mechanosensory  pathways  from  the 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   587
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   587

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

588

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 genitals are components of the somatosensory system (see Chapter 12), 
and their anatomy follows the usual pattern: Axons from mechanorecep-
tors in the penis and clitoris collect in the dorsal roots of the sacral spinal 
cord. They then send branches into the dorsal horns of the cord, and into 
the dorsal columns, through which they project toward the brain. 

 Engorgement and erection are controlled primarily by axons of the  para-
sympathetic  division of the ANS (see Figure 15.9). Within the sacral spinal 
cord, the parasympathetic neurons can be excited by either mechanosen-
sory activity from the genitals (which can directly trigger reﬂ exive erection) 
or by axons descending from the brain (which account for responses medi-
ated by more cerebral stimuli) (see Figure 17.8). Engorgement of the clito-
ris and penis depends on dramatic changes in blood ﬂ ow. Parasympathetic 
nerve endings are thought to release a potent combination of acetylcho-
line, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), and nitric oxide (NO) directly 
into the erectile tissues. These neurotransmitters cause the relaxation of 
smooth muscle cells in the arteries and the spongy substance of the clito-
ris and penis. The usually ﬂ accid arteries then become ﬁ lled with blood, 
thereby distending the organs. (Sildenaﬁ l, better known by its trade name 
Viagra, is a treatment for erectile dysfunction that works by enhancing 
the effects of NO.) As the penis becomes longer and thicker, the spongy in-
ternal tissues swell against two thick, elastic outer coverings of connective 
tissue that give the erect penis its stiffness. In order to keep the organs 
sliding easily during copulation throughout the plateau phase, parasym-
pathetic  activity  also  stimulates  the  secretion  of  lubricating  ﬂ uids  from 
the woman’s vaginal wall and from the man’s bulbourethral gland. 

 Completing the sexual response cycle requires activity from the  sympa-
thetic  division of the ANS. As sensory axons, particularly from the penis or 
clitoris, become highly active, they, together with activity descending from 
the brain, excite sympathetic neurons in the thoracic and lumbar segments 
of the spinal cord (see Figure 17.8). In men, the sympathetic efferent axons 
then  trigger  the  process  of   emission:   Muscular  contractions  move  sperm 
from storage sites near the testes through two tubes called the  vas defer-
ens , combine the sperm with ﬂ uids produced by various glands, and propel 
the resulting mixture (called  semen ) into the  urethra . During  ejaculation,  a 
series of coordinated muscular contractions expel the semen from the ure-
thra, usually accompanied by the intense sensations of orgasm. In women, 
stimulation adequate to trigger orgasm probably also activates the sympa-
thetic system. Sympathetic outﬂ ow causes the outer vaginal wall to thicken 
and, during orgasm itself, triggers a series of strong muscular contractions. 
 Studies of the neural basis of orgasm are challenging and relatively 
new. One can only imagine the “technical” challenges that would be en-
countered ﬁ tting two people inside a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
machine,  but  a  more  scientiﬁ c  problem  is  the  investigation  of  feelings 
themselves (more on this in Chapters 18 and 21). For example, research 
has shown that the feelings of orgasm are accompanied by neural activ-
ity in widespread cortical and subcortical structures, but we don’t know 
which areas are actually responsible for the feelings and, more generally, 
it is a complete mystery how patterns of neural activity evoke feelings—
why is one activity pattern pleasurable and another painful? Studies in 
people who experience epileptic seizures give us clues to brain areas par-
ticularly relevant for orgasm. In rare cases, the aura that precedes sei-
zures may be sexually arousing, and the loci of such seizures are most 
commonly  in  the  temporal  lobe.  In  the  surgical  treatment  of  epilepsy, 
electrical stimulation of the medial temporal lobe or the basal forebrain 
has  been  reported  to  cause  sexual  arousal  in  some  patients.  Electrical 
stimulation of the medial temporal lobe has also been found to produce 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   588
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   588

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

589

Fallopian tube

Uterus

Urinary
bladder

Urethra

Vagina

Clitoris

Labia

Rectum

Cervix

Brain centers

Lumbar

Sacral

Urinary 
bladder

Seminal 
vesicle

Prostate
gland

Erectile
tissue

Parasympathetic pathways

Sympathetic pathways

Sensory pathways

Rectum

Bulbourethral gland

Glans penis

Vas deferens

Urethra

Testis

▲ FIGURE 17.8
The neural control of human sex organs.  Sensory 
information from the sex organs follows the dorsal 
column–medial lemniscal pathway to the brain.

feelings  of  orgasm  in  at  least  a  few  patients.  Studies  in  additional  pa-
tients and in non-epileptic brains are needed to conﬁ rm the association 
between orgasm and temporal lobe activation. 

 Following an orgasm, some time must pass before another orgasm can 
be triggered in men. The orgasmic experience of women tends to be con-
siderably more variable in frequency and intensity. The resolution phase, 
which ends the sexual response cycle, includes a draining of blood from 
the external genitals through veins, and a loss of erection and other signs 
and sensations of sexual excitement. 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   589
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   589

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

590

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Mammalian Mating Strategies 
 Mammals practice a dazzling range of mating behaviors. Each one is a 
strategy that ultimately meets the single evolutionary objective: to maxi-
mize the survival of offspring and parental genes. Species variations in 
preferred mating systems seem to depend on the investment that males 
and females make in raising their offspring, although there are excep-
tions. Very common among mammals is  polygyny  (from the Greek for 
“many  women”),  in  which  the  male  mates  with  many  females  but  the 
female  mates  with  only  one  male  for  one  or  multiple  mating  seasons. 
Polygynous  mating  (practiced  by  giraffes,  orangutans,  and  most  other 
mammals)  usually  has  a  “one-night  stand”  quality  to  it,  and  the  male 
never looks back to check on the outcome of his many liaisons or the mate. 
Sometimes, polygyny takes the form of a harem; one male forms a lasting 
and exclusive association with a group of females, as practiced by gorillas, 
elephant seals, and a very small number of traditional human cultures. 
  Polyandry  (“many men”), in which one female mates with many males 
but the males mate with only that female, is rare among mammals and 
vertebrates in general. One exception is the phalarope, a shorebird that 
breeds in the cold tundra. Some species practice simultaneous polyandry 
in which the female bird mates with and lays eggs in the nests of multiple 
males who raise the young within her territory. Other species practice 
sequential polyandry in which the female has nothing to do with a mate 
or offspring once the eggs are laid. Some marmosets and tamarins also 
appear to be polyandrous. Although historical examples of human poly-
andry have had a wide geographic distribution, these cases are rare and 
polyandry appears in only a tiny fraction of societies today. Polygyny and 
polyandry are both examples of  polygamy —having more than one mate. 
 In   monogamy   (“one  spouse”),  a  male  and  a  female  form  a  tightly 
bound relationship that includes exclusive (or nearly exclusive) mating 
with each other. Only about 3% of mammalian species are monogamous, 
although monogamy is practiced by roughly 12% of primate species (and 
90%  of  bird  species).  The  exclusive  relationship  may  last  a  lifetime  or 
until a new partner is chosen (serial monogamy). 

 Nearly every type of mating strategy occurs among humans in various 
cultures and eras. On balance, humans have a strong tendency toward (at 
least temporary) monogamy, although some cultures condone polygyny. 
Interestingly, even where polygyny is socially acceptable, most marriages 
are monogamous. Polyandry for reproductive purposes is rare, and most 
cultures have penalized women accused of it. Although there has been 
much  speculation  about  evolutionary  explanations  for  human  mating 
patterns, determining the precise inﬂ uences of genetics and culture on 
mating behaviors is virtually impossible. 

 The Neurochemistry of Reproductive Behavior 
 Regardless of an animal’s choice of reproductive strategy—staying faithful 
to a mate and devoted to one’s children, or wandering promiscuously and 
abandoning  offspring—complex  social  behaviors  are  involved.  It  would 
be  remarkable  if  the  tendency  to  be  monogamous  or  polygamous  were 
controlled by a few simple brain chemicals. Yet recent work on mouselike 
rodents called voles suggests that certain well-known pituitary hormones 
do precisely that (at least in voles). 

 Voles are a wonderful natural experimental model because closely related 
species of voles have very different reproductive behaviors. The prairie vole 
( Microtus  ochrogaster )  lives  in  the  American  grasslands,  practicing  solid 
“family values” (Figure 17.9). It is highly social and as reliably monogamous 

▲ FIGURE 17.9
Studying reproductive behavior.  The 
prairie vole is a valuable experimental 
model, representing monogamy and the 
care of offspring by both parents. 
(Source: Copyright 2005, Wendy Shattil/
Bob Rozinski.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   590
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   590

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

591

as any mammal known. After an intense period of initial matings, the male 
and female form a tight lifelong pair-bond and live together in one nest. 
The male will ﬁ ercely defend his mate, and both parents cooperate in the 
long-term care of their young. In contrast, the montane vole ( Microtus mon-
tanus ) is asocial and promiscuous. Each one lives in an isolated nest, the 
males take no part in parenting, and the females care for their offspring 
only brieﬂ y before letting them fend for themselves in the world. 

 Vole  pair-bonding  has  been  studied  in  the  laboratory  by  testing  the 
preference of an animal for spending time with a partner or an unfamiliar 
animal (Figure 17.10). After mating, a female prairie vole spends more 
time with its partner than by itself or with a stranger. Female montane 
voles, on the other hand, spend most of their time in a neutral area alone 
rather than with their recent mating partner or a stranger. 

 Because  these  two  vole  species  are  physically  and  genetically  quite 
similar,  relatively  few  biological  factors  might  account  for  their  differ-
ent  reproductive  behaviors.  Thomas  Insel  and  his  coworkers  at  Emory 
University and the National Institute of Mental Health have investigated 
the subtle brain differences that appear to account for the very different 
mating strategies in the two species of voles (Box 17.1). Based on clues 
from previous studies of maternal and territorial behavior, research has 
focused on the roles of  oxytocin  and  vasopressin  in voles. Recall that these 
peptide hormones are synthesized in the hypothalamus and can be re-
leased into the bloodstream by neurosecretory terminals in the posterior 
pituitary gland (see Figure 15.4). Circulating vasopressin (also known as 
ADH, antidiuretic hormone) helps regulate water and salt levels in the 

Partner
chamber

Neutral
chamber

Stranger
chamber

(a)  

)
n
m

i

(
 
r
e
b
m
a
h
c
 

n

i
 
t

n
e
p
s
 

e
m
T

i

120

80

40

0

(b)  

Montane vole

Prairie vole

▲ FIGURE 17.10
Pair-bonding in prairie and montane 
voles.  (a) To experimentally measure 
partner preference, the vole is placed in 
a neutral chamber and allowed to 
choose whether to stay alone or visit 
neighboring chambers, where a partner 
or a stranger is held. (b) After mating, 
montane voles spend most of their time 
alone and away from their partner (blue), 
whereas prairie voles choose to spend 
most of their time with the partner 
(purple). (Source: Adapted from Insel 
and Young, 2001.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   591
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   591

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

592

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 17.1

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

                                           

Bonding with Voles
by Thomas Insel

I had never heard of a vole, let alone met one in vivo. I trained 

as a physician and then a psychiatrist. After clinical training, I 
really had no idea about science. Almost completely by ser-
endipity, I got a job at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in 
Bethesda, Maryland. In the early 1980s, NIH seemed to have a 
Nobel laureate on almost every ﬂ oor, and the intellectual envi-
ronment, especially for the fast-emerging ﬁ eld of neuroscience, 
was infectious. Neuropeptides were the rage, with a new neu-
ropeptide  or  neuropeptide  receptor  being  discovered  nearly 
every month. And tools for studying slow and fast neurotrans-
mitters were evolving rapidly, so that any young investigator 
with a new technique could quickly begin to run experiments.
But neuroscience at the NIH in the 1980s also felt a bit 
crowded.  There  were  lots  of  talented  and  technique-savvy 
scientists  working  on  the  neural  basis  of  stress,  sadness, 
and pain. My instinct had always been to go to less crowded 
places where I could focus on problems without rushing to 
keep up or ahead of others. And since I had no formal sci-
entiﬁ c  training,  I  needed  time  to  learn  the  hard  lessons  of 
science.  I  moved  to  the  Laboratory  of  Brain  Evolution  and 
Behavior in the NIMH, founded by Paul MacLean on a farm in 
Poolesville, Maryland.

I chose to focus on stress research but decided to study 
development,  focusing  on  the  recently  discovered  ultra-
sonic calls rat pups emit when they are separated from their 
mothers. My behavioral neuroscience career seemed to be 
 progressing until my ﬁ rst post-doctoral fellow arrived, return-
ing  with  some  ambivalence  from  maternity  leave.  The  idea 
of listening to rat pups cry after being separated from their 
mothers was not an ideal project for her. To her great credit 
and  my  lasting  gratitude,  Marianne  Wamboldt  pointed  out 
that we might study the experience of the mothers and not 
just the separation distress of the pups.

At that time, very few people were interested in the neu-
robiology  of  positive  behaviors  like  parental  care,  afﬁ liation, 
or attachment. A robust community of scientists was study-
ing  reproductive  behavior  in  rodents  and  working  out  the 
role of gonadal steroids and neuropeptides, but most of this 
research focused on the motor or sensory aspects of repro-
duction,  not  on  the  emotional  or  affective  experience.  With 
the discovery that neuropeptides, like oxytocin, could modify 
parental behavior, and with a new post-doc who cared a lot 
about maternal affect, we were off into a new frontier. Using 
tools for mapping oxytocin receptors in the brain, we were 
able to demonstrate the pathways critical for rats becoming 
maternal,  a  profound  behavioral  transition  that  takes  place 
right at the time of parturition.

These studies helped us to understand the neural mecha-
nisms of maternal care, but what about attachment between 
adults? Laboratory rats and mice are not ideal for studying at-
tachment. They are highly social but not selective. We needed 
a species that was monogamous, forming selective and en-
during pair bonds. Again, through serendipity, I met a brilliant 
behavioral endocrinologist, Sue Carter, who was then at the 
University of Maryland. Sue schooled me in behavioral biology 
and introduced me to her favorite animal, the prairie vole.

If nature had set out to evolve a species perfect for social 
neuroscience, prairie voles could well be the result: They are 
highly afﬁ liative, easy to breed in the lab, and profoundly mo-
nogamous. Sue Carter had studied these critters in both the 
lab and the ﬁ eld, working out simple but rigorous behavioral 
measures of partner preference and attachment. Bringing the 
neuroscience  expertise  from  our  lab  in  Poolesville  together 
with the behavioral expertise in Sue’s lab, we were able to 
show  the  profound  effects  of  oxytocin  and  vasopressin  on 
afﬁ liative behaviors and attachment.

The  story  became  even  more  interesting  after  the  lab 
moved to Emory University in 1994. Joined by Larry Young and 
Zuoxin Wang, we were able to bring transgenic and viral vec-
tor tools to answer questions about the mechanisms by which 
oxytocin and vasopressin inﬂ uence social cognition and social 
behavior.  Two  insights  emerged.  First,  altering  the  regional 
expression of receptors in brain could change social organiza-
tion,  inducing or preventing mating-induced attachment. This 
was quite a shock because it meant that release of the same 
peptide had completely different effects in different species. 
And  as  we  compared  monogamous  and  nonmonogamous 
species, we noticed a surprising pattern. In  monogamous ro-
dents and primates, oxytocin receptors were found in brain 
areas associated with reward, as if this single receptor linked 
the social world to the circuitry for motivation. Today, oxytocin 
is also being studied in autism and  schizophrenia.

Of  course,  the  vole  work  has  raised  questions  about 
monogamy in humans. I have always been reluctant to ex-
trapolate from voles to mice, so extrapolating from voles to 
humans seems a fool’s errand. But that does not mean the 
prairie vole is irrelevant. “Nature’s gift to social neuroscience” 
reminds us that neuroanatomy, especially the distribution of 
receptors, is important for understanding function. Thanks to 
prairie voles, the neural basis of attachment is now an excit-
ing area of neuroscience. And, whatever the role of oxytocin 
and vasopressin in human social behavior, we have gained 
some  basic  principles  for  understanding  the  relationship  of 
form and function in the brain.

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   592
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   592

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

593

body, mainly by affecting the kidneys; oxytocin stimulates smooth mus-
cle, causing uterine contractions during childbirth and milk letdown dur-
ing lactation. However, oxytocin and vasopressin are also released onto 
CNS  neurons,  and,  like  most  signaling  molecules,  they  bind  to  speciﬁ c 
receptors  scattered  about  the  brain.  Because  oxytocin  and  vasopressin 
are protein hormones, they bind with extracellular receptors. 

 As shown in Figure 17.11, maps of these receptors are strikingly dif-
ferent in the brains of prairie voles and montane voles, whereas maps of 
other types of neurotransmitter and hormone receptors are very similar 
in the two species. The receptor differences correlate well with reproduc-
tive behavior even in other species of voles. Furthermore, the maps are 
plastic: When the female montane vole gives birth and assumes a ma-
ternal  role  (however  brieﬂ y),  her  receptor  maps  temporarily  change  to 
resemble those of the prairie vole. 

 The  distinctive  maps  of  oxytocin  and  vasopressin  receptors  tell  us 
that  each  hormone  activates  a  different  network  of  neurons  in  the  po-
lygynous  and  monogamous  vole  brains.  This  alone  does  not  prove  that 
the  hormones  have  anything  to  do  with  sex-related  behaviors.  But  to-
gether with the effects of the hormones and drugs that antagonize them, 
this evidence makes a strong case for cause and effect. When a pair of 
prairie voles copulates, levels of vasopressin (in males) and oxytocin (in 
females)  rise  sharply.  Vasopressin  antagonists  given  to  a  male  prairie 
vole before  mating prevent him from forming a pair-bond relationship. 
This disruption of pair-bonding can be produced with the antagonist se-
lectively  infused  into  the  ventral  pallidum  (the  anterior  portion  of  the 
globus pallidus). Oxytocin antagonists have no such effect. When a male 
is given vasopressin while he is exposed to a new female, he quickly forms 
a strong preference for her even without the intense mating that usually 
precedes  pair-bonding.  In  females,  oxytocin  appears  to  be  necessary  to 
establish a preference for her mate, while vasopressin has little effect. 

 A  study  by  Lim  et  al.  provides  more  direct  evidence  that  vole  pair-
bonding  can  be  signiﬁ cantly  altered  by  a  small  change  in  vasopressin 
receptors. A virus was used to deliver genes to the ventral pallidum of 
male montane voles, causing an overexpression of vasopressin receptors. 
Consequently, the male montane voles had numbers of vasopressin recep-
tors in the ventral pallidum comparable to prairie voles. The manipulated 
montane voles also pair-bonded like prairie voles. If this cause-and-effect 
link is supported by further studies, it will dramatically show that a com-
plex social behavior can be altered by the overexpression of a single pro-
tein at one location in the brain. 

Vasopressin receptors

Oxytocin receptors

▲ FIGURE 17.11
The role of oxytocin and vasopressin receptors in reproductive behavior.  These 
coronal brain sections show the distribution of oxytocin and vasopressin in the brains 
of montane voles and prairie voles. The red areas have the highest receptor densities. 
Compared to montane voles, prairie voles have high vasopressin receptor density in 
the ventral pallidum (VP) and high oxytocin receptor density in the medial prefrontal 
cortex (mPFC) and the nucleus accumbens (NAcc). (Source: Young et al., 2011.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   593
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   593

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

594

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Oxytocin and vasopressin are also involved in vole parenting habits. 
Vasopressin increases the male prairie vole’s paternal proclivities, caus-
ing him to spend more time with his pups, and oxytocin similarly stimu-
lates maternal behaviors in the female. The research on voles  suggests a 
very interesting hypothesis about the evolution of complex social behav-
iors.  If  genetic  mutations  change  the  anatomical  distribution  of  a  par-
ticular  hormone’s  receptors,  then  that  hormone  may  evoke  an  entirely 
new repertoire of behaviors. Consistent with this idea, administering va-
sopressin or oxytocin to the naturally promiscuous montane voles does 
not evoke the effects on pair-bonding and parenting seen in prairie voles, 
perhaps because they don’t have receptors in the necessary places. 

 Love, Bonding, and the Human Brain 
 The vole story is a fascinating example of how brain chemicals can regu-
late critical behaviors. But what does all this have to do with human rela-
tionships, faithfulness, and love? It is too early to be sure, but intriguing 
pieces of evidence suggest that voles may teach us something about the 
human brain and behavior. For example, there is evidence that human 
plasma oxytocin levels increase during breastfeeding in mothers and dur-
ing sexual intercourse in men and women. 

 In a series of experiments, Andreas Bartels and Semir Zeki at University 
College London have used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
to explore human brain activity associated with maternal and romantic 
love  and  bonding.  In  an  experiment  investigating  maternal  love,  while 
brain scans were being taken, mothers saw pictures of their child inter-
mixed  with  pictures  of  other  familiar  children.  In  a  second  experiment 
studying  romantic  love,  brain  activity  was  compared  when  men  and 
women viewed pictures of partners and pictures of friends. The differences 
in brain activity for one’s child versus other children and one’s partner ver-
sus friends are shown in Figure 17.12. Several brain areas, including the 
anterior cingulate cortex, the caudate nucleus, and the striatum, are more 
activated by one’s child and partner than by pictures of unrelated people. 

▲ FIGURE 17.12
Imaging maternal and romantic love in the human 
brain.  Brain activation is shown in (a) sagittal, (b) hori-
zontal, and (c,d) two different coronal planes. Yellow ar-
eas were more active when mothers saw pictures of 
their own child than with pictures of other familiar chil-
dren. Red areas were more activated by pictures of ro-
mantic partners than to pictures of friends. Some of the 
highlighted areas are labeled: PAG, periaqueductal gray; 
aC, anterior cingulate cortex; hi, hippocampus; I, insula; 
C, caudate nucleus; S, striatum. (Source: Bartels and 
Zeki, 2004.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   594
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   594

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

595

The heightened responses to child and partner overlap signiﬁ cantly; other 
brain areas respond differently with the two types of relationship. Many of 
the areas that are active with both maternal and romantic attachment are 
part of the brain’s reward circuitry (see Chapter 16). We can speculate that 
the brain activation demonstrates the strong reinforcing nature of partner 
and parental relationships. Also interesting, and relevant to the vole story, 
is the ﬁ nding that many of the brain areas activated by pictures of people’s 
partners and children are rich in oxytocin and vasopressin receptors. 

 These  fMRI  studies  suggest  that  oxytocin  and  vasopressin  play  roles 
in human bonding, perhaps similarly to what we see in voles. But surely, 
the  tendency  of  humans  to  be  monogamous  or  not  isn’t  as  simple  as  in 
rodents.  Although  human  behavior  undoubtedly  involves  more  complex 
factors than vole behavior, surprising evidence suggests that vasopressin 
inﬂ uences human bonding as well. Hasse Walum and a team of Swedish 
and American scientists studied 552 pairs of same-sex Swedish twins who 
were married or had long-term partners. Of particular interest was the 
gene sequence that codes for vasopressin receptors and the tendency to-
ward monogamy. The DNA sequences that code vasopressin receptors in 
montane and prairie voles are nearly identical, but the monogamous prai-
rie voles have a DNA sequence adjacent to the gene that encodes the V1aR 
vasopressin  subtype  (called  a  gene  variant).  When  this  gene  variant  is 
transgenically introduced into nonmonogamous mice, their social behavior 
becomes more like the prairie voles. In the human twin study, the scien-
tists investigated whether vasopressin gene variants might inﬂ uence pair-
bonding in humans too. In women, there was no connection between the 
vasopressin gene variants and the quality of their marriage as assessed by 
a variety of questionnaires. In the men, however, an  intriguing correlation 
was found: Men with a particular gene variant scored signiﬁ cantly lower 
on measures of the quality of their marriage and were twice as likely to 
report that a marital crisis had occurred in the year before the survey. The 
wives of the men with the gene variant also reported lower marital quality 
than the wives of the men without the variant. The function of this gene 
variant is not known, but these results suggest that, even in humans, va-
sopressin receptors might play a role in pair-bonding. 

WHY AND HOW MALE AND FEMALE BRAINS 
WHYY AND HHOW MALE AND FEEMALE BRAINS
DIFFEER 
DIFFER 

 Sexual reproduction depends on a variety of individual and social behav-
iors—ﬁ nding, attracting, and keeping a mate; copulating; giving birth; and 
nursing  and  nurturing  the  offspring—and  in  each  case,  the  behavior  of 
males and females is usually quite different. Since all behaviors ultimately 
depend on the structure and function of the nervous system, we can make 
the strong prediction that male and female brains are also somehow differ-
ent; that is, they have  sexual dimorphisms  (from the Greek  dimorphos,
“having two forms”). Another good reason to expect that male and female 
brains differ is simply that male and female bodies differ. The body parts 
that are unique to each sex require neural systems that have evolved spe-
ciﬁ cally to control them. For example, male rats have a particular muscle 
at the base of the penis, and their spinal cord has a small cluster of motor 
neurons that control that muscle; females lack both the muscle and the 
related motor neurons. Body size and general shape also vary with gender, 
and thus somatosensory and motor maps must adjust to ﬁ t them. 

 Sexual  dimorphisms  vary  widely  across  species.  In  the  brain,  dimor-
phisms are sometimes found, but they are signiﬁ cant in some species and 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   595
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   595

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

596

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 17.13
Dimorphism in brain size.  These brains are from adult female (left) and male 
(right) three-spined stickleback fish that were the same length and weight. 
The male brain is larger and 23% heavier than the female brain. The scale 
bar indicates 1 mm. (Source: Kotrschal et al., 2012.)

nonexistent in others. An example of an animal with a large dimorphism 
is the Icelandic stickleback ﬁ sh, in which the male brain is much larger 
than the female brain, perhaps because of the cognitive demands of nest 
construction,  courtship,  and  childcare  (Figure  17.13),  which  are  carried 
out only by the male. In rodents, the trained eye can tell male from female 
brains with no ambiguity because of differences in the hypothalamus. The 
diversity  of  brain  dimorphisms  across  species  is  sometimes  associated 
with  remarkable  variations  in  sexual  behaviors.  For  example,  in  some 
songbird species, only males sing, and, not surprisingly, only males have 
large singing-related brain nuclei. In human brains, dimorphisms have so 
far proven to be subtle, few, and of unknown function. Differences between 
human male and female brains tend to vary along a continuum, with lots 
of overlap. A particular hypothalamic nucleus might be larger in women 
than men  on average , for example, but size variations of the nucleus may 
be so great that many men have a larger nucleus than many women. 

 In the rest of this section, we will describe sexual dimorphisms in the ner-
vous systems of humans and other species, focusing on examples that illumi-
nate the relationship between the brain and behavior. We will also discuss 
some of the neurobiological mechanisms that generate these dimorphisms. 

 Sexual Dimorphisms of the Central Nervous System 
 Few dimorphic neural structures are related to their sexual functions in 
an obvious way. One structure that is related is the collection of spinal 
motor  neurons  that  innervates  the   bulbocavernosus  (BC)   muscles  sur-
rounding the base of the penis. These muscles have a role in penile erec-
tion and help to eject urine. Both women and men have a BC muscle. In 
women, it surrounds the opening of the vagina and serves to constrict it 
slightly. The motor neuron pool controlling the BC muscles in humans, 
called  Onuf’s nucleus , is located in the sacral spinal cord. Onuf’s nucleus 
is  moderately  dimorphic  (there  are  more  motor  neurons  in  men  than 
women) because the male BC muscles are larger than those of females. 

 The  most  distinct  sexual  dimorphisms  in  the  mammalian  brain  are 
clustered around the third ventricle, within the  preoptic area of the an-
terior  hypothalamus .  This  region  seems  to  have  a  role  in  reproductive 
behaviors. In rats, lesions of the preoptic area disrupt the estrous cycle 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   596
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   596

12/20/14   5:36 AM
12/20/14   5:36 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

597

Corpus callosum

Anterior commisure

Third ventricle

Optic chiasm

Third 
ventricle

SDN

Optic chiasm

SDN

▲ FIGURE 17.14
Sexual dimorphism in rats.  The 
 sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN) in the 
hypothalamus of male rats (left) is much 
larger than the SDN in female rats (right). 
(Source: Adapted from Rosenzweig 
et al., 2005, Fig 12.21. Photos courtesy 
of Roger Gorski.)

in females and reduce the frequency of copulation in males. Histological 
sections of male and female preoptic areas from rats show an obvious dif-
ference: The aptly named  sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN)  is ﬁ ve to 
eight times larger in males than in females (Figure 17.14). 

 The preoptic area of humans may also have dimorphisms, but the dif-
ferences are small and controversial. There are four clusters of neurons 
called the  interstitial nuclei of the anterior hypothalamus (INAH) . 
In different studies INAH-1, INAH-2, and INAH-3 have all been reported 
to be larger in men than women. INAH-1 may be the human analogue of 
the rat SDN, but researchers disagree about whether INAH-1 is dimor-
phic. The clearest dimorphism appears to be in INAH-3, which was ﬁ rst 
reported  to  be  twice  as  large  in  men  as  women  by  Laura  Allen,  Roger 
Gorski, and their colleagues at UCLA. Evidence of the involvement of the 
INAH in sexual behavior is thus far inconclusive. Various neurons of the 
medial preoptic area in male rhesus monkeys ﬁ re vigorously during spe-
ciﬁ c phases of sexual behavior, including arousal and copulation. In addi-
tion, there may be subtle differences in the size of certain hypothalamic 
nuclei that correlate with sexual orientation in people. 

 Human brain dimorphisms outside the hypothalamus have been difﬁ -
cult to prove conclusively, although many have been reported. For example, 
some studies have found that the corpus callosum is larger in men, but this 
may be a consequence of men having slightly larger brains (and bodies). 
In other reports, the posterior end of the corpus callosum, called the  sple-
nium , is larger in women than men. But even if there is a dimorphism in 
the size or shape of the corpus callosum, what could it mean? We can only 
guess.  The  callosum  has  no  obvious  role  in  mediating  speciﬁ cally  sex-
related behaviors, but it is important for a variety of cognitive functions 
that involve coordinated activity between hemispheres. Observations of 
stroke patients in whom only one hemisphere has been damaged  suggest 
that the functions of female brains may be less lateralized, that is, less 
dependent on one cerebral hemisphere more than the other. But this con-
clusion, too, has been challenged. As a rule, sexual dimorphisms of the 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   597
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   597

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

598

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

brain are difﬁ cult to prove because male and female brains are very simi-
lar, and because within populations of male and female brains, there is 
considerable individual variation. 

 Perhaps, the most reliable conclusion we can draw about sexual dimor-
phisms in human brain structure is that there are so few of them. This 
probably should not come as a surprise, since the vast majority of women’s 
and men’s behaviors are very similar, if not indistinguishable. The gross 
anatomy of the brain provides only a crude view of the organization of the 
nervous system. To determine the reasons for sexually dimorphic behav-
ior, we need to look deeper into the patterns of neural connections, the 
neurochemistry of the brain, and the inﬂ uence of sex-related hormones on 
neural development and function. 

 Sexual Dimorphisms of Cognition 
 Even if there are no major differences in the brain structures of men and 
women,  there  may  still  be  differences  in  cognitive  abilities.  Reports  of 
cognitive  dimorphisms  are  sometimes  accompanied  by  an  evolutionary 
explanation: Men evolved as hunters and relied more on their abilities 
to navigate their environment. Women evolved the behavior of staying 
closer to home to care for children, so they were more social and verbal. 

 Numerous studies have reported that women are better at verbal tasks 
than men. Starting at around age 11 years, girls perform slightly better 
on tests of comprehension and writing, and this effect is sometimes said 
to extend through high school and beyond. Perhaps, it reﬂ ects a difference 
in the rates of brain development in the two sexes. Speciﬁ c tasks at which 
women excel include naming objects of the same color, listing words be-
ginning with the same letter, and verbal memory (Figure 17.15a). 

 In  other  sorts  of  tasks,  men  appear  to  outperform  women.  Tasks 
that  reportedly  favor  men  include  map  reading,  maze  learning,  and 
 mathematical reasoning. Researchers speculate that these male advan-
tages evolved from the days when men roamed large areas to hunt wild 
animals. One of the largest reported differences between the sexes is men-
tal rotation of objects, a task that appears to favor men (Figure 17.15b). 
 While thinking about dimorphisms of cognition, we need to consider 
a few things. First, not all studies yield the same results. In some cases, 
one  sex  performs  better,  and  in  others,  there  is  no  difference.  Second, 
across large groups of people of both sexes, there are huge differences in 
performance. But most of the variation is the result of differences  among 
individuals , rather than being sex-speciﬁ c. Third, it is not clear whether 
performance differences (or brain dimorphisms) are innate or the result 
of  differences  in  experience.  Typical  males  and  females  experience  dif-
ferent things and they may, on average, develop slightly different skills. 
This may in turn inﬂ uence neural circuitry. 

 A  common  interpretation  of  sex-based  differences  in  performance  is 
that  the  distinctive  hormonal  environments  of  male  and  female  brains 
make them work somewhat differently. Perhaps, there is a beneﬁ t or pen-
alty associated with estrogens or androgens for each task. Consistent with 
this  conjecture  are  reports  that  spatial  reasoning  in  women  correlates 
with the menstrual cycle, better performance being observed when estro-
gen levels are lowest. Evidence also indicates that administering testos-
terone enhances spatial performance in older men with low testosterone 
levels. However, cognition cannot be so simply related to hormones, as 
there is no reliable correlation between performance on verbal or spatial 
tasks and hormone levels. This doesn’t mean that hormones do not affect 
cognitive function, but we must be cautious about overgeneralizing. 

(a)  List words beginning with
      the letter B.

      big, bag, bug, boy,
      banana, bugle, bunny......

(b)  Are these two shapes the same?

▲ FIGURE 17.15
Cognitive tasks that may favor women 
or men.  (a) Women may outperform men 
in listing words beginning with the same 
letter. (b) Men appear to be somewhat 
better at spatial rotation tasks, such as 
deciding whether two three-dimensional 
objects are the same. (Source: Adapted 
from Kimura, 1992, p. 120.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   598
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   598

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

599

 Sex Hormones, the Brain, and Behavior 
 A variety of factors ranging from genetics to culture and life experiences 
may make a behavior more common in one sex than the other, but ul-
timately, all behaviors are controlled by the brain. Even if there are no 
gross anatomical dimorphisms, male and female brain circuitry must be 
somewhat different to account for sex-speciﬁ c behaviors, whether singing 
by male birds or human sexual behavior. Recall that the kinds of sex hor-
mones circulating in the blood are determined by the gonads, and the di-
morphism of the gonads is ordinarily speciﬁ ed by our genes. As described 
earlier, people with a Y chromosome express a factor (testis-determining 
factor) that causes the undifferentiated gonads to become testes; people 
lacking a Y chromosome do not produce TDF, and their gonads differenti-
ate into ovaries. The differentiation of testes or ovaries sets off a cascade 
of developmental events in the body. Most importantly for the sexual dif-
ferentiation of the brain, the testes produce androgens, which trigger the 
masculinization of the nervous system by regulating the expression of a 
variety of sex-related genes. In the absence of androgens, there is a femi-
nization of the brain through a different pattern of gene expression. 

 There is nothing fundamentally unique about the brain’s sensitivity to 
hormones. It is just one more body tissue waiting for a hormonal signal to 
decide its speciﬁ c pattern of growth and development. Androgens provide a 
unitary signal for masculinization in the brain, just as in the various other 
tissues of the body that are sexually dimorphic. Steroids can inﬂ uence neu-
rons in two general ways (Figure 17.16). First, they can act quickly (within 
seconds or less) to alter membrane excitability, sensitivity to neurotrans-
mitters, or neurotransmitter release. Steroids do this, in general, by directly 
binding to, and modulating the functions of, various enzymes, channels, 
and transmitter receptors. For example, certain metabolites (breakdown 
products) of progesterone bind to the inhibitory GABA A  receptor and poten-
tiate the amount of chloride current activated by GABA. The effects of these 
progesterone metabolites are quite similar to the sedative and anticonvul-
sant effects of the benzodiazepine class of drugs (see Figure 6.22). Second, 
steroids can diffuse across the outer membrane and bind to speciﬁ c types of 
steroid receptors in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Receptors with bound ste-
roid can either promote or inhibit the transcription of speciﬁ c genes in the 
nucleus, a process that can take minutes to hours. Speciﬁ c receptors exist 
for each type of sex hormone, and the distributions of each receptor type 
vary widely throughout the brain (see Figure 17.6). 

 Steroid hormones can exert effects on the brain and body throughout 
life, but their inﬂ uence early in development is often fundamentally differ-
ent from their effects after the animal is mature. For example, the ability of 
testosterone to alter very young genitals and brain circuitry, leading to dis-
tinctly male genitals and masculine behaviors later in life, can be thought 
of as the  organizational effects  of the hormone. The hormone  organizes  
the perinatal tissues in irreversible ways that allow it to generate male 
functions after sexual maturity has been reached. For a mature animal to 
express sexual behaviors fully, however, it is often necessary for steroid 
hormones to circulate  again  during periods of sexual activity, providing  ac-
tivational effects  on the nervous system. Thus, for example, testosterone 
levels might surge in the body of a male songbird in the spring,  activating  
changes in certain parts of his brain that are essential for normal repro-
ductive behavior (Box 17.2). Activational effects are usually temporary. 

 Masculinization of the Fetal Brain. Prenatally, elevated testosterone lev-
els  are  essential  for  the  development  of  the  male  reproductive  system. 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   599
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   599

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

600

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 17.16
The direct and indirect effects of ste-
roids on neurons.  Steroids can directly 
affect transmitter synthesis, transmitter 
release, or postsynaptic transmitter 
receptors. They can indirectly influence 
gene transcription.

Presynaptic
terminal

Postsynaptic
spine

Dendrite

Direct effects

OH

Estradiol

HO

dir

e

In

ct effe
cts

Nuclear
envelope

DNA

Estrogen
receptor/
transcription
factor

Estrogen bound
to receptor,
bound to DNA

Cell body
of neuron

Ironically,  it  is  a “female”  hormone,  not  testosterone,  which  causes  the 
changes in gene expression responsible for masculinization of the male 
brain.  Remember  that  testosterone  is  converted  within  neuronal  cyto-
plasm into estradiol in a single chemical step, catalyzed by the enzyme 
aromatase (see Figure 17.5). The rise in testosterone that occurs prena-
tally actually leads to an increase in estrogen, which binds to estradiol 
receptors, thereby triggering masculinization of the developing nervous 
system. What is not clear is which genes are regulated in various parts of 
the brain by sex hormones to account for masculinization. Female gonads 
do not produce an early surge of testosterone or estrogen, so female brains 
are not affected in the same way as male brains. 

 An interesting and important complication arises regarding the response 
of the fetal brain to circulating hormones. In addition to the estrogens and 
androgens produced by the fetal gonads, hormones coming from the preg-
nant  mother’s  placenta  reach  the  circulation  of  the  fetus.  A   reasonable 
question is why estrogens from the mother do not alter  sexual development 
of the fetal brain. We have said that estrogen, rather than testosterone, is 
actually responsible for masculinization, so why doesn’t the female fetus 
become masculinized in response to estrogens passed to the fetus from the 
mother? In rats and mice, the answer to this dilemma is that   ␣ -fetoprotein , 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   600
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   600

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

601

BOX 17.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Bird Songs and Bird Brains

To  our  ears,  the  singing  of  birds  may  be  simply  a  pleas-

ant  harbinger  of  spring,  but  for  birds,  it  is  part  of  the  seri-
ous  business  of  sex  and  reproduction.  Singing  is  strictly  a 
male  function  in  many  species,  performed  for  the  purpose 
of attracting and keeping a mate and for warning off poten-
tial  rivals.  Studies  of  two  bird  species  with  different  habits 
of reproduction and singing have revealed some fascinating 
clues about the control and diversity of sexual dimorphisms 
in the brain.

Zebra ﬁ nches, which are popular pets, live in the wild in 
the  harsh  Australian  desert.  To  breed  successfully,  birds 
require  dependable  sources  of  food,  but  in  the  desert, 
food  comes  only  with  sporadic  and  unpredictable  rains. 
Zebra ﬁ nches must therefore be ready and willing to breed 
whenever  food  and  a  mate  are  available,  in  any  season. 
Wild  canaries,  on  the  other  hand,  live  in  the  more  pre-
dictable environment of the Azores and (where else?) the 
Canary Islands. They breed seasonally during spring and 
summer and do not reproduce during fall and winter. The 
males of both species are passionate singers, but they dif-
fer greatly in the size of their repertoires. Zebra ﬁ nches belt 
out  one  simple  ditty  all  their  lives  and  cannot  learn  new 
ones. Canaries learn many elaborate songs, and they add 
new  ones  each  spring.  The  different  behaviors  of  zebra 
ﬁ nches and canaries require different mechanisms of neu-
ral control.

The birds’ sexually dimorphic behavior—singing—is gen-
erated by dramatically dimorphic neural structures. Birds sing 
by  forcing  air  past  a  special  muscularized  organ  called  the 
syrinx, which encircles the air passage. The muscles of the 
syrinx are activated by motor neurons of the nucleus of cra-
nial nerve XII, which are in turn controlled by a set of higher 

nuclei collectively called the vocal control regions, or VCRs 
(Figure A). In zebra ﬁ nches and canaries, VCR size is ﬁ ve or 
more times larger in males than in females.

The development of VCRs and singing behavior is under 
the  control  of  steroid  hormones.  However,  the  very  differ-
ent seasonal requirements of zebra ﬁ nches and canaries are 
paralleled  by  distinctly  different  modes  of  steroidal  control. 
Zebra  ﬁ nches  apparently  require  early  doses  of  steroids  to 
organize their VCRs, and later androgens to activate them. 
If a hatchling female zebra ﬁ nch is exposed to testosterone 
or estradiol, her VCRs will be larger than those of normal fe-
males when she reaches adulthood. If the masculinized fe-
male is given more testosterone as an adult, her VCRs will 
grow larger still, and she will then sing like a male. Females 
that are not exposed to steroids when young are unrespon-
sive to testosterone as adults.

In  contrast,  the  song  system  in  canaries  seems  to  be 
independent of early steroid exposure, yet it bursts into full 
service each spring. If female canaries are given androgens 
for the ﬁ rst time as adults, they will begin singing within a few 
weeks. The androgens of males surge naturally each spring; 
their VCRs double in size as neurons grow larger dendrites 
and more synapses, and singing commences. Remarkably, 
neurogenesis,  the  birth  of  neurons,  continues  throughout 
adulthood in songbird brains, further contributing to the VCR 
circuitry during the mating season. By fall, male androgen lev-
els drop, and the canary song system shrinks in size as his 
singing abates. In a sense, the male canary rebuilds much of 
his song control system anew each year as courtship begins. 
This  may  enable  him  to  learn  new  songs  more  easily  and, 
with his enlarged repertoire, gain some advantage in attract-
ing a mate.

Male

Cranial
nerve XII

Syrinx

Female

Cranial
nerve XII

Syrinx

Figure A 
 Blue circles represent the vocal control regions in male and female zebra ﬁ nches.

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   601
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   601

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

602

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

a protein found in high concentrations in fetal blood, binds estrogens and 
protects the female fetus from masculinization. As odd as it sounds, the 
female fetus must be protected from “female hormones” to keep its brain 
from becoming more masculine. Knockout mice that lack  ␣ -fetoprotein are 
sterile and do not exhibit normal sexual behaviors. The role of  ␣ -fetoprotein 
in humans is less clear; there are conﬂ icting reports about whether human 
 ␣ -fetoprotein binds estrogen as it does in rodents. Also noteworthy is the di-
agnostic measurement of  ␣ -fetoprotein levels in maternal blood or amniotic 
ﬂ uid; unusually high levels are a possible indicator of neural tube defects, 
and unusually low levels are found in  Down syndrome . 

 A  study  by  Amateau  and  McCarthy  shows  that  one  factor  in  brain 
masculinization “downstream” from testosterone and estradiol is the pro-
duction  of   prostaglandins .  Prostaglandins  are  compounds  derived  from 
arachidonic acid, a fatty acid present in the brain and other organs. One 
of the enzymes involved in the synthesis of prostaglandins is cyclooxy-
genase (COX). Prostaglandins have numerous roles; most notably, they 
are produced after tissue damage and are involved in inducing pain and 
fever. Amateau and McCarthy found that fetal and neonatal male rats 
exposed to COX inhibitors showed reduced copulatory behavior as adults. 
Conversely, female rats treated with COX inhibitors exhibited male-like 
copulatory behaviors; the female rat behavior, and brain, were partially 
masculinized despite the lack of the usual sex hormones playing this role, 
thus moving us one step downstream from estradiol in the chain reaction 
that causes masculinization. A fascinating side note to this study is that 
human pain is frequently treated with COX inhibitors such as aspirin. 
Only time will tell whether a human mother’s use of analgesics during 
pregnancy affects the future sexual behavior of her children. 

 Mismatches  between  Genetic  Sex  and  Hormone  Action.  Under  normal 
circumstances, the genetic sex of an animal or person determines hormonal 
function and, consequently, the sexual characteristics of the nervous system. 
However, in situations in which hormonal function is altered, it is possible 
for genetic males to have female brains and genetic females to have male 
brains. For example, in all mammalian species studied, treatment with tes-
tosterone early in development leads to decreases in at least some features 
of adult female sexual behavior. Activating fully masculine behavior usu-
ally requires extended testosterone treatment before and after birth. If ge-
netically female (XX) rats are exposed to testosterone during the few days 
around birth, they will fail to elicit the typical female mating posture, called 
lordosis, when they reach maturity. Female guinea pigs treated  in utero  with 
enough testosterone to masculinize their external genitals will, as adults, 
energetically mount and attempt to mate with females in estrus. In the ab-
sence of human intervention, when a cow carries twin calves that include 
both a male and a female, the female calf is exposed  in utero  to some testos-
terone produced by her male twin. As an adult, the female, known as a free-
martin, will invariably be infertile and behave more like a bull than a cow. 
 Some humans also experience mismatches between their chromosomes 
and sex hormones. For example, genetic males (XY) who carry a defec-
tive androgen receptor gene may have profound  androgen insensitivity . 
The  androgen  receptor  gene  is  on  the  X  chromosome;  males  thus  have 
only  one  copy  of  it,  and  males  with  the  defective  gene  cannot  produce 
functioning androgen receptors. These individuals develop normal testes 
but they remain undescended in the abdomen. The testes produce ample 
testosterone,  but  outwardly  these  individuals  appear  entirely  female 
because  their  tissues  cannot  respond  to  androgen;  they  have  a  vagina, 
a clitoris, and labia, and at puberty, they develop breasts and a female 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   602
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   602

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

603

body shape. The testes also produce normal levels of Müllerian-inhibiting 
factor so the Müllerian duct does not develop into the female reproduc-
tive  system,  the  individuals  do  not  menstruate,  and  they  are  infertile. 
Androgen-insensitive genetic males not only look like normal genetic fe-
males, but they also behave like them. Even when they understand the 
circumstances of their biology, they prefer to call themselves women; they 
dress like women, and they choose men as their sex partners. 

 Occasionally, genetic females have a condition called  congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH) , which literally means overgrown adrenal glands pres-
ent at birth. Although they are genetically female, because their adrenal 
glands secrete unusually large amounts of androgens, CAH females are 
exposed to abnormally high levels of circulating androgens early in their 
development. At birth, they have normal ovaries and no testes, but their 
external genitals are intermediate in size between a normal clitoris and 
a penis. Surgery and medications are the usual treatments after birth. 
Nevertheless, CAH girls (and their parents) are more likely to describe 
their behavior as aggressive and tomboyish. As adults, most CAH women 
are  heterosexual,  but,  compared  to  other  women,  a  higher  percentage 
of CAH women are homosexual. Presumably, by analogy to the animal 
studies, prenatal exposure to high levels of androgens causes a somewhat 
male-like organization of certain brain circuits in CAH women. We have 
to be particularly cautious about drawing conclusions about the causes of 
human behavior, however (Box 17.3). It is very hard to determine whether 
masculine  behavior  of  a  CAH  female  is  due  entirely  to  early  androgen 
exposure and male-like brain dimorphisms, whether her behavior is the 
product of subtle differences in the way she is treated by others (particu-
larly parents faced with a child who has ambiguous genitals), or both. 

 Direct Genetic Effects on Behavior and Sexual 
Differentiation of the Brain 
 The classic view of sexual differentiation, and the one discussed in this 
chapter, gives genetics only an indirect role in determining the gender 
of  an  individual:  Genes  direct  the  development  of  the  gonads,  and  the 
hormonal secretions of the gonads control sexual differentiation. While 
there is no question that hormones are extremely important in sexual de-
velopment, recent research suggests that genes may sometimes be more 
directly involved in sexual differentiation, at least in some species. The 
most  compelling  evidence  comes  from  studies  of  birds.  In  one  particu-
larly dramatic study, Agate et al. examined the body and brain of a rare, 
naturally occurring zebra ﬁ nch. This bird, technically a  gynandromorph  
(meaning that it has both male and female tissues), was genetically fe-
male on the left side of its body and brain and genetically male on the 
right side (Figure 17.17). As both sides of the brain are exposed to the 
same circulating hormones, they should be equally masculine or feminine 
if hormones are entirely responsible for sexual differentiation. However, 
the  brain  areas  associated  with  singing  (see  Box  17.2)  were  masculine 
on the right side and feminine on the left side, suggesting that different 
gene expression and not sex hormones in the two brain halves led to the 
brain dimorphisms. In related studies of gynandromorphic chickens, re-
searchers found that most cells on the male side of the body carry male 
sex chromosomes and cells on the other side have female chromosomes, 
the result of a mutation early in development. 

 Recently, attempts have been made to ﬁ nd direct genetic effects on sex-
ual differentiation in mammals. In a species in which the male and female 
forms are not as strikingly different as the zebra ﬁ nch, a  gynandromorph 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   603
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   603

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

604

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 17.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

David Reimer and the Basis of Gender Identity

David Reimer was a normal healthy baby boy when he 

was born in 1965. But during a circumcision, an accident 
with  an  electrocautery  device  burned  his  entire  penis. 
David’s parents were referred to Johns Hopkins University, 
where they met Dr. John Money. Because it was not possi-
ble to restore David’s male genitals, it was recommended 
that the boy be castrated and undergo cosmetic surgery, 
followed  by  estrogen  treatment  at  puberty,  to  turn  him 
into  a  girl.  Dr.  Money’s  recommendation  was  based  on 
his hypothesis that, at birth, babies are essentially gender-
neutral;  their  identity  as  male  or  female  is  determined  by 
their  subsequent  life  experiences  and  identiﬁ cation  with 
their anatomy. Faced with a terrible decision, David’s par-
ents  were  eventually  convinced  that  surgery  combined 
with a female upbringing gave their child the best chance 
at a normal life.

Dr. Money’s accounts of David’s life after his transforma-
tion sound as if the child adapted well and became a happy 
normal girl. In publications, Dr. Money refers to “John” having 
been successfully changed into “Joan.” The case even made 
it into the popular press, as evidenced by a 1973 article in 
Time magazine: “This dramatic case . . . provides strong sup-
port . . . that conventional patterns of masculine and feminine 
behavior  can  be  altered.  It  also  casts  doubt  on  the  theory 
that major sex differences, psychological as well as anatomi-
cal, are immutably set by the genes at conception.”1 At that 
time, dramatic societal changes were taking place in the roles 
of men and women, and the success of David as a female 
appeared to conﬁ rm that society created gender identity as 
much as, or more than, biology.

Unfortunately,  a  follow-up  report  revealed  that  David’s 
gender  transformation  was  a  disaster  from  the  outset. 
According  to  David  and  his  twin  brother,  David’s  behavior 
was always much more like other boys than girls. David re-
belled  at  wearing  girls’  clothing  and  playing  with  traditional 
girls’  toys.  Despite  cosmetic  surgery  and  female  indoctri-
nation, as an adult, he said that he had suspected he was 
a boy as early as the second grade and imagined growing 
up to be a muscular man. As a child, David was incessantly 
teased and ostracized. He knew nothing about the failed cir-
cumcision and subsequent surgery, nor the fact that he was 
genetically a male. However, as he got older, he was more 
attracted  to  girls  than  boys,  and  he  expressed  the  opinion 
that he felt like a boy trapped in a girl’s body. By the age of 

1Time, Jan. 8, 1973, p. 34.

14, after being on estrogen for 2 years, he looked increasingly 
like a girl, but he stopped living as one (Figure A). David’s fa-
ther ﬁ nally told him what had happened when he was young. 
David immediately requested sex-change hormonal therapy 
and  surgery.  For  years,  David  dealt  with  the  overwhelming 
emotional problems resulting from his past. He married, ad-
opted his wife’s children, and happily worked a physically de-
manding job as a janitor in a slaughter house. In the 1990s, 
David collaborated on a book about his life. Tragically, after 
numerous traumatic events in his life, including the death of 
his twin brother and the breakup of his marriage, David com-
mitted suicide in 2004 at the age of 38.

David  Reimer’s  experiences  demonstrate  that,  rather 
than  being  gender-neutral,  he  had  a  “male  brain”  from  the 
outset.  Evidently,  his  genetically  determined  sex  could  not 
be  suppressed  even  with  sex-change  surgery,  hormonal 
therapy, and a female upbringing. Clearly, gender identity in-
volves  a  complex  interplay  of  genetics,  hormones,  and  life 
experiences.

Figure A 
 David Reimer (aka John/Joan) and his twin brother Brian shortly 
before they were told the truth about David’s childhood. (Source: 
Courtesy of Jane Reimer.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   604
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   604

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

605

Right

Left

(a)

R

(b)

R

L

L

(c)

(d)

▲ FIGURE 17.17
Brain analysis of a gynandromorphic zebra finch.  (a) This bird had female 
plumage on its left side and male plumage on its right. (b) The HVC nucleus 
(hyperstriatum ventrale, pars caudalis) controls singing. It is larger on the geneti-
cally male right side (dark patch of labeled neurons). (c) An autoradiogram show-
ing the expression of a gene normally expressed only in females labels only the 
left side of the brain. (d) An autoradiogram showing the expression of a gene nor-
mally more highly expressed in males labels the right side of the brain more than 
the left. (Source: Arnold, 2004, Fig. 4.)

might not be as easily recognized. Eric Vilain and his colleagues at UCLA 
have found 51 genes that are expressed at different levels in male and 
female mouse brains before the formation of the gonads. The function of 
these genes is not yet known. 

 In addition to inﬂ uencing sexual differentiation, genes can play a role 
in surprisingly complex sex behaviors. Some of the best evidence comes 
from  studies  of  the  fruit  ﬂ y   Drosophila  melanogaster .  The  male  courts 
the female with an enticing set of behaviors, including orienting toward 
and  following  her,  singing  a  courtship  song,  and  tapping  her  with  his 
forelegs before attempting to mate. The female chooses whether to accept 
or reject the male’s advances. Evidently, these behaviors are genetically 
coded, as males know how to court even if they have never seen courtship 
by other ﬂ ies. Many genes may play some role in the courting behaviors, 
but there appear to be a very small number of critical regulatory genes 
(genes that regulate the expression of other genes). For example, the  fru  
gene (short for fruitless) may be essential for male courtship behaviors. In 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   605
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   605

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

606

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

males, the  fru  gene is expressed in a variety of cell types, and this leads to 
the develop ment of a male central nervous system. The male CNS devel-
ops such that male courtship behaviors automatically occur. In females 
without  fru  expression, a complete CNS also develops, but its wiring is 
somewhat different and female behaviors are “built in.” If the  fru  gene is 
absent in a male ﬂ y, male courtship behaviors are signiﬁ cantly reduced or 
nonexistent. Conversely, females made to express  fru  exhibit male court-
ship behaviors and resist courtship by males. 

 Another gene involved in sexual differentiation is  dsx  (for double sex). 
The  dsx  gene plays an important role in the sexual differentiation of the 
body (the development of male or female genitals) and also interacts with 
 fru  in controlling sexual differentiation of the CNS and sex-speciﬁ c be-
haviors.  In  the  case  of   fru ,  the  gene  is  either  expressed  (males)  or  not 
expressed (females). The  dsx  gene is different in that it is expressed in 
both males and females, but alternative splicing leads to the production 
of male-speciﬁ c and female-speciﬁ c proteins. How the  fru-  and  dsx -inﬂ u-
enced structure of the CNS assures sex-speciﬁ c behaviors is a challenging 
mystery yet to be explained in detail. 

 The Activational Effects of Sex Hormones 
 Long  after  sex  hormones  have  determined  the  structure  of  the  repro-
ductive  organs,  they  can  have  activational  effects  on  the  brain.  These 
effects  range  in  scale  from  temporary  modiﬁ cations  in  brain  organiza-
tion to changes in the structure of neurites. In men, testosterone has a 
two-way interaction with sexual behavior. On the one hand, testosterone 
levels rise in anticipation of a sexual act or even while fantasizing about 
it. Conversely, reduced testosterone levels are associated with decreased 
sexual interest. It has been reported that women are more likely to initi-
ate sex when estradiol levels are highest during their menstrual cycle. 
Through unknown mechanisms, hormone levels in both sexes inﬂ uence 
the brain and an individual’s interest in sexual behavior. 

 Brain Changes Associated with Maternal and Paternal Behavior. Patterns 
of sexual behavior vary over time. In some species, reproduction occurs 
only during a particular season, and mating may occur only during a spe-
ciﬁ c phase of that season. Obviously, females of all species nurse their off-
spring only after birth and only temporarily. In most animals, but not in 
humans, sexual attractiveness and copulation occur only during certain 
phases of the estrous cycle. Sexually dimorphic changes in the brain are 
sometimes  transient  or  cyclical,  coinciding  with  the  sexual  behavior  to 
which they are related. 

 In Chapter 16, we saw that appetite is controlled in part by blood levels of 
the hormone leptin that is secreted by fat cells: Higher leptin levels modu-
late cells in the hypothalamus and suppress eating. During pregnancy, the 
mother needs more food to supply energy for her growing fetus, and indeed, 
food intake increases early in pregnancy. Consequently, body fat accumu-
lates and leptin levels rise. Paradoxically, researchers have observed in rats 
that even though leptin levels rise during pregnancy, appetite and food in-
take increase rather than decrease. This occurs because hormonal changes 
associated with pregnancy lead to leptin resistance in the hypothalamus. 

 Another  behavior  unique  to  maternal  rats  occurs  with  lactation  and 
nursing. In female rats, the somatosensory cortex contains a sensory rep-
resentation of the ventral skin surrounding the nipples. Within a few days 
of the start of nursing, the tactile stimulation leads to a dramatic increase 
in the representation of the ventral skin (Figure 17.18) and a shrinkage 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   606
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   606

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

Nipple locations

(a)

HL

Tail

Hindlimb
(HL)

Ventral
surface

Primary
somatosensory
cortex

Tail

Dorsal surface

Hindlimb
(HL)

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

607

▲ FIGURE 17.18
The effect of lactation on a sensory 
representation in the cortex.  (a) The 
ventral skin of a nursing rat mother, 
showing the location of the nipples 
along the right side. (b) The rat’s brain 
and left primary somatosensory cortex, 
which contains a map of the right ventral 
skin (top). The boxed area, expanded 
below, illustrates how the cortical region 
that responds to the ventral skin around 
the nipples is enlarged in a postpartum 
lactating mother (left) compared to a 
postpartum nonlactating mother (right). 
Regions of somatosensory cortex sub-
serving other regions of the body were 
not affected by the lactating state. 
(Source: Adapted from Xerri et al., 1994.)

Tail

Dorsal 
surface

HL

FL

FL

(b)

Ventral
surface

FL

Neck

Forelimb
(FL)

Lactating

Ventral
surface

FL

FL

FL

Forelimb (FL)

Neck

Neck

Nonlactating

of receptive ﬁ elds to half their normal size. This interesting example of 
somatosensory map plasticity (see Chapter 12) appears to be temporary, 
as receptive ﬁ elds are normal in size several months after weaning. 

 Lactation also appears to lead to brain changes that reinforce this be-
havior, which is critical for the survival of mammalian offspring. Despite 
their very different pharmacological and behavioral effects, all addictive 
drugs appear to enhance the inﬂ uence of dopamine released by neurons 
projecting from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) into the nucleus accum-
bens (NA) (see Box 16.5). It is becoming increasingly clear that a variety of 
reinforcing or addictive behaviors also modify this VTA-NA circuit. In one 
study, fMRI scans of lactating female rats nursing their pups were com-
pared with those of virgin female rats after an injection of  cocaine. Brain 
activation was surprisingly similar in both, with particular   activation in 
the NA. The hypothesis is that in both instances, there is stimulation of the 
dopamine system associated with reward and addiction. The tactile stimu-
lation of the suckling pups may make nursing a reinforcing behavior to 
promote mother–infant bonding and, ultimately, the survival of the pups. 
 Even though fathers do not experience the dramatic body changes asso-
ciated with pregnancy and lactation, their interactions with children may 
alter their brains in fundamental ways. A hint of this comes from a study 
in Elizabeth Gould’s lab at Princeton University, where she examined the 
brains  of  marmosets.  Marmoset  fathers  are  unusually  involved  in  child 
care; indeed, they carry the babies around for the ﬁ rst few months of life. It 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   607
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   607

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

608

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

is known that across species, the prefrontal cortex is involved in complex, 
goal-directed behaviors. It is also established that environment can change 
neurons; for example, dendritic branching and spine density are enhanced 
when  animals  are  housed  in  an  enriched  environment.  To  see  whether 
fatherhood alters brain structure, Gould’s group compared the prefrontal 
cortex of marmoset fathers with that of non-fathers who were part of a 
mating pair. Two interesting differences were found: The density of den-
dritic  spines  on  pyramidal  cells  was  signiﬁ cantly  higher  in  the  fathers, 
and there appeared to be more vasopressin receptors on the spines. The 
functional consequences of these changes are not known, but they suggest 
that brains in other species that invest much time in childrearing, whether 
by the male or female, might be structurally changed by the experience. 

 Estrogen Effects on Neuron Function, Memory, and Disease. Estrogens 
have powerful activational effects on the structure and function of neurons. 
Within minutes of experimental application, estradiol alters the intrinsic 
excitability of neurons in a broad range of brain areas. By modulating the 
ﬂ ow of potassium ions, estradiol depolarizes some neurons and causes them 
to ﬁ re more action potentials. A dramatic example of the effects estrogen can 
have on cell structure is shown in Figure 17.19. Dominique Toran-Allerand 
at Columbia University found that estradiol treatment of tissue taken from 
the hypothalamus of newborn mice causes a great degree of neurite out-
growth. Other studies have shown that estradiol increases cell viability and 
spine density. Taken together, these ﬁ ndings suggest that estrogens play 
an important role in forming neuronal circuitry during brain development. 
 Working at Rockefeller University, Elizabeth Gould, Catherine Woolley, 
Bruce McEwen, and their colleagues reported a fascinating example of es-
tradiol’s activational effects. They counted dendritic spines on neurons in 
the hippocampus of female rats and found that the number of spines ﬂ uc-
tuated dramatically during the 5-day estrous cycle. Spine density and es-
tradiol levels peaked together, and treatment with injected estradiol also 
increased the numbers of spines in animals whose natural estradiol levels 
were kept low (Figure 17.20). Since spines are the major site of excitatory 
synapses on dendrites (see Chapter 2), this provides a possible  explanation 
for the fact that hippocampal excitability also seems to track the estrous 
cycle.  The  hippocampus  of  experimental  animals  more  easily  generates 
seizures, for example, when estrogen levels increase (Figure 17.21). Note 
that  estradiol  and  progesterone  levels  peak  during  the  proestrus  phase 
(Figure 17.21a,b) and at this time seizure thresholds are lowest (Figure 
17.21c). Woolley and McEwen showed that it is indeed estradiol itself that 
triggers the increase in spine numbers and that as hippocampal neurons 
grow more spines, they also grow more excitatory  synapses. 

 How does estradiol increase the numbers of hippocampal spines and ex-
citatory synapses? Although the details of this mechanism are not all clear, 
it appears that estradiol increases the capacity for synaptic plasticity in 
the hippocampus in multiple ways. In the presence of estradiol, postsyn-
aptic responses to glutamate are larger than without estradiol. As we will 
see in Chapter 25, such enhanced responses at excitatory synapses cause 
the  synapses  to  strengthen.  Estradiol  may  also  alter  hippocampal  func-
tion  by  decreasing  synaptic  inhibition.  Estradiol  causes  some  inhibitory 
cells to produce less GABA, their neurotransmitter, and therefore synaptic 
inhibition becomes less effective. Less inhibition increases neural activity, 
complementing the estradiol effect at excitatory synapses. When the pieces 
are put together, it seems that estradiol produces a hippocampus with less 
effective  inhibitory  synapses  and  stronger  excitatory  synapses,  thereby 
triggering an increase in the number of spines on the pyramidal cells. 

(a)

(b)
▲ FIGURE 17.19
The effect of estrogen on neurite 
growth in the hypothalamus.  Below the 
bottom of each photograph is a piece of 
hypothalamic tissue from a newborn 
mouse. (a) Without the addition of estro-
gen, a relatively small number of neurites 
grow from the tissue. (b) With the addi-
tion of estrogen, there is an exuberant 
growth of neurites. (Source: Toran- 
Allerand, 1980.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   608
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   608

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

609

Control

Estradiol-treated

10 µm

10 µm

50 µm

▲ FIGURE 17.20
An activational effect of steroid hormones.  Estradiol treatment causes an 
increase in the number of dendritic spines on hippocampal neurons. (Source: 
Adapted from Woolley et al., 1997.)

 In rats, the hippocampus is particularly important for spatial memory 
and navigational skills, and several studies demonstrate that estradiol en-
hances  such  forms  of  memory  formation.  In  these  experiments,  rats  are 
trained to run a maze or remember objects or places. Estradiol administered 
shortly before or after training enhances performance on these tasks when 
they are performed again hours later as a test of memory. It is interesting to 
note that the memory beneﬁ t associated with the  estradiol disappears if the 
estrogen is given 2 hours after training. Evidently, estrogens can facilitate 
memory, but they must be present near in time to the learning experience. 
 Woolley notes that the peak in hippocampal spine number coincides 
with the rat’s peak in fertility. During that period, the female actively 
seeks out mates, which may require the heightened spatial ability that 
might come with a more excitable, NMDA-receptor-ﬁ lled hippocampus. 
Thus, the female rat’s brain may ﬁ ne-tune itself on a 5-day cycle in order 
to meet changing reproductive needs. 

 Estradiol has also been shown to have a protective effect on neurons 
that may help combat disease. In neuronal cultures, cells are more likely 
to survive hypoxia, oxidative stress, and exposure to various neurotoxic 
agents  if  they  are  exposed  to  estradiol.  Clinically,  estrogen  appears  to 
minimize or delay neural damage in a variety of situations. For example, 
it may protect against stroke in humans, although the mechanism is un-
clear.  This  observation  could  be  related  to  the  ﬁ nding  that  tamoxifen, 
an  estrogen  receptor  antagonist  often  used  in  the  treatment  of  breast 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   609
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   609

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

610

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

50

40

30

20

10

0

30

20

10

0

250

200

150

100

50

0

E

D

D

P

E

E

D

D

P

E

Midnight

Noon

D

D

P

E

D

D

P

E

 

)
L
m
/
g
2
1
-
0
1
(
 
l
o
d
a
r
t
s
E

i

(a)

 

)
L
m
/
g
9
-
0
1
(
 
e
n
o
r
e
t
s
e
g
o
r
P

(b)

)

l

A
µ
(
 
d
o
h
s
e
r
h

t
 

e
r
u
z
e
S

i

(c)

▲ FIGURE 17.21
Fluctuations of hormone levels during the estrous cycle and hippocampal 
 seizure threshold.  The circulating levels of (a) estradiol and (b) progesterone vary 
during the estrous cycle. Levels of both hormones peak during the proestrus 
phase. (c) The threshold (in terms of stimulating current) for triggering a seizure in 
the hippocampus of a female rat varies over the estrous cycle and is lowest during 
the proestrus phase. The phases of the estrous cycle are D, diestrus; P, proestrus; 
E, estrous. (Sources: Parts a and b, Smith et al., 1975; part c, Terasawa et al., 1968.)

 cancer, is associated with an increased risk of stroke in women. Estrogen 
replacement  therapy  appears  to  aid  in  the  treatment  of  certain  neuro-
logical disorders. Researchers have observed that increased levels of sex 
hormones  during  pregnancy  are  associated  with  a  reduced  severity  of 
multiple sclerosis, and there is some evidence that estrogen may beneﬁ t 
women with multiple sclerosis. It also appears that estrogen replacement 
therapy might delay the onset of Alzheimer’s disease and decrease trem-
ors in Parkinson’s disease. The actions of estrogens in these diseases have 
been difﬁ cult to pin down, in part because a variety of cell types express 
estrogen receptors. Indeed, recent evidence suggests that the beneﬁ ts of 
estrogen may come from effects on astrocytes as well as neurons. 

 Sexual Orientation 
 Estimates are that about 3–10% of the American population is homosex-
ual. In light of the behavioral differences between, for example, male ho-
mosexuals and male heterosexuals, is the anatomy or physiology of the 

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   610
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   610

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

611

brain different? Is there a biological basis for sexual orientation? In some 
sense, this must be true if we believe that all behavior is based on brain 
activity. However, there is no evidence that sexual orientation is related 
to activational effects of hormones in adults. For example, administering 
androgens or estrogens to adults, or removing the gonads, has no effect 
on sexual orientation. As an alternative, perhaps homosexual and het-
erosexual brains are structurally different due to organizational effects. 
 We saw earlier that in animals, there are sex differences in the ante-
rior hypothalamus. In rats, the SDN (sexually dimorphic nucleus) in the 
preoptic area of the anterior hypothalamus is much larger in males than 
females. After a surgical lesion to this brain area, male rats spend more 
time  with  sexually  active  males  than  with  sexually  receptive  females, 
a  reversal  of  their  preference  before  surgery.  Another  piece  of  sugges-
tive  evidence  comes  from  studies  of  Rocky  Mountain  bighorn  sheep,  in 
which researchers estimate that about 8% of the male population prefers 
mounting other males rather than females. The SDN is found to be about 
half  the  size  in  these  male-oriented  rams  compared  to  female-oriented 
rams. Thus, it appears that the size of hypothalamic nuclei in some ani-
mals may correlate with sexual preference. Unfortunately, the causal re-
lationship between SDN size and sexual orientation is unclear. 

 In humans, the INAH-3 nucleus (one of the interstitial nuclei of the 
anterior hypothalamus) is about twice as large in men as in women, a dif-
ference that may be related to sexually dimorphic behavior. Some studies 
of the INAH suggest that there are differences between homosexual and 
heterosexual brains that might be related to sexual orientation. Simon 
LeVay,  then  working  at  the  Salk  Institute,  found  that  INAH-3  in  gay 
men is only half the size of the nucleus in straight men (Figure 17.22). 

Paraventricular
nucleus

Third
ventricle

Optic chiasm

3

4

1

2

(a)

(c)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 17.22
The location and size of INAH-3.  (a) The location of the four INAH nuclei in the 
hypothalamus. In the micrographs, arrows indicate INAH-3 in (b) a heterosexual 
man and (c) a homosexual man. In the homosexual, the nucleus is smaller and 
the cells more scattered. (Source: Micrographs from LeVay, 1991, p. 1035.)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   611
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   611

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

612

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

In other words, INAH-3 in homosexual men is similar in size to that of 
women. While this ﬁ nding may indicate a biological basis for homosexu-
ality, it is difﬁ cult to interpret this in terms of complex human behavior. 
Moreover,  subsequent  studies  have  not  always  conﬁ rmed  a  correlation 
between INAH-3 size and sexual orientation. 

 Other research has found the anterior commissure and suprachiasmatic 
nucleus to be larger in male homosexuals than in male heterosexuals. One 
study reported that the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis is larger in men 
than women and that male-to-female transsexuals have a nucleus com-
parable in size to females. Collectively, these studies offer the intriguing 
prospect that complex aspects of human sexual behavior may ultimately 
be linked to distinct brain organization. However, the difﬁ culties involved 
in comparing brains, as well as the history of brain dimorphisms, suggest 
that caution is advised until a research consensus is reached. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 The subject of sex and the brain is complicated by the subtleties of the biolog-
ical and cultural mechanisms that determine sexual behavior. Particularly 
in humans, anatomical differences between the female and male nervous 
systems are not readily apparent, and indeed, most human behavior is not 
distinctly masculine or feminine. Where small brain differences between 
the sexes occur, any adaptive purpose they may serve is not clear. And in 
no case is the neurobiological basis for sex differences in cognition known. 
 Nevertheless,  the  essential  biological  imperative—reproduction— 
demands sex-speciﬁ c behaviors, at least for mating and giving birth. For 
the most concretely sexual structures (such as the muscles and motor neu-
rons controlling the penis or the sensory afferents innervating the clitoris), 
identifying some of the peripheral and spinal neural systems involved is 
fairly easy. The powerful role of sex hormones in sexual development and 
behavior is also clear. But the more complex aspects of sexual behavior 
and the brain systems that generate them are still quite mysterious. 

 We have touched on only a few of the issues in the study of sex and 
the brain, and most of the basic questions remain unanswered. Scientiﬁ c 
 research  about  sex  was  long  hampered  by  society’s  reluctance  to  talk 
openly about the subject, and sexual politics still tend to muddy the sci-
entiﬁ c waters today. But sexual behavior is a deﬁ ning feature of being 
human, and understanding its neural basis is a worthy challenge. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Sex and Gender
gender identity (p. 581)
genotype (p. 581)
genetic sex (p. 581)
sex-determining region of 

the Y chromosome (SRY) 
(p. 582)

The Hormonal Control of Sex
androgens (p. 584)
estrogens (p. 584)
luteinizing hormone (LH) 

(p. 585)

follicle-stimulating hormone 

(FSH) (p. 585)

gonadotropins (p. 585)
gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH) (p. 585)

menstrual cycle (p. 586)
estrous cycle (p. 587)

The Neural Basis of Sexual 
Behaviors
polygyny (p. 590)
polyandry (p. 590)
monogamy (p. 590)

Why and How Male and Female 
Brains Differ
sexual dimorphisms (p. 595)
sexually dimorphic nucleus 

(SDN) (p. 597)

interstitial nuclei of the anterior 
hypothalamus (INAH) (p. 597)

organizational effects (p. 599)
activational effects (p. 599)
␣-fetoprotein (p. 600)

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   612
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   612

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER 17    SEX AND THE BRAIN

613

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Suppose you have just been captured by aliens who have landed on Earth to learn about humans. 
The aliens are all one sex, and they are curious about the two human sexes. To earn your free-
dom, all you must do is tell them how to reliably distinguish between males and females. What 
biological and/or behavioral tests do you tell them to conduct? Be sure to describe any exceptions 
that might violate your tests; you don’t want the aliens to get angry!

2.  Figure 17.18 shows an interesting but unexplained observation: In the brain of a mother rat 
during periods of lactation, the size of the somatosensory cortex representing the skin around 
the nipples expands. Speculate about a likely mechanism for this phenomenon. Suggest a reason 
why such brain plasticity might be advantageous.

3.  Estradiol is usually described as a female sex hormone, but it also plays a critical role in the 
early development of the male brain. Explain how this happens and why the female brain is not 
similarly affected by estradiol at the same stage of development.

4.  Where and how can steroid hormones inﬂ uence neurons in the brain at the cellular level?
5.  What evidence supports the hypothesis that sexual differentiation of the body and brain is not 

entirely dependent on sex hormones?

6.  Suppose that a research team has just claimed that a small, obscure nucleus in the brain stem, 
nucleus  X,  is  sexually  dimorphic  and  essential  for  certain  “uniquely  male”  sexual  behaviors. 
Discuss the kinds of evidence you would need to accept these claims about (a) the existence of a 
dimorphism, (b) the deﬁ nitions of uniquely male behaviors, and (c) the involvement of nucleus X 
in these sexual behaviors.

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   
F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   
Arnold AP. 2004. Sex chromosomes and brain gen-

der. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5:701–708.
Bartels A, Zeki S. 2004. The neural correlates 
of maternal and romantic love. Neuroimage 
21:1155–1166.

Colapinto J. 2001. As Nature Made Him: The Boy 
Who Was Raised as a Girl. New York: Harper 
Collins.

De Boer A, van Buel EM, ter Horst GJ. 2012. 

Love is more than just a kiss: a neurobiological 
perspective on love and affection. Neuroscience 
201:114–124.

Hines M. 2011. Gender development and the 

human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience 
34:69–88.

Pfaus JG. 2009. Pathways of sexual desire. 
Journal of Sexual Medicine 6:1506–1533.

Valente SM, LeVay S. 2003. Human Sexuality. 

Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.

Wooley CS. 2007. Acute effects of estrogen 

on neuronal physiology. Annual Review of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology 47:657–680.
Wu MV, Shah NM. 2011. Control of masculin-
ization of the brain and behavior. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology 21:116–123.

Young KA, Gobrogge KL, Liu Y, Wang Z. 2011. 

The neurobiology of pair bonding: insights 
from a socially monogamous rodent. Frontiers 
in Neuroendocrinology 32:53–69.

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   613
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   613

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   614
579–614_Bear_17_revised_final.indd   614

12/20/14   5:37 AM
12/20/14   5:37 AM

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Brain Mechanisms 
of Emotion

INTRODUCTION
EARLY THEORIES OF EMOTION

The James–Lange Theory
The Cannon–Bard Theory

 BOX 18.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Butterﬂ ies in the Stomach

Implications of Unconscious Emotion

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM

Broca’s Limbic Lobe
The Papez Circuit

 BOX 18.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Phineas Gage

Difﬁ culties with the Concept of a Single System for Emotions

EMOTION THEORIES AND NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS

Basic Emotion Theories
Dimensional Emotion Theories
What is an Emotion?

 BOX 18.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Concepts and Names in Everyday Science, 
by Antonio Damasio

FEAR AND THE AMYGDALA

The Klüver–Bucy Syndrome
Anatomy of the Amygdala
Effects of Amygdala Stimulation and Lesions
A Neural Circuit for Learned Fear

ANGER AND AGGRESSION
The Amygdala and Aggression

Surgery to Reduce Human Aggression
 BOX 18.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Frontal Lobotomy

Neural Components of Anger and Aggression Beyond the Amygdala

Anger, Aggression, and the Hypothalamus
The Midbrain and Aggression

Serotonergic Regulation of Anger and Aggression

CONCLUDING REMARKS

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   615
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   615

615615
615615

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

616

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 To appreciate the signiﬁ cance of emotions, just imagine life without them. 
Instead of the daily highs and lows we all experience, life would likely feel 
like a great empty plain of existence with little signiﬁ cance. Emotional 
experiences are a large part of being human. In books and movies, aliens 
and robots may look like people, but they usually seem inhuman simply 
because they exhibit no emotions. 

Affective  neuroscience   is  the  investigation  of  the  neural  basis  of 
emotion and mood. In this chapter, we explore emotion. Affective disor-
ders,  also  known  as  mood  disorders,  are  discussed  in  Chapter  22.  You 
might be wondering how we can study something as ephemeral as one’s 
feelings. When studying a sensory system, in contrast, you can present 
a  stimulus  and  seek  the  neurons  that  respond  to  it.  You  can  manipu-
late  the  stimulus  to  determine  the  stimulus  attributes  (light  intensity, 
sound frequency, etc.) that are best for evoking a response. It is not as 
straightforward  to  study  emotions  in  animals  that  cannot  tell  us  their 
subjective feelings, however. What we observe are behaviors presumed 
to be expressions of internal emotions. We must be careful to distinguish 
between emotional  experience  (feelings) and emotional  expression . What 
we know about the brain mechanisms of emotion has been derived from 
a synthesis of animal and human studies. In animals, brain activity and 
the effects of brain lesions on behavior have been noted and interpreted 
in the context of emotions, even though we cannot determine the animals’ 
feelings. Studies in humans have examined brain activity associated with 
emotional experience and the recognition of emotion in others. 

 We are not yet at a stage where we can map out an emotion system the 
same way that sensory systems have been outlined. Indeed, we will see 
that earlier ideas about a single emotion system or multiple systems in-
volving brain areas dedicated to particular emotions have been replaced 
by theories in which emotions are based on distributed networks of brain 
activity. 

 EARLY THEORIES OF EMOTION 
 EARLLY THEEORIES OF EMOTIOON 

 Emotions—love, hate, happiness, sadness, fear, anxiety, and so on—are 
feelings  we  all  experience  at  one  time  or  another.  But  what  precisely 
deﬁ nes  those  feelings?  Are  they  sensory  signals  from  our  body,  diffuse 
patterns of activity in our cortex, or something else? 

 In the nineteenth century, several highly regarded scientists, includ-
ing Darwin and Freud, considered the role of the brain in the expression 
of emotion (Figure 18.1). This early research was based on the careful 
study  of  emotional  expression  in  animals  and  humans  and  emotional 

▲ FIGURE 18.1
Expressions of anger in animals and 
humans. These drawings are from Dar-
win’s book The Expression of the Emo-
tions in Man and Animals; they were used 
to support his claim that there are basic 
universal emotions. Darwin conducted 
one of the first extensive studies of emo-
tional expression. Reproduced with per-
mission from John van Wyhe, ed. 2002. 
The Complete Work of Charles Darwin 
Online. (http://darwin-online.org.uk/)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   616
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   616

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

617

 experience  in  humans.  It  may  seem  like  common  sense  to  many  now, 
but  Darwin  made  the  important  observations  that  people  in  different 
cultures experience the same emotions and that animals appear to ex-
press some of the same emotions as humans. Later in the nineteenth and 
twentieth  centuries,  scientists  developed  theories  for  the  physiological 
basis of emotion and the relationship between emotional expression and 
experience. 

 The James–Lange Theory 
 One of the ﬁ rst well-articulated theories of emotion was proposed in 1884 
by the renowned American psychologist and philosopher William James. 
Similar ideas were proposed by Danish psychologist Carl Lange. This the-
ory, commonly known as the  James–Lange theory  of emotion,  proposed 
that we experience emotion  in response to  physiological changes in our 
body. To understand why many contemporaries of James and Lange con-
sidered this idea counterintuitive, consider an example. 

 Suppose you wake one morning to ﬁ nd a malicious-looking spider hang-
ing from a web above your bed. If you like many people have arachnopho-
bia, you may experience a ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight response that involves changes 
in heart rate, muscle tone, and lung function (see Chapter 15). According 
to  the  James–Lange  theory,  your  visual  system  sends  an  image  of  the 
spider to your brain and in response the brain issues commands to the so-
matic and autonomic nervous systems that alter muscle and organ func-
tion. These responses of the body follow directly from the sensory input 
without any emotional component. The emotion you experience consists 
of your feelings that result from the changes in the body. In other words, 
rather than jumping out of bed in response to being scared, you actually 
feel scared because you become aware of your racing heart and tensed 
muscles.  This  seems  like  a  backward  idea  to  many  people  today,  as  it 
did to many contemporaries of James and Lange. Until this theory was 
proposed,  the  common  conception  was  that  an  emotion  is  evoked  by  a 
situation and the body changes in response to the emotion: You become 
scared  when  you  see  a  spider  and  then  your  body  reacts.  The  James–
Lange theory is the exact opposite. 

 Consider one of the thought experiments suggested by James. Suppose 
you are boiling with anger about something that has just happened. Try 
to strip away all the physiological changes associated with the emotion. 
Your  pounding  heart  is  calmed,  your  tensed  muscles  are  relaxed,  and 
your ﬂ ushed face is cooled. As James said, it is hard to imagine maintain-
ing rage in the absence of any of these physiological responses. 

 Even if it is true that emotion follows from changes in the body’s physi-
ological state, this doesn’t mean that emotion cannot be felt in the ab-
sence of obvious physiological signs (a point even James and Lange would 
concede). But for strong emotions that are typically associated with phys-
ical change, the James–Lange theory says the bodily changes cause the 
emotion rather than the other way around. 

 The Cannon–Bard Theory 
 Although  the  James–Lange  theory  became  popular  in  the  early  twen-
tieth  century,  it  soon  came  under  attack.  In  1927,  American  physiolo-
gist  Walter  Cannon  published  a  paper  that  offered  several  compelling 
criticisms  of  the  James–Lange  theory  and  proposed  a  new  theory. 
Cannon’s theory was modiﬁ ed by Philip Bard and became known as the 
 Cannon–Bard theory  of emotion. It proposed that emotional experience 
can occur independently of emotional expression. 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   617
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   617

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

618

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 One  of  Cannon’s  arguments  against  the  James–Lange  theory  was 
that  emotions  can  be  experienced  even  if  physiological  changes  cannot 
be sensed. To support this claim, he offered the cases of animals he and 
 others studied after transection of the spinal cord. Such surgery elimi-
nated body sensations below the level of the cut, but it did not appear to 
abolish emotion. To the extent possible with muscular control of just the 
upper body or head, the animals still exhibited signs of experiencing emo-
tions. Similarly, Cannon noted human cases in which a transected spinal 
cord did not diminish emotion. If emotional experience occurs when the 
brain senses physiological changes in the body, as the James–Lange the-
ory proposed, then eliminating sensation should also eliminate emotions, 
and this did not appear to be the case. 

 A  second  observation  of  Cannon’s  that  seems  inconsistent  with  the 
James–Lange theory is the lack of a reliable correlation between the ex-
perience of emotion and the physiological state of the body. For example, 
fear is accompanied by increased heart rate, inhibited digestion, and in-
creased sweating. However, these same physiological changes accompany 
other emotions, such as anger, and even nonemotional conditions of ill-
ness, such as fever. How can fear be a consequence of the physiological 
changes when these same changes are associated with states other than 
fear? 

 Cannon’s  new  theory  focused  on  the  idea  that  the  thalamus  plays  a 
special  role  in  emotional  sensations.  The  theory  proposes  that  sensory 
input is received by the cerebral cortex, which in turn activates certain 
changes  in  the  body.  But  according  to  Cannon,  this  stimulus–response 
neural  loop  is  devoid  of  emotion.  Emotions  are  produced  when  signals 
reach the thalamus either directly from the sensory receptors or by de-
scending cortical input. In other words, the character of the emotion is 
 determined by the pattern of activation of the thalamus irrespective of 
the physiological response to the sensory input. An example may clarify 
the difference between this and the James–Lange theory. According to 
James and Lange, you feel sad when you sense that you are crying; if you 
could prevent the crying, the sadness should go, too. In Cannon’s theory, 
you don’t have to cry to feel sad; there simply has to be the appropriate ac-
tivation of your thalamus in response to the situation. The James–Lange 
and Cannon–Bard theories of emotion are compared in Figure 18.2. 

▲ FIGURE 18.2
A comparison of the James–Lange 
and Cannon–Bard theories of  emotion. 
In the James–Lange theory (red arrows), 
the man perceives the threatening ani-
mal and reacts. When he senses his 
body’s response to the situation, he be-
comes afraid. In the Cannon–Bard the-
ory (blue arrows), the threatening 
 stimulus first causes the feeling of fear, 
and the man’s reaction follows.

Emotional
experience (fear)

r d  
a
n - B
C a n n o
o r y  
      th e

Sensory
stimulus

Stimulus
perceived

James-Lang
    theory 

Emotional expression
(somatic, visceral response)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   618
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   618

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

619

 Many  theories  of  emotion  have  been  proposed  since  the  days  of  the 
James–Lange  and  Cannon–Bard  theories.  Subsequent  work  has  dem-
onstrated  that  each  of  the  older  theories  has  merits  as  well  as  ﬂ aws. 
For instance, contrary to Cannon’s statements, fear and rage have been 
shown  to  be  associated  with  distinguishable  physiological  responses, 
even though they both activate the sympathetic division of the autonomic 
 nervous  system  (ANS).  Although  this  does  not  prove  that  these  emo-
tions  result  from  distinct  physiological  responses,  the  responses  are  at 
least different (Box 18.1). Research has also shown that to some extent 
we  can  be  aware  of  our  body’s  autonomic  function  (called   interoceptive 
 awareness ), a key component of the James–Lange theory. For example, 
people have been shown to be capable of judging the timing of their heart-
beat, and increased activity is found in certain brain areas when this task 
is  performed. 

 Another  interesting  challenge  to  the  Cannon–Bard  theory,  demon-
strated by later studies, is that emotion is sometimes affected by dam-
age  to  the  spinal  cord.  In  one  study  of  adult  men  with  spinal  injuries, 
there was a correlation between the extent of sensory loss and reported 
decreases in emotional experiences, although other studies of people with 
spinal injuries have not always found a similar correlation. Shortly, we 
will examine more recent theories of emotion in the context of experimen-
tal results that suggest the brain structures involved in the experience 
and expression of emotion. 

 Implications of Unconscious Emotion 
 Although the ﬁ ndings may be counterintuitive, some studies suggest that 
sensory input can have emotional effects on the brain without our being 
aware of the stimuli. Several related experiments were conducted by Arne 
Öhman, Ray Dolan, and their colleagues in Sweden and England. They 
ﬁ rst showed that if an angry face is brieﬂ y ﬂ ashed and quickly followed 
by a brieﬂ y ﬂ ashed photo of an expressionless face, subjects report see-
ing only the expressionless face. The angry face is said to be perceptually 
“masked,” and the expressionless face is the masking stimulus. 

 In one experiment, subjects were shown a variety of faces without a 
masking stimulus; and each time an angry face was shown, the subject’s 
ﬁ nger got a mild electrical shock. After aversive conditioning like this, 
subjects  exhibited  altered  autonomic  activity,  such  as  increased  skin 
conductance  (sweaty  palms),  when  the  angry  faces  were  shown  again. 
The researchers were interested in what happens when the angry faces 
are occasionally shown after training but the masking stimulus is rein-
troduced. Surprisingly, when angry faces were shown, the subjects had 
an autonomic response (increased skin conductance), even though they 
were unaware of the angry faces. These ﬁ ndings indicate that the sub-
jects responded to the angry expressions on the aversive face stimuli even 
though they were not perceptually aware of seeing the faces at all. The 
concept of an  unconscious emotion  is based on this observation. 

 In  a  second  experiment,  subjects  were  shown  angry  faces  with  or 
without  a  loud  unpleasant  sound  (Figure  18.3).  As  before,  the  subjects 
did  not  perceive  the  angry  faces  when  a  subsequent  masking  stimulus 
was presented. Nonetheless, skin conductance showed that the subjects 
responded  to  the  angry  faces  that  had  been  paired  with  the  sound.  In 
addition, positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was used to re-
cord  brain  activity  while  the  photos  were  presented.  The  brain  images 
 revealed that the angry faces conditioned to be unpleasant evoked greater 
activity in the brain in a particular location, the amygdala. We will have 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   619
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   619

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

620

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 18.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Butterflies in the Stomach

Human language has colorful ways of describing emotional 

experiences. If someone hesitates before bungee jumping off 
a high bridge, we describe their fear by saying they have “cold 
feet.” At the other end of the temperature spectrum, a per-
son who readily becomes angry is described as a “hot head.” 
Nervous before going out with someone new? You may be 
experiencing “butterﬂ ies in the stomach.” These descriptive 
terms are fun, but do they have the slightest relationship to 
the physiological experience of emotion?

An  intriguing  study  conducted  by  scientists  at  Aalto 
University in Finland suggests that basic emotions and some 
other emotions may indeed be associated with unique maps 
of  sensory  changes  spread  across  the  body.  This  conclu-
sion was reached based on online testing of over 700 people 
in Finland, Sweden, and Taiwan. In order to itemize which 
parts  of  the  body  were  felt  to  be  affected  by  an  emotion, 
the experimenters asked participants to color a map of the 
body  using  warm  colors  where  they  felt  an  emotion  made 
the body more active and cool colors where the body was 
made  less  active.  Emotion  maps  were  made  in  response 
to  a  variety  of  stimuli  including  emotion  words,  pictures  of 
emotional facial expressions, emotional experiences in short 
stories, and emotional scenes in movies. The hope was that 
by studying participants in different cultures and languages, 

universal  emotional  experiences  could  be  mapped  rather 
than cultural stereotypes.

The ﬁ gure shows maps of presumptive body activity av-
eraged across many observers. Red and yellow indicate el-
evated activity, and blue reduced activity, relative to a neutral 
(black) state. Some traits, such as elevated head and chest 
activity (elevated heart and respiration rates?), were common 
to multiple emotions. Other characteristics were more unique. 
Happiness was unusual in the extent to which the entire body 
showed increased activity, and sadness had a unique lower-
ing  of  activity  in  the  extremities.  The  body  map  for  disgust 
had an odd elevation in activity around the digestive tract and 
throat  (a  gag  reﬂ ex?).  What  do  these  colorful  maps  repre-
sent? We can only speculate, but perhaps they are related to 
patterns of sensation and activation in the autonomic nervous 
system.  Obviously,  one  has  to  be  cautious  interpreting  the 
maps, but it is intriguing that the different emotion maps are 
distinguishable,  and  this  was  even  true  to  some  extent  for 
emotions not considered “basic.” Also interesting is the ﬁ nd-
ing that the emotion maps are similar across cultures. Even 
though we can’t take a snapshot of butterﬂ ies in the stomach, 
these ﬁ ndings are consistent with Darwin’s idea that at least 
some  emotions  are  unique  experiences  that  are  universal 
across cultures.

Anger

Fear

Disgust

Happiness Sadness

Surprise

Neutral

Figure A
 Color maps of six basic emotions. Estimates of body activation range from low (blue) to high (yellow). (Source: Adapted 
from Nummenmaa L, Glerean E, Hari R, Hietanen JK. 2014. Bodily maps of emotions. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science 111:646–651, Figure 1.)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   620
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   620

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

621

Perception: Expressionless face
ANS: No effect

Perception: Expressionless face
ANS: Increased skin conductance

+

Perception: Angry face
ANS: Increased skin conductance

(b) Testing

Unpleasant
sound

(a) Conditioning

(c) Brain activity

▲ FIGURE 18.3
Unconscious emotional brain activity. (a) Human subjects were conditioned 
 using photos of expressionless and angry faces. Subjects responded to the angry 
face, paired with a loud unpleasant sound, with increased ANS activity (skin 
 conductance). (b) In the testing phase, an angry face was shown briefly, followed 
immediately by an expressionless face. Subjects reported seeing only the 
 expressionless face, but increased skin conductance still occurred. (c) Despite 
the fact that the angry face was not perceived in the testing phase, amygdala 
 activation (red and yellow) occurred only when an angry face preceded the mask-
ing stimulus. (Source: Morris, Öhman, and Dolan, 1998.)

more to say about the amygdala later in the chapter. For now, the im-
portant point to remember is that measures of both autonomic response 
and amygdala activity correlate with the presentation of angry faces that 
are  conditioned to be unpleasant despite the fact that the faces are not 
perceived. 

 If sensory signals can have emotional impact on the brain without our 
being  aware  of  it,  this  seems  to  rule  out  theories  of  emotion  in  which 
emotional experience is a prerequisite for emotional expression. But even 
with this conclusion, there are many possible ways for the brain to pro-
cess emotional information. We now turn to the pathways in the brain 
that link sensations (inputs) to the behavioral responses (outputs) that 
characterize emotional experience. In the remainder of this chapter, we 
will see that different emotions may depend on different neural circuits, 
but some parts of the brain are important for multiple emotions. 

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM 
THE LLIMBICC SYSTEM 

 Previous chapters discussed how sensory information from peripheral re-
ceptors is processed along clearly deﬁ ned, anatomically distinct pathways 
to the neocortex. The components of a pathway collectively  constitute a 
system . For example, neurons located in the retina, lateral geniculate nu-
cleus, and striate cortex work together to serve vision, so we say they are 
part of the visual system. Is there a system, in this sense, that processes the 
experiencing of emotions? Beginning around 1930, some scientists argued 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   621
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   621

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

622

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Cingulate gyrus

Cut edge
of corpus
callosum

Temporal lobe
(medial surface)

Cut edge of 
brain stem

Hippocampus

▲ FIGURE 18.4
The limbic lobe. Broca defined the  limbic lobe as the structures that form a ring 
around the brain stem and corpus callosum on the medial walls of the brain. The 
main structures in the limbic lobe labeled here are the cingulate  gyrus, medial 
temporal cortex, and the hippocampus. The brain stem has been removed in the 
illustration to make the medial surface of the temporal lobe  visible.

that there is, and it came to be known as the limbic system. Shortly, we 
will discuss the difﬁ culties of trying to deﬁ ne a single system for emotion. 
But ﬁ rst, let’s examine the origin of the limbic system concept. 

 Broca’s Limbic Lobe 
 In a paper published in 1878, French neurologist Paul Broca noted that, 
on the medial surface of the cerebrum, all mammals have a group of corti-
cal areas that are distinctly different from the surrounding cortex. Using 
the Latin word for “border” ( limbus ), Broca named this collection of cor-
tical areas the  limbic lobe  because they form a ring or border around 
the brain stem (Figure 18.4). According to this deﬁ nition, the limbic lobe 
consists of the cortex around the corpus callosum (mainly the cingulate 
gyrus), the cortex on the medial surface of the temporal lobe, and the hip-
pocampus. Broca did not write about the importance of these structures 
for emotion, and for some time, they were thought to be primarily involved 
in olfaction. However, the word  limbic , and the structures in Broca’s lim-
bic lobe, were subsequently closely associated with emotion. 

 The Papez Circuit 
 By  the  1930s,  evidence  suggested  that  a  number  of  limbic  structures 
are involved in emotion. Reﬂ ecting on the earlier work of Cannon, Bard, 
and  others,  American  neurologist  James  Papez  proposed  that  there  is 
an “emotion system,” lying on the medial wall of the brain that links the 
cortex with the hypothalamus. Figure 18.5 shows the group of structures 
that have come to be called the  Papez circuit . Each is connected to an-
other by a major ﬁ ber tract. 

 Papez believed, as do many scientists today, that the cortex is critically 
involved in the experience of emotion. Following damage to certain corti-
cal areas, there are sometimes profound changes in emotional expression 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   622
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   622

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

623

Neocortex

Fornix

Neocortex

Emotional coloring

Cingulate
cortex

Anterior 
nuclei of
thalamus

Hypothalamus

Hippocampus

Cingulate

cortex

Emotional experience

Anterior nuclei

of thalamus

Hippocampus

Fornix

Hypothalamus

Emotional expression

▲ FIGURE 18.5
The Papez circuit. Papez believed that the experience of emotion was deter-
mined by activity in the cingulate cortex and, less directly, other cortical areas. 
Emotional expression was thought to be governed by the hypothalamus. The cin-
gulate cortex projects to the hippocampus, and the hippocampus projects to the 
hypothalamus by way of the bundle of axons called the fornix. Hypothalamic 
 effects reach the cortex via a relay in the anterior thalamic nuclei.

with little change in perception or intelligence (Box 18.2). Also, tumors 
located near the cingulate cortex are associated with certain emotional 
disturbances, including fear, irritability, and depression. Papez proposed 
that  activity  evoked  in  other  neocortical  areas  by  projections  from  the 
cingulate cortex adds “emotional coloring” to our  experiences. 

 We saw in Chapter 15 that the hypothalamus integrates the actions of 
the ANS. In the Papez circuit, the hypothalamus governs the behavioral 
expression of emotion. The hypothalamus and neocortex are arranged so 
that each can inﬂ uence the other, thus linking the expression and experi-
ence of emotion. In the circuit, the cingulate cortex affects the hypothala-
mus via the hippocampus and fornix (the large bundle of axons leaving the 
hippocampus), whereas the hypothalamus affects the cingulate cortex via 
the  anterior  thalamus.  The  fact  that  communication  between  the  cortex 
and hypothalamus is bidirectional means that the Papez circuit is compat-
ible with both the James–Lange and the Cannon–Bard theories of emotion. 
 While  anatomical  studies  demonstrated  that  the  components  of  the 
Papez circuit were interconnected as Papez had indicated, there was only 
suggestive evidence that each was involved in emotion. One reason Papez 
thought the hippocampus is involved in emotion is that it is affected by 
the virus responsible for rabies. An indication of rabies infection, and an 
aid  in  its  diagnosis,  is  the  presence  of  abnormal  cytoplasmic  bodies  in 
neurons, especially in the hippocampus. Because rabies is characterized 
by  hyperemotional  responses  such  as  exaggerated  fear  and  aggressive-
ness, Papez reasoned that the hippocampus must be involved in normal 
emotional experience. Although little evidence related to the role of the 
anterior thalamus, other clinical reports at the time stated that lesions 
in this area led to apparent emotional disturbances, such as spontaneous 
laughing and crying. 

 You may have noticed the correlation between the elements compos-
ing the Papez circuit and Broca’s limbic lobe. Because of their similarity, 
the group of structures in the Papez circuit are often referred to as the 
 limbic system , even though Broca’s anatomical notion of the limbic lobe 
originally had nothing to do with emotion. The term  limbic system  was 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   623
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   623

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

624

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 18.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Phineas Gage

Brain damage can sometimes have a profound inﬂ uence 

on  a  person’s  personality.  One  of  the  most  famous  exam-
ples is the case of Phineas Gage. On September 13, 1848, 
while  tamping  explosive  powder  into  a  hole  to  prepare  for 
blasting  at  a  railroad  construction  site  in  Vermont,  Phineas 
made the mistake of looking away from what he was doing. 
His  tamping  iron  hit  a  rock  and  sparked  an  explosion.  The 
consequences are described by Dr. John Harlow in an 1848 
article entitled “Passage of an Iron Rod Through the Head.” 
When the charge went off, it sent Phineas’s meter-long, 6-kg 
iron tamping rod into his head just below his left eye. After 
passing through his left frontal lobe, the rod exited the top of 
Gage’s head.

Incredibly, after being carried to an ox cart, Gage sat up-
right  on  the  ride  to  a  nearby  hotel  and  walked  up  a  long 
ﬂ ight of stairs to go inside. When Harlow ﬁ rst saw Gage at 
the hotel, he commented that “the picture presented was, to 
one unaccustomed to military surgery, truly terriﬁ c” (p. 390). 
As  you  might  imagine,  the  projectile  destroyed  a  consid-
erable  portion  of  the  skull  and  left  frontal  lobe,  and  Gage 
lost a great deal of blood. The hole through his head was 
more than 9 cm in diameter. Harlow was able to stick the full 
length of his index ﬁ nger into the hole from the top of Gage’s 
head, and also upward from the hole in his cheek. Harlow 
dressed  the  wound  as  best  he  could.  Over  the   following 

Figure A
 Phineas Gage and the rod that passed through his brain. 
(Source: Wikimedia.)

 popularized in 1952 by American physiologist Paul MacLean. According 
to MacLean, the evolution of a limbic system enabled animals to experi-
ence and express emotions and freed them from the stereotypical  behavior 
dictated by their brain stem. 

 Difﬁ culties with the Concept of a Single System for 
Emotions 
 We have deﬁ ned a group of interconnected anatomical structures roughly 
encircling the brain stem as a limbic system. Experimental work supports 
the hypothesis that some of the structures in Broca’s limbic lobe and the 
Papez circuit play a role in emotion. On the other hand, some of the com-
ponents of the Papez circuit are no longer thought to be important for the 
expression of emotion, such as the hippocampus. 

 The critical point seems to be conceptual, concerning the deﬁ nition of 
an emotion system. Given the diversity of emotions, we experience and 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   624
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   624

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

weeks,  considerable  infection  developed.  No  one  would 
have  been  surprised  if  the  man  died.  But  about  a  month 
after the accident, he was out of bed and walking around 
town.

Harlow corresponded with Gage’s family for many years 
and  in  1868  published  a  second  article,  “Recovery  from 
the  Passage  of  an  Iron  Bar  Through  the  Head,”  describing 
Gage’s life after the accident. After Gage recovered from his 
wounds, he was apparently normal except for one thing: His 
personality was drastically and permanently changed. When 
he tried to return to his old job as construction foreman, the 
company found he had changed so much for the worse that 
they wouldn’t rehire him. According to Harlow, before the ac-
cident Gage was considered “the most efﬁ cient and capable 
foreman. . . . He possessed a well-balanced mind, and was 

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

625

looked  upon  by  those  who  knew  him  as  a  shrewd,  smart 
business man, very persistent in executing all his plans of op-
eration” (pp. 339–340). After the accident, Harlow described 
him as follows:

The  equilibrium  or  balance,  so  to  speak,  between 
his intellectual faculties and animal propensities, seems 
to  have  been  destroyed.  He  is  ﬁ tful,  irreverent,  indulg-
ing  at  times  in  the  grossest  profanity  (which  was  not 
previously  his  custom),  manifesting  but  little  deference 
for  his  fellows,  impatient  of  restraint  or  advice  when  it 
conﬂ icts  with  his  desires,  at  times  pertinaciously  obsti-
nate, yet capricious and vacillating, devising many plans 
of future operation, which are no sooner arranged than 
they  are  abandoned  in  turn  for  others  appearing  more 
feasible. . . . His mind was radically changed, so decid-
edly that his friends and acquaintances said he was “no 
longer Gage.” (pp. 339–340)

Phineas lived for another 12 years; when he died, no au-
topsy was performed. However, Gage’s skull and the tamp-
ing iron have been preserved in a museum at Harvard Medical 
School. In 1994, Hanna and Antonio Damasio and their col-
leagues at the University of Iowa made new measurements of 
the skull and used modern imaging techniques to assess the 
damage to Gage’s brain. Their reconstruction of the tamping 
iron’s path is shown in Figure A. The iron rod severely dam-
aged  the  cerebral  cortex  in  both  hemispheres,  particularly 
the frontal lobes. It was presumably this damage that led to 
Gage’s  emotional  outbursts  and  the  drastic  changes  in  his 
personality.

Figure B
The path of the iron rod through Gage’s skull. (Source: Damasio et al., 
1994, p. 1104.)

the different brain activity associated with each, there is no compelling 
reason  to  think  that  only  one  system,  rather  than  several,  is  involved. 
Conversely,  solid  evidence  indicates  that  some  structures  involved  in 
emotion are also involved in other functions; there is not a one-to-one re-
lationship between structure and function in this case. Although the term 
limbic system  is still commonly used in discussions of brain mechanisms 
of  emotion,  it  has  become  increasingly  clear  that  there  is  not  a  single, 
discrete emotion system. 

EMOTION THEORIES AND NEURAL 
EMOTTION TTHEORIES AND NEEURAL 
REPRRESENNTATIONS 
REPRESENTATIONS 

 Early theories of emotion and subsequent descriptions of the limbic sys-
tem were built on a combination of introspection and inference based pri-
marily on instances of brain injury and brain disease: If damage to a brain 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   625
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   625

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

626

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

structure  alters  the  experience  or  expression  of  emotion,  we  infer  that 
the structure is important for normal emotional function. Unfortunately, 
studies of disease and the consequences of lesions are not ideal for reveal-
ing  normal  function. Before getting into the nitty-gritty of experiments 
investigating  neural  mechanisms  of  emotion,  it  may  be  helpful  to  con-
sider the representation of emotions from a broad perspective. 

 Basic Emotion Theories 
 If the limbic system is not a monolithic system for the experience and ex-
pression of all emotions, as now seems the case, another possibility that 
has been explored is that some emotions are at least associated with dis-
tinct patterns of activity in the brain and unique physiological responses 
in the body (see Box 18.1). In  basic theories of emotion , certain emo-
tions are thought to be unique, indivisible experiences that are innate 
and universal across cultures, an idea that seems a logical extension of 
Darwin’s  early  observations  on  the  universality  of  a  small  number  of 
emotions. Commonly, these  basic emotions  are considered anger, dis-
gust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise. From a neural perspective, 
one might hypothesize that basic emotions have distinct representations 
or circuits in the brain, perhaps analogous to distinct representations 
for sensory experiences. For example, it has been claimed that sadness 
correlates  best  with  activity  in  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex  and  fear 
with activity in the amygdala. In a moment, we will take an in-depth 
look at evidence suggesting a special role for the amygdala in fear. But 
ﬁ rst, let’s look into the general question of brain activity associated with 
emotion. 

 One way to get a broad perspective on the representation of emotion is 
to compare human functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or PET 
brain recordings while people experience different emotions. Numerous 
experiments of this sort have been conducted in which people are induced 
to experience emotions or shown pictures that evoke different emotions 
while  they  lie  in  a  brain  imaging  machine.  Figure  18.6  shows  a  sum-
mary of brain images collected in this way. Several observations can be 
made from these images. First, there are different “hotspots”—areas of 
particularly  high  brain  activity  associated  with  each  emotion.  Second, 
each emotion is associated with an array of smaller and larger patches 
of  lesser  brain  activity.  Finally,  some  activated  regions  are  associated 
with more than one emotion. The bottom portion of the ﬁ gure compares 
brain activations for sadness and fear, emotions that could be reliably 
discriminated from the activation patterns. Consistent with distinct cir-
cuits for different emotions, amygdala activity is more associated with 
fear than with sadness, and medial prefrontal activity is more associated 
with sadness. 

 One interpretation of the data in Figure 18.6 is that the most highly 
activated region uniquely represents an emotion, such as the medial pre-
frontal cortex for sadness. This might be like the face-selective patches 
of visual cortex in the temporal lobes (see Chapter 10). Alternatively, the 
 pattern   of  activation  could  be  the  basis  of  the  emotion  and  each  active 
brain region a piece of the puzzle. If either single areas or networks of 
areas uniquely represent emotions, we might, in principle, be able to scan 
people’s brains and know what they are feeling. This would be consistent 
with the concept of basic emotions thought to have unique and distinct 
representations. At this time we do not know which of these interpreta-
tions is correct. As we will now see, there are also alternative theories for 
the nature of the brain’s representation of emotion. 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   626
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   626

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

Happiness

Sadness

Anger

Fear

Disgust

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

627

Activations distinguishing

fear vs. sadness

▲ FIGURE 18.6
Brain activation associated with five basic emotions. For each emotion, the 
strength of brain activation is indicated by color (yellow greater than red). The 
lower brain image compares activations associated with sadness (red and 
 yellow ⫽ greater sadness activity) and fear (blue ⫽ greater fear activity). 
(Source: Hamann, 2012, p. 460.)

 Dimensional Emotion Theories 
 There is an intuitive appeal to the idea that each basic emotion we experi-
ence is based on brain activity in a specialized brain area or network of 
areas; how convenient that would be for us scientists! Unfortunately, we 
have learned enough about the brain to know it doesn’t always do what 
we ﬁ nd intuitive. An interesting analogy is the coding of body movement. 
The  ﬁ ring  rate  of  a  neuron  in  the  motor  cortex  might  code  something 
rather  straightforward  such  as  the  contraction  properties  of  a  single 
muscle  (e.g.,  length,  force).  However,  there  is  evidence  that  neural  ac-
tivity might represent something more complex, such as the input to a 
spectrum of muscles that makes up a portion of a complex behavior (e.g., 
swinging a golf club, dancing a pirouette). 

 An alternative to basic theories are  dimensional theories of emo-
tion . These theories are based on the idea that emotions, even basic emo-
tions, can be broken down into smaller fundamental elements combined 
in different ways and differing amounts, just as all the elements of the 
periodic table are made of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Examples of 
proposed  affective  dimensions  are  valence  (“pleasant–unpleasant”)  and 
arousal  (“weak  emotion–strong  emotion”).  Imagine  a  two-dimensional 
graph with axes labeled in these ways; each emotional experience would 
be located in a different part of the graph (Figure 18.7). Of course, for 
any particular emotion, such as happiness, there would be some normal 
range along a dimension such as emotional strength (arousal). In differ-
ent theories there are different numbers of dimensions, sometimes with 
different names. Look again at Figure 18.6, in which we ﬁ rst considered 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   627
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   627

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

628

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 18.7
A dimensional representation of basic 
 emotions. In a dimensional theory, emotions 
such as happiness and sadness consist of differ-
ing amounts of brain activation corresponding to 
affective dimensions such as valence and arousal. 
(Source: Hamann, 2012, p. 461.)

Smiling
baby

Basic emotions

Beautiful
sunset

Chair

Moral
violation

Snake

Rotten
food

Funeral

Happiness

Sadness

Fear

Anger

Disgust

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

e
c
n
e
a
V

l

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

Low

Arousal

High

the patches of activity in each brain slice to be, as a group, a possible rep-
resentation of one basic emotion. Might the patches instead be distinct 
subpatterns, one subpattern associated with the degree of pleasantness, 
another with emotional strength, and perhaps still others with additional 
dimensions? The answer to this question is, at present, unclear. 

  Psychological  constructionist  theories  of  emotion   are  a  varia-
tion on dimensional theories. These theories are similar to dimensional 
theories in the sense that emotions are said to consist of smaller building 
blocks. A key difference is that in the constructionist models, the dimen-
sions do not carry affective weight. Instead of dimensions such as pleas-
antness, an emotional state is constructed from physiological processes 
that,  on  their  own,  do  not  concern  only  emotion.  Examples  of  nonemo-
tional  psychological  components  that  construct  emotion  are  things  like 
language, attention, internal sensations from the body, and external sen-
sations from the environment. The emotion is an emergent consequence 
of the combination of these components, just as a cake results from the 
combination of ingredients in a recipe. 

 What is an Emotion? 
 From  before  the  time  of  Darwin,  there  has  been  speculation  about  the 
nature of human emotions. Some researchers contend that a small set of 
basic emotions has evolved and these emotions are common to humans 
around the globe and animals as well. Other affective neuroscientists be-
lieve  that  emotions  are  constructed  from  building  blocks  that  do  or  do 
not  have  emotional  weight  themselves.  At  present,  there  is  a  great  di-
versity of perspectives on the nature of emotions, going beyond what we 
have  discussed.  One  of  the  leaders  in  this  ﬁ eld  is  Antonio  Damasio  at 
the University of Southern California, who has investigated the nature 
of emotions, the distinction between emotions and feelings, and the re-
lationship  between  emotion  and  other  brain  functions  such  as  decision 
making  (Box  18.3).  Aside  from  the  nature  of  emotions,  a  related  issue 
is the neural basis of emotions: Is each emotion represented by activity 
in a specialized area of the brain, a network of areas, or a more diffuse 
network of neurons? We do not yet have answers to these questions. Our 
hope for answering them relies on a convergence of approaches  including 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   628
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   628

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

629

BOX 18.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Concepts and Names in Everyday Science
by Antonio Damasio

It would appear that the clarity of a concept or of a scientiﬁ c 

 hypothesis is the trait that counts most in determining the ac-
ceptance and impact of an idea. But not so fast: The name given 
to the concept or hypothesis plays a role in how they succeed, 
or not. Three examples from my own work illustrate the point.

First: For the past 20 years I have been insisting on a prin-
cipled distinction between the concepts of emotion and feel-
ing.1  Emotions  are  programs  of  actions  that  rapidly  modify 
the state of several components of our bodies in response, 
for instance, to a threat or an opportunity. Quite differently, 
feelings are the mental experiences of body states, including, 
of course, those that are caused by emotions. That the two 
sets of phenomena are distinct is quite clear, and yet the gen-
eral public, not to mention several scientists, have persisted 
in lumping them together as if they were one and the same. 
Worse, when people do make the distinction, they often call 
the phenomenon by the wrong name (e.g., referring to feeling 
when they mean emotion or vice versa). Why so much confu-
sion? Surely it cannot be mere carelessness. Well, it so hap-
pens  that,  given  the  long-standing  historical  conﬂ ation,  no 
distinct words have evolved for the emotion or the feeling of 
a speciﬁ c affective state. When I use the word “fear,” I could 
be referring to the actual emotion fear or to the feeling that re-
sults from deploying the said emotion. And even worse: One 
of my intellectual heroes, William James, who is responsible 
for ﬁ rst sketching a credible physiology of emotion and how it 
may lead to the feeling experience, is guilty of confusing the 
two within the very paragraph in which he so well articulated 
the  distinction!  One  lesson:  One  should  have  different  and 
unambiguous terms to designate different phenomena.

Second:  Unambiguous  naming  is  only  part  of  what  is 
needed for the success of new ideas. The more transparent 
one can be about what one means, the more likely it is that 
people  will  retain  a  clear  message.  About  the  same  time,  I 
began insisting on the emotion–feeling distinction, I also ad-
vanced a hypothesis regarding how affect—emotions and feel-
ings, conscious or not—intervene, for better or for worse, in 
the decision-making process, and, importantly, how they need 
to be factored in the decision process alongside knowledge 
and cool reason. I called this the somatic marker hypothesis.2
Why the term “somatic”? Because emotions alter the state of 
the body, the soma, and feelings originate in that same body, 
the soma. And why the term “marker”? Because the affective 
state of the body, by virtue of its natural valence, marks a cer-
tain option as good, bad, or indifferent. Well, the designation 
caught. People do refer to it and usually get the gist of the idea 
from the name. It found a niche.

Third:  I  had  no  such  luck  when  I  used  the  terms 
“ convergence” and “divergence” to describe, quite accurately, 
a connectional neural architecture with two distinct features: 
(a) neurons project, hierarchically, from a primary sensory cor-
tex to smaller and smaller cortical association ﬁ elds, thus con-
verging into a narrower brain territory; and (b) other neurons 
reciprocate  the  favor  in  the  opposite  direction,  thus  diverg-
ing  from  “convergence– divergence  zones”  toward  the  origi-
nating  points.3  The  reality  of  this  anatomical  arrangement  in 
the human brain is unquestionable and is quite evident in the 
cerebral cortex, for example. The importance of the arrange-
ment to help explain how memory works, in terms of learning 
and  recall,  is  also  high.  The  correctness  of  the  terms  “con-
vergence” and “divergence” is not in question either. And yet, 
these names did not catch and that did hurt the diffusion of 
my idea. About the same time, however, the terms “hub” and 
“spoke” began to be used to designate the same general ar-
chitecture. Rather than focusing on the actual direction of the 
neural messages, or the functional role that each direction of 
the  projections  played,  hub  and  spoke  succinctly  described 
the resulting ﬂ ow diagram. Amusingly, after deregulation, U.S. 
airlines stopped ﬂ ying everywhere each way and instead op-
erated their ﬂ ights to and from a few major urban hubs con-
nected by spokes to smaller hubs, in smaller cities, by what 
else, spokes! Advertisements used “hub and spokes” to refer 
successfully  to  the  airlines’  route  system.  Guess  what:  hub
and spoke stuck for the neural architecture as well. The word 
“hub,” in particular, captured in three letters what I described 
as “convergence–divergence zones and regions.”

What’s in a name? A lot. A rose by another name is still a 
rose but it may not smell as well. My prize for the catchiest term 
to convey a scientiﬁ c idea goes to mirror neurons. Ironically, 
mirror neurons depend on a convergence–divergence neuro-
nal architecture and operate in a hub and spoke network!4

References
1. Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes’ Error. New York: Penguin Books.
2. Damasio A, Carvalho GB. 2013. The nature of feelings: evolution-
ary and neurobiological origins. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 14: 
143–152.

3. Damasio AR. 1996. The somatic marker hypothesis and the pos-
sible functions of the prefrontal cortex. Transactions of the Royal 
Society (London) 351:1413–1420.

4. Damasio  AR.  1989.  Time-locked  multiregional  retroactivation: 
a  systems  level  proposal  for  the  neural  substrates  of  recall  and 
 recognition. Cognition 33:25–62.

5. Meyer  K,  Damasio  A.  2009.  Convergence  and  divergence  in 
a  neural  architecture  for  recognition  and  memory.  Trends  in 
Neurosciences 32(7):376–382.

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   629
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   629

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

630

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

behavioral  observations, physiological recordings, and studies of the ef-
fects of lesions and disease, among others. In the next section, we focus 
on two emotions, fear and anger/aggression. We could have chosen other 
emotions just as well, but the research on fear and anger provides good 
examples that nicely bring together studies in humans and experimental 
animals. 

FEAR AND THE AMYGDALA 
FEARR AND THE AMYGDALA 

 As we’ve seen, there remains considerable uncertainty about the brain’s 
representation  of  emotions.  Human  brain  imaging  gives  us  pictures  of 
brain activity associated with different emotions, but these pictures can-
not tell us how or which brain areas actually contribute to an emotion’s 
experience  or  expression.  That  said,  there  is  one  brain  structure  that, 
more than any other, has a reputation as being critical for emotion: the 
amygdala. It has been claimed that the amygdala plays a special role in 
fear. While we explore the evidence connecting the amygdala to fear, keep 
in mind that other brain structures also appear to be involved in fear and 
that the amygdala is active also in other emotional states. 
 The Klüver–Bucy Syndrome 
 Shortly after Papez’s proposal of an emotion circuit in the brain, neuro-
scientists Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy, at the University of Chicago, 
found that bilateral removal of the temporal lobes, or temporal  lobectomy , 
in rhesus monkeys has a dramatic effect on the animals’ aggressive ten-
dencies  and  responses  to  fearful  situations.  The  surgery  produces  nu-
merous  bizarre  behavioral  abnormalities  collectively  referred  to  as  the 
 Klüver–Bucy syndrome . 

 After temporal lobectomy, the monkeys appeared to have good visual 
perception but poor visual recognition. Placed in a new environment, the 
monkeys moved about exploring objects they saw. However, unlike nor-
mal animals they appeared to rely on placing objects into their mouth to 
identify them. If a hungry monkey was shown a group of objects it had 
seen before intermixed with food, the monkey would still go through the 
process of picking up each object for study before consuming the food bits. 
A normal hungry monkey in the same situation would make a beeline for 
the food. The monkeys also showed a markedly increased interest in sex. 
 The emotional changes in monkeys with Klüver–Bucy syndrome were 
most dramatically represented by decreases in fear and aggression. For 
example, a normal wild monkey will avoid humans and other animals. 
In the presence of an experimenter, it usually crouches in a corner and 
remains still; if approached, it will dash off to a safer corner or make an 
 aggressive  stand.  These  behaviors  were  not  exhibited  by  the  monkeys 
with bilateral temporal lobectomies. These otherwise wild monkeys would 
not only approach and touch the human but would even let the human 
stroke them and pick them up. They had the same placid demeanor in 
the  presence  of  other  animals  that  monkeys  normally  fear.  Even  after 
approaching and being attacked by a natural enemy such as a snake, the 
monkey would go back and try to examine it again. There was also a cor-
responding decrease in the vocalizations and facial expressions usually 
associated with fear. It appeared that both the normal experience and the 
normal expression of fear and aggression were severely decreased by the 
temporal lobectomy. 

 Virtually  all  the  symptoms  of  the  Klüver–Bucy  syndrome  reported 
in monkeys have also been seen in humans with temporal lobe lesions 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   630
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   630

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

631

and, more speciﬁ cally, amygdala lesions. In addition to visual  recognition 
problems,  oral  tendencies,  and  hypersexuality,  these  people  appear  to 
have “ﬂ attened” emotions. 

 Anatomy of the Amygdala 
 The  amygdala  is situated in the pole of the temporal lobe, just below the 
cortex on the medial side. Its name is derived from the Greek word for 
“almond” because of its shape. 

 The human amygdala is a complex of nuclei that are commonly divided 
into  three  groups:  the   basolateral  nuclei ,  the   corticomedial  nuclei ,  and 
the  central nucleus  (Figure 18.8). Afferents to the amygdala come from a 

Lateral view

Medial view

Amygdala

(a)

Amygdala

Hippocampus

Lateral
ventricle

Thalamus

Hippocampus

Corticomedial nuclei

Central
nucleus

Basolateral
nuclei

Amygdala

Neocortex

Third
ventricle Hypothalamus

(b)
▲ FIGURE 18.8
A cross section of the amygdala. (a) Lateral and medial views of the temporal 
lobe, showing the location of the amygdala in relation to the hippocampus. 
(b) The brain is sectioned coronally to show the amygdala in cross section. The 
basolateral nuclei (surrounded by red) receive visual, auditory, gustatory, and 
 tactile afferents. The corticomedial nuclei (surrounded by purple) receive olfactory 
afferents.

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   631
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   631

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

632

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

large variety of sources, including the neocortex in all lobes of the brain, 
as well as the hippocampal and cingulate gyri. Of particular interest here 
is the fact that information from all the sensory systems feeds into the 
amygdala, particularly the basolateral nuclei. Each sensory system has 
a different projection pattern to the amygdala nuclei, and interconnec-
tions within the amygdala allow the integration of information from dif-
ferent  sensory  modalities.  Two  major  pathways  connect  the  amygdala 
with the hypothalamus: the  ventral amygdalofugal pathway  and the  stria 
 terminalis . 

 Effects of Amygdala Stimulation and Lesions 
 Researchers  have  demonstrated  in  several  species  that  lesions  of  the 
amygdala  have  the  effect  of  ﬂ attening  emotion  in  a  manner  similar  to 
the Klüver–Bucy syndrome. Bilateral amygdalectomy in animals can pro-
foundly  reduce  fear  and  aggression.  Reports  claim  that  rats  so  treated 
will approach a sedated cat and nibble its ear and that a wild lynx will 
become as docile as a house cat. 

 Numerous studies in humans have examined the effect of lesions that in-
clude the amygdala on the ability to recognize emotional facial expressions. 
While there is a consensus that the lesions usually impair the  recognition 
of  emotional  expression,  researchers  disagree  about  which  emotions  are 
affected. In different studies, deﬁ cits associated with fear, anger, sadness, 
and disgust have been reported. The variety of deﬁ cits probably reﬂ ects, in 
part, differences in the damage; two lesions are rarely alike, and they typi-
cally include damage to other brain structures in addition to the amygdala. 
Nonetheless,  the  most  commonly  reported  symptom  of  lesions  involving 
the amygdala is an inability to recognize fear in facial expressions. 

 Very few cases of humans with bilateral damage isolated to the amyg-
dala have been documented. However, Ralph Adolphs, Antonio Damasio 
and their colleagues, then at the University of Iowa, studied a 30-year-old 
woman  known  as  S.M.,  who  had  bilateral  destruction  of  the  amygdala 
resulting from Urbach–Wiethe disease, a rare disorder characterized by 
thickening of the skin, mucus membranes, and certain internal organs. 
S.M. was somewhat unusual in the extent to which she was indiscrimi-
nately friendly and trusting, perhaps indicating she experienced less fear 
than other people. She had normal intelligence and was perfectly able to 
identify people from photographs. When asked to categorize the emotion 
expressed in a person’s face, she correctly described happiness, sadness, 
and disgust. She was somewhat less likely to describe an angry expres-
sion as angry, however, and the most abnormal response was that she was 
much less likely to describe a fearful expression as afraid. Interestingly, 
S.M. could recognize fear from a person’s tone of voice. It appears that 
the amygdala lesion selectively decreased her ability to recognize fear in 
faces from visual input alone. 

 Ten  years  after  the  initial  examination  of  S.M.,  a  follow-up  study 
probed her deﬁ cit in more detail by comparing her abilities to recognize 
happiness  and  fear.  In  the  10  intervening  years,  her  ability  to  recog-
nize fear in faces had not improved. The fascinating ﬁ nding of the later 
study was that her inability to detect fear and some other emotions re-
sulted from her not looking at the eyes of people in the test photographs. 
Evidently because she consistently looked at their mouths, she was able 
to recognize happiness. By comparison, control subjects routinely spent a 
high percentage of time looking at the eyes as they explored faces. S.M.’s 
exploratory eye movements were unusual in not ﬁ xating on the eyes of 
the people in the photographs. When she was explicitly instructed to look 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   632
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   632

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

633

at  a  person’s  eyes,  she  did  so  and  then  was  able  to  correctly  recognize 
fear. Surprisingly, after the more recent tests, she reverted to abnormal 
eye movements and poor fear recognition. To explain this curious set of 
results, the scientists hypothesized that fear is normally recognized by a 
two-way interaction between the amygdala and the visual cortex. Visual 
information is delivered to the amygdala, which then instructs the visual 
system to move the eyes and examine the visual input to determine the 
emotional expression in a face. Without the amygdala, this interaction 
does not take place, and S.M.’s abnormal eye movements did not allow 
her to recognize fear. 

 If  removing  the  amygdala  reduces  the  expression  and  recognition  of 
fear,  what  happens  if  the  intact  amygdala  is  electrically  stimulated? 
Depending on the site, amygdala stimulation can lead to different effects, 
including a state of increased vigilance or attention. Stimulation of the 
lateral portion of the amygdala in cats can elicit a combination of fear and 
violent aggression. Electrical stimulation of the amygdala in humans has 
been reported to lead to anxiety and fear. Not surprisingly, the amygdala 
ﬁ gures  prominently  in  current  theories  about  anxiety  disorders,  as  we 
will see in Chapter 22. 

 Functional  brain  imaging  demonstrates  that  neural  activity  in  the 
amygdala is consistent with its role in fear, as seen in Figure 18.6. For 
example, in an experiment performed by Breiter et al., subjects were po-
sitioned in an fMRI machine and brain activity was monitored as they 
viewed pictures of neutral, happy, and fearful faces (Figure 18.9a). Brain 
activity in response to fearful faces showed more amygdala activity than 
in response to faces with neutral expressions (Figure 18.9b). The amyg-
dala activation was speciﬁ c to fear, as no difference in activity occurred 
in response to happy and neutral facial expressions (Figure 18.9c). Other 
studies  have  reported  amygdala  activation  in  response  to  other  facial 
expressions  including  happiness,  sadness,  and  anger.  The  function  the 
amygdala plays in these various emotions is not yet resolved, but all the 
evidence together suggests that the amygdala plays a key role in detect-
ing fearful and threatening stimuli. 

 A Neural Circuit for Learned Fear 
 Experiments in animals and humans, as well as introspection, indicate 
that  memories  for  emotional  events  are  particularly  vivid  and  long- 
lasting. This is undoubtedly true for  learned fear . Through socialization 
or painful experience, we all learn to avoid certain behaviors for fear of 
being  hurt.  If  you  ever  received  a  painful  shock  as  a  child  by  pushing 
a  paper  clip  into  an  electrical  outlet,  you  probably  never  did  it  again. 
Memories associated with fear can form quickly and be long-lasting. As 
we will see in Chapter 22, in post-traumatic stress disorder, intense fear 
resulting from a traumatic experience can interfere with normal life for 
many years. Although the amygdala is not thought to be a primary loca-
tion for memory storage, synaptic changes in the amygdala appear to be 
involved in forming memories for emotional events. 

 A number of different experiments suggest that neurons in the amyg-
dala can “learn” to respond to stimuli associated with pain, and after such 
learning, these stimuli evoke a fearful response. In an experiment per-
formed by Bruce Kapp and his colleagues at the University of Vermont, 
rabbits were conditioned to associate the sound of a tone with mild pain. 
A normal sign of fear in rabbits is a change in heart rate. In the experi-
ment an animal was placed in a cage, and at various times it would hear 
one of two tones. One tone was followed by a mild electrical shock to the 

(a)

(b)

(c)

▲ FIGURE 18.9
Human brain activity in response to 
emotional stimuli. (a) Neutral and 
 fearful faces were used as visual stimuli. 
(b) Fearful faces produced greater activ-
ity in the amygdala (red and yellow areas 
within white squares) than neutral faces. 
(c) No difference in amygdala activity 
occurred in response to happy and neu-
tral faces. (Source: Breiter et al., 1996.)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   633
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   633

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

634

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

feet through the metal ﬂ oor of the cage; the other tone was benign. After 
conditioning, Kapp’s group found that the rabbit’s heart rate developed 
a fearful response to the tone associated with pain but not to the benign 
tone. Before conditioning, neurons in the central nucleus of the amygdala 
had not responded to the tones used in the experiment. After conditioning, 
however, neurons in the central nucleus of the amygdala responded to the 
shock-related tone (but not the benign one). Joseph LeDoux of New York 
University has shown that after this type of fear conditioning, amygdala 
lesions eliminate the learned visceral responses, such as the changes in 
heart rate and blood pressure. It appears that the conditioned response 
in the amygdala arises from synaptic changes in the basolateral nuclei. 

 Figure  18.10  shows  a  proposed  circuit  to  account  for  learned  fear. 
Sensory  information,  for  example,  the  tone  the  animal  heard  and  the 
electrical shock it felt, is sent to the basolateral region of the amygdala, 
where cells in turn send axons to the central nucleus. The pairing of a 
benign tone with a painful stimulus leads to changes in synaptic strength 
that  enhance  the  amygdala’s  response  to  the  tone  after  conditioning 
(Chapters 24 and 25 discuss the neural changes that occur with condi-
tioning). Efferents from the central nucleus project to the hypothalamus, 
which  can  alter  the  state  of  the  ANS,  and  to  the  periaqueductal  gray 
matter in the brain stem, which can evoke behavioral reactions via the 
somatic motor system. The emotional experience is thought to be based 
on activity in the cerebral cortex. 

 Recent research suggests that the role of the amygdala in learned fear, 
ﬁ rst studied in rabbits and rats, extends to humans. In one study, sub-
jects were shown a number of visual stimuli and conditioned to expect a 

Basolateral nuclei

Somatosensory
cortex

Electric shock

Central
nucleus

Hypothalamus

Periaqueductal
gray matter
in brain stem

Autonomic
response

Behavioral
reaction

Cerebral
cortex

Emotional
experience

Tone

Auditory
cortex

Amygdala

▲ FIGURE 18.10
A neural circuit for learned fear. Through conditioning, a sound tone becomes 
associated with the pain of an electrical shock. The fear response is mediated by 
the amygdala. The benign tone and the painful shock reach the basolateral nuclei 
of the amygdala by way of auditory and somatosensory cortex, and the signal is 
relayed to the central nucleus. The pairing of these stimuli leads to synaptic 
change in the amygdala and an enhanced response to the benign tone. Efferents 
from the amygdala project to the brain stem periaqueductal gray matter, causing 
the behavioral reaction to the conditioned tone, and to the hypothalamus, result-
ing in the autonomic response. The experience of an unpleasant emotion presum-
ably involves projections to the cerebral cortex.

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   634
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   634

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

635

▲ FIGURE 18.11
Amygdala activity associated with 
enhanced emotional memory. Sub-
jects first viewed pictures of emotional 
and neutral stimuli while PET imaging 
recorded brain activity. Later the origi-
nal and new pictures were viewed. The 
recall of emotional stimuli was associ-
ated with an enhanced response in the 
amygdala, shown in yellow. (Source: 
Hamann et al., 1999.)

mild electrical shock when a particular visual stimulus was presented. 
An fMRI machine monitored brain activity. The fMRI images show that 
the  “feared”  visual  stimulus  activated  the  amygdala  signiﬁ cantly  more 
than visual stimuli not associated with a shock. 

 In  another  study  using  PET  imaging  of  brain  activity  conducted  by 
Hamann et al., subjects ﬁ rst viewed a series of pictures. Some of the pic-
tures  were  pleasant  (appealing  animals,  sexually  arousing  scenes,  ap-
petizing  food);  some  were  frightening  or  aversive  (frightening  animals, 
mutilated  bodies,  violence);  and  some  were  neutral  (household  scenes, 
plants). Compared to the neutral objects, both the pleasant and unpleas-
ant stimuli affected physiological measures such as heart rate and skin 
conductance,  and  they  evoked  greater  activity  in  the  amygdala.  These 
measurements conﬁ rm the role of the amygdala in emotional processing, 
as  we  have  already  discussed.  In  the  second  phase  of  the  experiment, 
subjects were put back in the PET imaging machine and shown a vari-
ety of pictures. They were asked to use their memory and identify which 
pictures they had seen in the initial conditioning session. As expected, 
subjects  recalled  the  emotional  pictures  better  than  the  neutral  ones. 
The enhanced memories for emotional pictures correlated with recorded 
amygdala activity (Figure 18.11). There was no such correlation for the 
neutral pictures. 

ANGER AND AGGRESSION 
ANGEER ANND AGGRESSION 

 Anger is a basic emotion. Many things can make us angry: frustration, 
hurt feelings, stress, and so on. Aggression is not an emotion but is one 
possible behavioral result of anger; an angry drunk might punch some-
one in the nose. In studies of humans, aggression and the feeling we call 
anger can be readily distinguished, since people can state that they are 
angry even if they do not act on that feeling. As we have already seen, 
emotions are more difﬁ cult to study in animals because we cannot ask 
an animal how it feels but can only measure its physiological or behav-
ioral manifestations. We can infer that an animal is angry only by the 
aggressive behaviors it exhibits, such as making a loud scary sound, a 
menacing  facial  expression,  or  a  threatening  posture.  Because  aggres-
sion and anger are often intertwined in animals, we will discuss them 
together here. 

 The Amygdala and Aggression 
 We can distinguish different forms of aggression in humans, ranging from 
self-defense to murder. Likewise, there are different types of aggression 
in animals. One animal may act aggressively toward another for many 
reasons: to kill for food, to defend offspring, to win a mate, or to scare off 
a potential adversary. There is some evidence that different types of ag-
gression are regulated differently by the nervous system. 

 Aggression is a multifaceted behavior that is not a product of a single 
isolated system in the brain. One factor that inﬂ uences aggression is the 
level of male sex hormones, or androgens (see Chapter 17). In animals, 
seasonal androgen levels and aggressive behavior correlate. Consistent 
with one of the roles of androgens, injections of testosterone can make 
an immature animal more aggressive, and castration can reduce aggres-
siveness. In humans, the relationship is less clear, although some have 
claimed  that  aggressive  behavior  in  violent  criminals  is  connected  to 
testosterone levels. You may have heard of “roid rage,” an uncontrolled 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   635
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   635

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

636

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

outburst of anger and aggression sometimes reported in athletes taking 
anabolic steroids, which have similar effects on the body as testosterone. 
In any case, there is strong evidence for a neurobiological component to 
aggression, which is our focus here. 

 A  useful  distinction  can  be  made  between  predatory  aggression  and 
affective aggression.  Predatory aggression  involves attacks against a 
member of a different species for the purpose of obtaining food, such as 
a lion hunting a zebra. Attacks of this type are typically accompanied by 
relatively few vocalizations, and they are aimed at the head and neck of 
the prey. Predatory aggression is not associated with high levels of activ-
ity in the sympathetic division of the ANS.  Affective aggression  is for 
show rather than to kill for food, and it involves high levels of sympa-
thetic activity. An animal exhibiting affective aggression typically makes 
vocalizations  while  adopting  a  threatening  or  defensive  posture.  A  cat 
hissing and arching its back at the approach of a dog is a good example. 
The behavioral and physiological manifestations of both types of aggres-
sion must be mediated by the somatic motor system and the ANS, but the 
pathways must diverge at some point to account for the dramatic differ-
ences in the behavioral responses. 

 Several lines of evidence indicate that the amygdala is involved in ag-
gressive behavior. American scientist Karl Pribram and his colleagues 
in 1954 showed that amygdala lesions had a major effect on social inter-
actions in a colony of eight male rhesus monkeys. Having lived together 
for some time, the animals had established a social hierarchy. The inves-
tigators’ ﬁ rst intervention was to make bilateral amygdala lesions in the 
brain of the most dominant monkey. After this animal returned to the 
colony, it fell to the bottom of the hierarchy, and the monkey previously 
second  in  dominance  now  became  dominant.  Presumably,  the  second 
monkey in the hierarchy discovered that the “top banana” had become 
more placid and less difﬁ cult to challenge. After an amygdalectomy was 
performed on the new dominant monkey, it likewise fell to the bottom 
of  the  hierarchy.  This  pattern  suggested  that  the  amygdala  is  impor-
tant for the aggression normally involved in maintaining a position in 
the social hierarchy. This is consistent with the ﬁ nding that electrical 
stimulation of the amygdala can produce a state of agitation or affective 
aggression. 

 Surgery to Reduce Human Aggression. In the 1960s, amygdala surgery 
in  violent  humans  was  ﬁ rst  performed  in  the  hope  that  lesions  would 
reduce aggression as they do in animals. It was thought by some that 
violent behavior frequently resulted from seizures in the temporal lobe. 
In  a  human  amygdalectomy,  electrodes  are  passed  through  the  brain 
and  down  into  the  temporal  lobe.  By  making  neural  recordings  along 
the  way  and  imaging  the  electrodes  with  X-rays,  it  is  possible  to  posi-
tion the tip of the electrode in the amygdala. Electrical current is then 
passed through the electrode, or a solution is injected, to destroy all or 
part of the amygdala. The lesions that are produced have a “taming ef-
fect”  in  some  patients,  reducing  the  incidence  of  aggressive  outbursts. 
Brain surgery used as a method of treating psychiatric disorders is called 
  psychosurgery . Early in the twentieth century, treating severe disor-
ders involving anxiety, aggression, or neuroses with psychosurgical tech-
niques, including the frontal lobotomy, was a common practice (Box 18.4). 
By today’s standards, psychosurgery is a drastic procedure to be consid-
ered only as a treatment of last resort. Although amygdalectomies are 
still  occasionally  performed  to  treat  aggressive  behavior,  medication  is 
the usual treatment. 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   636
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   636

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

637

BOX 18.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Frontal Lobotomy

Ever since the discoveries by Klüver, Bucy, and others that 

brain lesions can alter emotional behavior, clinicians have at-
tempted  surgery  as  a  means  of  treating  severe  behavioral 
disorders in humans. Today, it is difﬁ cult for many people to 
imagine that destroying a large portion of the brain was once 
thought to be therapeutic. Indeed, in 1949 the Nobel Prize 
in Medicine was awarded to Dr. Egas Moniz for his develop-
ment of the frontal lobotomy technique. Even stranger is the 
fact that Moniz was shot in the spine and partially paralyzed 
by a lobotomized patient. Although lobotomies are no longer 
being performed, tens of thousands were performed follow-
ing World War II.

Little theory supported the development of the lobotomy. 
In  the  1930s,  John  Fulton  and  Carlyle  Jacobsen  of  Yale 
University  reported  that  frontal  lobe  lesions  had  a  calming 
effect in chimpanzees. It has been suggested that frontal le-
sions  have  this  effect  because  of  the  destruction  of  limbic 
structures and, in particular, connections with frontal and cin-
gulate  cortex.  Moniz  proposed  that  ablations  of  the  frontal 
cortex might be effective in treating psychiatric diseases.

A frightening variety of techniques were used to produce 
lesions  in  the  frontal  lobes.  The  procedure  became  more 
commonplace with the development of a technique known 
as transorbital lobotomy (Figure A). In this procedure, a leu-
cotome, a 12-cm steel rod that tapers to a point, was driven 
through  the  thin  bone  at  the  top  of  the  eye’s  orbit  with  a 
 hammer. The handle was then swung medially and laterally 
to  destroy  cells  and  interconnecting  pathways.  Thousands 
of people were lobotomized with this technique, sometimes 
called “ice pick psychosurgery”; it was so simple it could be 
performed  in  the  physician’s  ofﬁ ce.  Note  that  although  this 
surgery  left  no  outward  scars,  the  physician  could  not  see 
what was being destroyed.

Frontal  lobotomy  reportedly  had  beneﬁ cial  effects  on 
people with a number of disorders, including psychosis, de-
pression,  and  various  neuroses.  The  effect  of  the  surgery 
was  described  as  a  relief  from  anxiety  and  escape  from 

thoughts that were unendurable. Only later did a pattern of 
less  pleasant side effects emerge. While frontal lobotomy can 
be performed with little decrease in IQ or loss of memory, it 
did have other profound effects. The changes that appear to 
be related to the limbic system are a blunting of emotional re-
sponses and a loss of the emotional component of thoughts. 
In addition, lobotomized patients often developed “inappro-
priate behavior” or an apparent lowering of moral standards. 
Like Phineas Gage, patients had considerable difﬁ culty plan-
ning  and  working  toward  goals.  Lobotomized  patients  also 
had trouble concentrating and were easily distracted.

With our modest understanding of the neural circuitry un-
derlying emotion and other brain functions, it is hard to justify 
destroying a large portion of the brain. Fortunately, treatment 
with  lobotomy  decreased  fairly  rapidly,  and  today,  instead, 
drug therapy is primarily used for serious emotional disorders.

Figure A

 Neural Components of Anger and Aggression 
Beyond the Amygdala 
 In  addition  to  the  amygdala,  a  variety  of  brain  structures  have  been 
reported  to  be  involved  in  anger  and  aggression.  For  example,  human 
brain imaging studies have found that there is greater activity in orbi-
tofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex when subjects recall past 
experiences that made them angry. Interpreting these patterns of brain 
activation involves the same challenges we have discussed for other emo-
tions. Historically, studies of anger and aggression have been important 
for  their  implications  for  the  involvement  of  subcortical  structures  in 
emotion. We now look at a few of these important research milestones. 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   637
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   637

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

638

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Anger,  Aggression,  and  the  Hypothalamus.  One  of  the  earliest  struc-
tures  linked  to  anger  and  aggressive  behavior  is  the  hypothalamus. 
Experiments performed in the 1920s showed that a remarkable behav-
ioral  transformation  took  place  in  cats  or  dogs  whose  cerebral  hemi-
spheres had been removed. Animals that were not easy to provoke prior 
to the surgery would go into a state of violent rage with the least provoca-
tion after the surgery. For instance, a violent response might be produced 
by an act as mild as scratching a dog’s back. This state was called  sham 
rage  because the animal demonstrated all the behavioral manifestations 
of rage but in a situation that normally would not cause anger. It was also 
a sham in the sense that the animals would not actually attack as they 
normally might. 

 While the extreme behavioral condition called sham rage resulted from 
removing all of both cerebral hemispheres (the telencephalon), remark-
ably, the behavioral effect can be reversed by making the lesion just a 
little bit larger to include portions of the diencephalon, particularly the 
hypothalamus.  Sham  rage  is  observed  if  the  anterior  hypothalamus  is 
destroyed along with the cortex but is not seen if the lesion is extended to 
include the posterior half of the hypothalamus (Figure 18.12). The impli-
cation is that the posterior hypothalamus may be particularly important 
for the expression of anger and aggression and that normally it is inhib-
ited by the telencephalon. But we must bear in mind that these lesions 
were large, and something other than the posterior hypothalamus may 
have been destroyed with the larger lesion. 

 In a series of pioneering studies begun in the 1920s, W.R. Hess at the 
University of Zurich investigated the behavioral effects of electrically stim-
ulating the diencephalon. Hess made small holes in the skulls of anesthe-
tized cats and implanted electrodes in the brain. After the animal awoke, a 
small electrical current was passed through the electrodes, and behavioral 
effects were noted. Various structures were stimulated, but here we will 
focus on the effects of stimulating different regions of the hypothalamus. 

Cerebral
cortex

1

2

3

Posterior
hypothalamus

Anterior
hypothalamus

▲ FIGURE 18.12
Brain transections and sham rage. ➀ If the cerebral hemispheres are removed 
and the hypothalamus is left intact, sham rage results. ➀ and ➁ A similar result is 
obtained if the anterior hypothalamus is removed in addition to the cerebral cor-
tex. ➀, ➁, and ➂ If the posterior hypothalamus is removed in addition to the 
anterior hypothalamus, sham rage does not result.

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   638
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   638

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

639

 The variety of complex responses to stimulating slightly different por-
tions of the hypothalamus is amazing, considering that it is such a small 
part of the brain. Depending on where the electrode is placed, stimulation 
may cause the animal to sniff, pant, eat, or express behaviors characteristic 
of fear or anger. These reactions illustrate the two primary functions of the 
hypothalamus discussed in Chapters 15 and 16: homeostasis and the or-
ganization of coordinated visceral and somatic motor responses. Responses 
related to emotional expression can include changes in heart rate, pupillary 
dilation, and gastrointestinal motility, to name a few. Because stimulation 
of some parts of the hypothalamus also elicits behavior characteristic of 
fear  and  anger,  we  hypothesize  that  the  hypothalamus  is  an  important 
component of the system normally involved in expressing these emotions. 
 The expression of rage Hess evoked by hypothalamic stimulation was 
similar  to  the  sham  rage  seen  in  animals  whose  cerebral  hemispheres 
had been removed. With a small application of electrical current, a cat 
would spit, growl, and fold its ears back, and its hair would stand on end. 
This  complex  and  highly  coordinated  set  of  behaviors  would  normally 
occur  when  the  cat  feels  threatened  by  an  enemy.  Sometimes  the  cat 
would suddenly run as if ﬂ eeing an imaginary attacker. If the intensity of 
the stimulation was increased, the animal might make an actual attack, 
swatting with a paw or leaping onto an imaginary adversary. When the 
stimulation was stopped, the rage disappeared as quickly as it started, 
and the cat might even curl up and go to sleep. 

 In experiments conducted at the Yale University Medical School in the 
1960s, John Flynn found that affective aggression and predatory aggres-
sion could be elicited by stimulating different areas of a cat’s hypothala-
mus (Figure 18.13). Affective aggression, also known as a  threat attack , 
was observed after stimulating speciﬁ c sites in the medial hypothalamus. 
Similar  to  the  rage  response  reported  by  Hess,  the  cat  would  arch  its 
back, hiss, and spit but would usually not actually attack a victim, such 
as a nearby rat. Predatory aggression, which Flynn called a  silent-biting 
attack ,  was  evoked  by  stimulating  parts  of  the  lateral  hypothalamus. 
While the back might be somewhat arched and the hair slightly on end, 
predatory aggression was not accompanied by the dramatic threatening 
gestures of affective aggression. Nonetheless, in this “quiet attack,” the 
cat would move swiftly toward a rat and viciously bite its neck. Despite 
the  crudeness  of  such  experimentation  by  today’s  standards,  the  early 
research  involving  lesions  and  electrical  stimulation  of  the  hypothala-
mus are consistent in suggesting that this structure is important for the 
 expression of anger and aggression in animals. 

 The Midbrain and Aggression. There are two major pathways by which 
the  hypothalamus  sends  signals  involving  autonomic  function  to  the 
brain stem: the  medial forebrain bundle  and the  dorsal longitudinal 
fasciculus . Axons from the lateral hypothalamus make up part of the 
medial forebrain bundle, and these project to the  ventral tegmental area  
in the midbrain. Stimulation of sites within the ventral tegmental area 
can elicit behaviors characteristic of predatory aggression, just as stimu-
lation of the lateral hypothalamus does. Conversely, lesions in the ventral 
tegmental area can disrupt offensive aggressive behaviors. One ﬁ nding 
suggesting that the hypothalamus inﬂ uences aggressive behavior via its 
effect on the ventral tegmental area is that hypothalamic stimulation will 
not evoke aggression if the medial forebrain bundle is cut. Interestingly, 
aggressive behavior is not entirely eliminated by this surgery, suggesting 
that this route is important when the hypothalamus is involved, but that 
the hypothalamus need not always be involved. 

(a)

(b)
▲ FIGURE 18.13
Rage reactions in cats with hypotha-
lamic stimulation. (a) Stimulation of the 
medial hypothalamus produces affective 
aggression (threat attack). (b) Stimulation 
of the lateral hypothalamus evokes pred-
atory aggression (silent-biting attack). 
(Source: Flynn, 1967, p. 45.)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   639
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   639

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

640

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Dorsal longitudinal
fasiculus

Periaqueductal gray
matter

Cerebral cortex

Amygdala

Hypothalamus
Medial forebrain bundle

Ventral tegmental area

Cerebral
aqueduct

Hypothalamus

PAG, ventral
tegmental area

(a)

(b)

Aggressive
behavior

▲ FIGURE 18.14
A neural circuit for anger and aggression. (a) The hypothalamus can influence 
aggressive behavior through projections to the ventral tegmental area and the 
periaqueductal gray matter. (b) In this simplified scheme, the expression of anger 
and aggression is controlled by a neural pathway from the amygdala through the 
hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray matter (PAG), and ventral tegmental area.

 The  medial  hypothalamus  sends  axons  to  the   periaqueductal  gray 
matter (PAG)  of the midbrain by way of the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus. 
Electrical stimulation of the PAG can produce affective aggression, and le-
sions there can disrupt this behavior. Interestingly, the hypothalamus and 
the midbrain periaqueductal gray matter appear to inﬂ uence behavior par-
tially based on input from the amygdala. Figure 18.14 shows a simpliﬁ ed 
circuit for anger and aggression involving the structures we have discussed. 

 Serotonergic Regulation of Anger and Aggression 
 A variety of studies suggest that the neurotransmitter serotonin plays an 
important role regulating anger and aggression. Serotonin-containing neu-
rons are located in the raphe nuclei of the brain stem, and they ascend in 
the medial forebrain bundle and project to the hypothalamus and various 
limbic structures involved in emotion (see Figure 15.13). For the most part, 
experimental evidence supports the  serotonin deﬁ ciency hypothesis,  
which states that aggression is inversely related to serotonergic activity. 
 One  link  between  serotonin  and  aggression  comes  from  studies  of  in-
duced aggression in rodents. If male mice are isolated in a small cage for 
several weeks, about half of them will become hyperactive and unusually 
aggressive when they subsequently encounter other mice. Although the iso-
lation has no effect on the  level  of serotonin in the brain, there is a decrease 
in the  turnover rate  (the rate of synthesis, release, and resynthesis) of this 
neurotransmitter. Moreover, this decrease is found only in the mice that 
later become unusually aggressive and not in those relatively unaffected by 
the isolation. Also, female mice typically do not become aggressive following 
isolation, and they show no decrease in serotonin turnover. Evidence indi-
cates that drugs that block the synthesis or release of serotonin increase 
aggressive behavior. For instance, in one study, when the drug parachlo-
rophenylalanine (PCPA), which blocks serotonin synthesis, was adminis-
tered, the injected animals increased their attacks on others in their cage. 
 There are at least 14 serotonin receptor subtypes, and it appears that 
the 5-HT 1A  and 5-HT 1B  subtypes are involved in modulating anger and ag-
gression. For example, a number of experiments have shown in mice that 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   640
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   640

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

641

agonists of 5-HT 1B  receptors decrease aggressiveness while antagonists of 
these receptors increase aggressiveness. Based on these pharmacological 
results, one would predict that mice lacking the 5-HT 1B  receptor would be 
more aggressive than normal animals. Consistent with this prediction, in 
some studies, 5-HT 1B  receptor knockout mice are reported to show more 
aggressive behavior. Other experiments paint a somewhat different pic-
ture, however, suggesting that rather than simply being more aggressive, 
the knockout mice are more impulsive. 

 The  relationship  between  serotonin  and  aggression  is  similar  in  pri-
mates  that  have  been  studied.  For  example,  researchers  found  that  the 
dominance hierarchy in a colony of vervet monkeys could be manipulated 
by injecting animals with drugs that either increased or decreased sero-
tonergic activity. The behavior of these animals was consistent: More ag-
gression was associated with less serotonergic activity. However, there was 
one interesting sociological twist; aggression did not correlate with domi-
nance in the group. If the dominant male was removed, the top position was 
taken  by  an  animal  with  artiﬁ cially   enhanced   serotonergic  activity  (i.e., 
one injected with a serotonin precursor or reuptake inhibitor who was  less
 aggressive). Conversely, the injection of drugs that reduced serotonin func-
tion (serotonin antagonists) was correlated with animals becoming subor-
dinate. The subordinate animals were actually signiﬁ cantly more likely to 
initiate aggression. Interestingly, the less aggressive dominant male gar-
nered his status by his skills in recruiting females to support his position. 
 In humans, there are a large number of reports of a negative correlation 
between serotonin activity and aggression. For example, in a study of men 
in the military who had been diagnosed with personality disorders, ag-
gression was found to be inversely related to cerebrospinal ﬂ uid levels of 
the serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). Questions 
have  been  raised,  however,  about  the  generality  of  the  correlation  be-
tween serotonin and aggression when people of different ages and people 
without personality disorders are examined. As with the animal studies, 
a correlation is often reported, but the reality is probably more complex. 
 Many  scientists  would  agree  that  serotonin  is  involved  in  the  modu-
lation  of  anger  and  aggressive  behavior.  The  evidence  presented  here 
suggests a straightforward negative correlation between aggression and 
activity  in  the  brain’s  serotonergic  system.  However,  some  scientists  in 
the ﬁ eld consider this relationship overly simplistic. Animals exhibit ag-
gressive behaviors for a variety of reasons, and serotonin is not involved 
equally in all forms. From a mechanistic standpoint, the system is complex. 
Serotonergic neurons project broadly across the brain. 5-HT 1A  and 5-HT 1B
receptors are distributed widely, and they and other serotonin receptors 
provide interactions with other neurotransmitter systems. As well, there 
is negative feedback in the system because many of the 5-HT 1A  and 5-HT 1B
receptors are autoreceptors (see Chapter 5). Some autoreceptors are pre-
synaptic on the raphe neurons that send serotonin widely to the brain. 
Activation of them globally inhibits serotonin release. With this negative 
feedback, serotonin release affects the raphe neurons in such a way as to 
decrease further release. Because of the diversity of receptor locations and 
functions, interpretation of pharmacological and knockout experiments is 
challenging;  new  approaches  are  needed  to  tease  out  the  details  of  the 
relationships among serotonin, anger, and aggressive behavior. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 We  all  know  what  emotions  are—those  feelings  we  have  that  we  call 
happiness, sadness, and so on. But what exactly are those feelings? As 

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   641
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   641

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

642

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

evidenced by the diverse theories we have outlined, there is a great deal 
of uncertainty. More than a hundred years after the James–Lange theory 
was proposed, there remains controversy about the extent to which emo-
tions  cause  changes  in  the  body  or  bodily  changes  cause  emotions.  We 
do know from brain imaging studies that emotions are associated with 
widespread brain activation. Some of the structures involved are part of 
the limbic system, and other structures are not. But even with images 
of brain activity in various emotional states, understanding the neural 
basis of emotional experience is challenging. We don’t know which of the 
active areas are responsible for the feelings. Is it the most active area, 
all of the areas, or something else? What should we make of the observa-
tion that some brain structures are activated in multiple emotional states 
while others are more speciﬁ c to particular emotions? For that matter, is 
it even correct to think of brain activity as reﬂ ecting feelings, or might 
feelings be emergent sensations based on combinations of active neurons, 
none of which independently signals an emotion? 

 In this chapter, we have focused on a handful of brain structures for 
which there is particularly strong evidence for involvement in emotion. 
A  way  to  look  at  our  current  state  of  understanding  is  that  the  com-
bined  lesion,  stimulation,  and  brain  imaging  studies  have  done  a  good 
job identifying structures that are candidates for emotional processing. 
It will take a good deal more work to ﬁ gure out what various cortical and 
subcortical areas contribute. 

 Emotional  experiences  are  the  result  of  complex  interactions  among 
sensory stimuli, brain circuitry, past experiences, and the activity of neu-
rotransmitter  systems.  In  light  of  this   complexity,  we  probably  should 
not be surprised that humans exhibit a broad spectrum of emotional and 
mood disorders, as we will see in Chapter 22. 

 When thinking about the neural basis of emotion, keep in mind that 
the structures apparently involved in emotion also have other functions. 
For a considerable time after Broca deﬁ ned the limbic lobe, it was thought 
to be primarily an olfactory system. And even though our perspective has 
changed much since Broca’s time, parts of the brain involved in olfaction 
have  been  included  in  the  deﬁ nition  of  the  limbic  system.  We  will  see 
in Chapter 24 that some of the limbic structures are also important for 
learning and memory. Emotions are nebulous experiences that inﬂ uence 
our brains and behavior in many ways, so it seems logical that emotional 
processing should be intertwined with other brain functions. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
affective neuroscience (p. 616)

Early Theories of Emotion
James–Lange theory (p. 617)
Cannon–Bard theory (p. 617)
unconscious emotion (p. 619)

The Limbic System
limbic lobe (p. 622)
Papez circuit (p. 622)
limbic system (p. 623)

Emotion Theories and Neural 
Representations
basic theories of emotion (p. 626)
basic emotions (p. 626)
dimensional theories of emotion 

(p. 627)

psychological constructionist 
theories of emotion (p. 628)

Fear and the Amygdala
Klüver–Bucy syndrome (p. 630)
amygdala (p. 631)
learned fear (p. 633)

Anger and Aggression
predatory aggression (p. 636)
affective aggression (p. 636)
psychosurgery (p. 636)
sham rage (p. 638)
medial forebrain bundle (p. 639)
dorsal longitudinal fasciculus 

periaqueductal gray matter 

(PAG) (p. 640)

serotonin deﬁ ciency hypothesis 

(p. 639)

(p. 640)

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   642
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   642

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER 18    BRAIN MECHANISMS OF EMOTION

643

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1. According  to  the  James–Lange  and  Cannon–Bard  theories  of  emotion,  what  is  the  relationship
 between the anxiety you would feel after oversleeping through an exam and your physical responses 
to the situation? Would you experience anxiety before or after the increase in your heart rate?

2. How have the deﬁ nition of the limbic system and thoughts about its function changed since the

time of Broca?

3. What procedures produce an abnormal rage reaction in an experimental animal? Can we know

that the animal feels angry?

4. What changes in emotion were observed following temporal lobectomy in monkeys by Klüver
and Bucy? Of the numerous anatomical structures they removed, which is thought to be closely
related to changes in temperament?

5. Why might performing bilateral amygdalectomy on a dominant monkey in a colony result in that

monkey becoming a subordinate?

6. What assumptions about limbic structures underlie the surgical treatment of emotional disorders?
7. The drug ﬂ uoxetine (Prozac) is a serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitor. How might this drug

 affect a person’s level of anxiety and aggression?

8. What  distinguishes  basic  emotion,  dimensional,  and  psychological  constructionist  theories  of

emotion?

9. How do patterns of brain activation differ for sadness and fear?

aaaaaa

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G 

Barrett LF, Satpute AB. 2013. Large-scale 

networks in affective and social neuroscience: 
towards an integrative functional architecture 
of the brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
23:361–372.

Dagleish T. 2004. The emotional brain. Nature 

Reviews 5:582–589.

Dolan RJ. 2002. Emotion, cognition, and behav-

ior. Science 298:1191–1194.

Duke AA, Bell R, Begue L, Eisenlohr-Moul T. 

2013. Revisiting the serotonin-aggression rela-
tion in humans: a meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin 139:1148–1172.

Gendron M, Barrett LF. 2009. Reconstructing 
the past: a century of ideas about emotion in 
psychology. Emotion Review 1:316–339.

Gross CT, Canteras NS. 2012. The many paths to 
fear. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13:651–658.

Hamann S. 2012. Mapping discrete and dimen-
sional emotions onto the brain: controversies 
and consensus. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
16:458–466.

LeDoux J. 2012. Rethinking the emotional brain. 

Neuron 73:653–676.

Lindquist KA, Wager TD, Kober H, Bliss-Moreau 

E, Barrett LF. 2012. The brain basis of emo-
tion: a meta-analytic review. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences 35:121–143.

McGaugh JL. 2004 The amygdala modulates 
the consolidation of memories of emotion-
ally arousing experiences. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 27:1–28.

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   643
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   643

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   644
615–644_Bear_18_revised_final.indd   644

12/20/14   7:27 AM
12/20/14   7:27 AM

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Brain Rhythms and Sleep

INTRODUCTION
THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM

Recording Brain Waves

 BOX 19.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: The Puzzle of Brain Rhythms, 
by Stephanie R. Jones

EEG Rhythms
Mechanisms and Meanings of Brain Rhythms

The Generation of Synchronous Rhythms
Functions of Brain Rhythms

The Seizures of Epilepsy

SLEEP

The Functional States of the Brain
The Sleep Cycle

 BOX 19.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Walking, Talking, and Screaming 
in Your Sleep

Why Do We Sleep?

 BOX 19.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Longest All-Nighter

Functions of Dreaming and REM Sleep
Neural Mechanisms of Sleep

Wakefulness and the Ascending Reticular Activating System
 BOX 19.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Narcolepsy
Falling Asleep and the Non-REM State
Mechanisms of REM Sleep
Sleep-Promoting Factors
Gene Expression during Sleeping and Waking

CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS

Biological Clocks
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: A Brain Clock

 BOX 19.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Mutant Hamster Clocks

SCN Mechanisms

CONCLUDING REMARKS

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   645
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   645

645645645

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

646

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Earth has a rhythmic environment. Temperature, precipitation, and day-
light vary with the seasons; light and dark trade places each day; tides 
ebb and ﬂ ow. To compete effectively and survive, an animal’s behavior 
must oscillate with the cadences of its environment. Brains have evolved 
a variety of systems for rhythmic control. Sleeping and waking are the 
most  striking  periodic  behavior.  But  some  rhythms  controlled  by  the 
brain  have  much  longer  periods,  as  in  hibernating  animals,  and  many 
have shorter periods, such as the cycles of breathing, the steps of walking, 
the repetitive stages of one night’s sleep, and the electrical rhythms of the 
cerebral cortex. The functions of some rhythms are obvious, while others 
are obscure, and some rhythms indicate pathology. 

 In  this  chapter,  we  explore  selected  brain  rhythms,  beginning  with 
the fast and proceeding to the slow. The forebrain, especially the cere-
bral cortex, produces a range of rapid electrical rhythms that are easily 
measured and that closely correlate with interesting behaviors, including 
sleep.  We  discuss  the  electroencephalogram,  or  EEG,  because  it  is  the 
classical method of recording brain rhythms and is essential for study-
ing sleep. Sleep is explored in detail because it is complex, ubiquitous, 
and so dear to our hearts. Finally, we summarize what is known about 
the timers that regulate the everyday ups and downs of our hormones, 
body  temperature,  alertness,  and  metabolism.  Almost  all  physiological 
functions change according to daily cycles known as circadian rhythms. 
The clocks that time circadian rhythms are in the brain, calibrated by the 
sun via the visual system, and they profoundly inﬂ uence our health and 
well-being. 

 THE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM 
THE EELECTTROENCEPHALOGRRAM 

 Sometimes  the  forest  is  more  interesting  than  the  trees.  Similarly, 
we  are  often  less  concerned  with  the  activities  of  single  neurons  than 
with  understanding  the  activity  of  a  large  population  of  neurons.  The 
  electroencephalogram (EEG)  is a measurement of electrical activity 
from  the  surface  of  the  scalp  that  enables  us  to  glimpse  the  general-
ized  activity  of  the  cerebral  cortex.  The  roots  of  the  EEG  lie  in  work 
done by English physiologist Richard Caton in 1875. Caton made electri-
cal recordings from the surface of dog and rabbit brains using a primi-
tive device sensitive to voltage. The human EEG was ﬁ rst described by 
Austrian psychiatrist Hans Berger in 1929, who observed that waking 
and  sleeping  EEGs  are  distinctly  different.  Figure  19.1  shows  one  of 
his ﬁ rst published records, taken from the head of his 15-year-old son, 
Klaus. Today, the EEG is used primarily to help diagnose certain neu-
rological conditions, especially the seizures of epilepsy, and for research 
purposes,  notably  to  study  the  stages  of  sleep  and  cognitive  processes 
during wakefulness. 

▲ FIGURE 19.1
The first published human EEG rhythm.  
(Source: Berger, 1929.)

EEG

10 Hz time signal

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   646
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   646

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

647

 Recording Brain Waves 
 Recording  an  EEG  is  relatively  simple.  The  method  is  usually  nonin-
vasive and is painless. Countless people have slept through entire nights 
wearing  EEG  electrodes  in  the  comfort  of  sleep  research  laboratories 
(Figure 19.2). The electrodes are wires taped to the scalp, along with con-
ductive paste to ensure a low-resistance connection. Figure 19.3 shows 
a  common  EEG  conﬁ guration,  in  which  some  two  dozen  electrodes  are 
ﬁ xed to standard positions on the head and connected to banks of ampli-
ﬁ ers and recording devices. Small voltage ﬂ uctuations, usually a few tens 
of microvolts ( ␮ V) in amplitude, are measured between selected pairs of 
electrodes. Different regions of the brain—anterior and posterior, left and 
right—can be examined by selecting the appropriate electrode pairs. The 
typical EEG record is a set of many simultaneous squiggles, indicating 
voltage changes between pairs of electrodes. 

 What part of the nervous system generates the ﬂ uctuations and oscilla-
tions of an EEG? For the most part, an EEG measures voltages  generated 
by  the  currents  that  ﬂ ow  during  synaptic  excitation  of  the  dendrites  of 
many pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex, which lies right under the 
skull and makes up most of the brain’s mass. But the electrical contribu-
tion of any single cortical neuron is exceedingly small, and the signal must 
penetrate  several  layers  of  non-neural  tissue,  including  the  meninges, 
ﬂ uid, bones of the skull, and skin, to reach the electrodes (Figure 19.4). 
Therefore, it takes many thousands of underlying neurons, activated to-
gether, to generate an EEG signal big enough to be measured at all. 

 This  has  an  interesting  consequence:  The  amplitude  of  the  EEG  sig-
nal strongly depends, in part, on how  synchronous  is the activity of the 
underlying neurons. When a group of cells is excited simultaneously, the 
tiny  signals  sum  to  generate  one  larger  surface  signal.  However,  when 
each cell receives the same amount of excitation but the excitations are 
spread out in time, the summed signals are meager and irregular (Figure 
19.5). Notice that in this case, the  number  of activated cells and the  total 
amount of excitation  may not have changed, only the timing of the activity. 
If synchronous excitation of this group of cells is repeated again and again, 
the resulting EEG will consist of large, rhythmic waves. We often describe 

▲ FIGURE 19.2
A subject in a sleep research study. 
 The subject shown here is American 
sleep researcher Nathaniel Kleitman, 
codiscoverer of REM sleep. The white 
patches on his head are pieces of tape 
holding EEG electrodes, and those next 
to his eyes hold electrodes that monitor 
his eye movements. (Source: Carskadon, 
1993.)

Cz

F3

Fp1

F7

C3

T3

P3
T5 O1

Amplifier

Fp2

Fp1

F8

F4

F3

F7

Right
A2

T4

T6

Cz

C4

P4

O2

C3 P3

O1

T3

T5

A1
Left

▲ FIGURE 19.3
Standard positions for the placement of EEG electrodes.  A, auricle (or ear); C, 
central; Cz, vertex; F, frontal; Fp, frontal pole; O, occipital; P, parietal; T, temporal. 
Wires from pairs of electrodes are fed to amplifiers, and each recording measures 
voltage differences between two points on the scalp. The output of each amplifier 
is stored in a computer for analysis and display.

50 μV

1 sec

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   647
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   647

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

648

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Amplifier EEG

EEG electrode

▲ FIGURE 19.4
The generation of very small electrical 
fields by synaptic currents in pyramidal 
cells. In this case, the active synapse is 
on the upper part of the dendrite. When 
the afferent axon fires, the presynaptic 
terminal releases glutamate, which opens 
cation channels. Positive current flows 
into the dendrite, leaving a slight negativ-
ity in the extracellular fluid. Current 
spreads down the dendrite and escapes 
from its deeper parts, leaving the fluid 
slightly positive at those sites. The EEG 
electrode (referred to a second electrode 
some distance away)  measures this pat-
tern through thick  tissue layers. Only if 
thousands of cells contribute their small 
voltage is the  signal large enough to 
reach the scalp surface. (Notice the EEG 
convention of plotting the signals with 
negativity upward.)

Active synapse

Afferent axon

Scalp

Skull

Dura
mater
Arachnoid
Subarachnoid
space
Pia mater

Efferent
axon 

rhythmic EEG signals in terms of their relative amplitude, suggesting how 
synchronous the underlying activity is (although other factors,  especially 
the number of active neurons, contribute to amplitude as well). 

 An alternative way to record the rhythms of the cerebral cortex is with 
 magnetoencephalography (MEG) . Recall from physics that whenever 
electrical  current  ﬂ ows,  a  magnetic  ﬁ eld  is  generated  according  to  the 
“right hand rule” (hold up your right hand loosely; if your thumb points 
in the direction of electrical current ﬂ ow, the rest of your curling ﬁ ngers 
indicate the direction of the magnetic ﬁ eld). It stands to reason that when 
neurons generate currents, as in Figure 19.4, they should also produce a 
magnetic ﬁ eld. But the magnetic ﬁ eld they generate is minuscule. Even 
the  strongest  brain  activity,  with  many  synchronously  active  neurons 
contributing, produces a ﬁ eld strength just one billionth that of the mag-
netic ﬁ eld generated by the Earth, nearby power lines, and the movement 
of distant metal objects such as elevators and cars. Detecting the brain’s 
inﬁ nitesimal magnetic signals in the midst of those relatively immense 
sources of environmental magnetic “noise” is analogous to listening for 
the footsteps of a mouse in the middle of a rock concert! It requires a spe-
cially screened room to shield out the magnetic noise and a large, expen-
sive instrument with highly sensitive magnetic detectors that are cooled 
with liquid helium to –269°C (Figure 19.6). 

 The capabilities of MEG complement those of other methods that measure 
brain function. MEG is much better than EEG at localizing the sources of 
neural activity in the brain, particularly those deep below the surface. Like 
EEG, MEG can record rapid ﬂ uctuations of neural activity that are much 
too fast to be detected by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   648
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   648

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

649

EEG electrode

Irregular

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sum = EEG

1

2

3

4

5

6
Sum = EEG

(b)

Synchronized 

1

2

3

4

6

5

(a)

(c)

▲ FIGURE 19.5
The generation of large EEG signals by synchronous activity.  (a) In a population 
of pyramidal cells located under an EEG electrode, each neuron receives many syn-
aptic inputs. (b) If the inputs fire at irregular intervals, the pyramidal cell responses 
are not synchronized, and the summed activity detected by the electrode has a 
small amplitude. (c) If the same number of inputs fire within a narrow time window 
so the pyramidal cell responses are synchronized, the resulting EEG is much larger.

▲ FIGURE 19.6
Magnetoencephalography (MEG). (a) A person receiving an MEG scan. (b) The 
tiny magnetic signals generated by neurons on the brain are  detected by an array 
of 150 sensitive magnetic detectors. (c) Researchers use the signals to calculate 
the  locations of sources of neural activity (color-coded, in this image). (Sources: 
part a, http://infocenter.nimh.nih.gov/il/public_il/image_details.cfm?id=80; parts b 
and c, Los Alamos National Laboratory.)

(a)

(b)

(c)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   649
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   649

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

650

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 19.1

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

The Puzzle of Brain Rhythms
by Stephanie R. Jones 

I’ve always loved a good puzzle, and what better puzzle is 

there  than  understanding  how  our  brains  form  perceptions 
and  actions?  This  isn’t  the  puzzle  I  set  out  to  solve  at  the 
start  of  my  career.  My  analytic  nature  led  me  to  pursue  a 
Ph.D.  in  mathematics  at  Boston  University.  I  intended  to 
study the mathematics of chaos, but as with many careers 
my  path  diverged  unexpectedly.  A  year  into  my  graduate 
study,  mathematician  Nancy  Kopell  established  the  Center 
for BioDynamics, catalyzing growing interest in the applica-
tions of dynamical systems theory to the study of biological 
phenomena,  including  neuroscience.  After  attending  a  few 
neuroscience lectures, I knew this was a puzzle I wanted to 
help solve. To my good fortune, Nancy took me on as a stu-
dent. I began using mathematics to study rhythmic activity in 
simpliﬁ ed representations of neural circuits, such as the cen-
tral pattern-generating network that regulates crayﬁ sh swim-
ming.  By  the  time  I  ﬁ nished  my  mathematics  Ph.D.,  I  was 
passionate about neuroscience. I knew I wanted to apply my 
knowledge to understand human brain dynamics. Little did I 
know just how many pieces are in that puzzle! 

For the next decade, I studied human brain rhythms using 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) in the brain-imaging center at 

Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). At MGH, my path of 
discovery was again shaped by the gift of fantastic mentors and 
colleagues. The ﬁ rst is my now close colleague, neurophysiologist 
Chris Moore, who was himself a postdoctoral fellow at the time. 
Chris enlightened me to the nuances of neuroscience and to the 
idea that the somatosensory system was the “ideal system to 
study” because of its puzzle-like topographical representation 
of the body, the homunculus (see Figure 12.19). With MEG we 
began studying tactile perception, such as the detection of light 
taps to the ﬁ ngertips, in humans. Chris’s notion that this system 
was “ideal” was fortuitous, as was revealed in a surprising way 
through the mentorship of physicist Matti Hämäläinen, director 
of the MEG center. Matti taught me the ins and outs of MEG 
data  collection  and,  importantly,  the  electromagnetic  physics 
underlying these brain signals. I learned that the intracellular cur-
rents within the long, aligned dendrites of pyramidal neurons are 
the primary generators of the recorded magnetic ﬁ eld signals. 
Further, the pyramidal neurons in primary somatosensory cortex 
(S1) are “ideally” oriented to produce strong MEG signals during 
ﬁ nger taps that can be reliably localized to the hand representa-
tion in S1. This enabled us to do careful studies of the neural 
generators of brain rhythms. 

positron emission tomography (PET) (see Box 7.3). MEG cannot provide the 
spatially detailed images of fMRI, however. Another important distinction is 
that EEG and MEG directly measure the activity of neurons, whereas fMRI 
and PET detect changes in blood ﬂ ow or metabolism, which are controlled in 
part by neuronal activity but which may also be inﬂ uenced by other physi-
ological factors. MEG is currently being used in experimental studies of the 
human brain and its cognitive functions and as an aid in the diagnosis of 
epilepsy and language disorders (Box 19.1). 

 EEG Rhythms 
 EEG rhythms vary dramatically and often correlate with particular states 
of behavior (such as level of attentiveness, sleeping, or waking) and pathol-
ogy (seizures or coma). Figure 19.7 shows part of a normal EEG. The brain 
can generate rhythms that are as slow as about 0.05 Hz and as fast as 500 
Hz or more. The main EEG rhythms are categorized by their frequency 
range, and each range is named after a Greek letter.  Delta rhythms  are 
slow, less than 4 Hz, are often large in amplitude, and are a hallmark of 
deep sleep.  Theta rhythms  are 4–7 Hz and can occur during both sleeping 
and waking states.  Alpha rhythms  are about 8–13 Hz, are largest over the 
occipital cortex, and are associated with quiet, waking states;  Mu rhythms
are similar in frequency to alpha rhythms but are largest over the motor 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   650
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   650

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

651

As with all MEG (and EEG) recordings, the dominant activities 
from S1 are low-frequency, large-amplitude rhythms, including 
the  beta  rhythms  of  15–29  Hz.  We  discovered  that  when  a 
subject directs her attention to her ﬁ nger before it is tapped, 
the beta rhythms in the hand area of S1 decrease compared 
to when her attention is directed elsewhere. Attention and re-
duced beta rhythms correlated with an increase in the subject’s 
ability to feel a light tap. Our results were similar to previous 
ﬁ ndings in the visual cortex, suggesting that beta rhythms may 
signal inhibitory processes in sensory areas of cortex. But why? 
What is it about these rhythms, if anything, that links them to 
decreased perception? And why, in conditions like Parkinson’s 
disease, are beta rhythms over-expressed in motor cortex with 
a corresponding decrease in motor actions? 

To  address  this  piece  of  the  puzzle,  I  turned  to  my 
mathematics roots and began constructing a computational 
neural model to study the origins of these rhythms. My prior 
research  had  given  me  solid  intuitions  about  how  stable 
rhythms  can  emerge  from  neural  circuits.  However,  after 
much exploration using simpliﬁ ed mathematical representa-
tions of neural circuits (e.g., collapsing the activity of an en-
tire neuron to a single point), I realized these models simply 
could not reproduce signals that resembled the recordings. 
Next, I drew on the pioneering work of Yoshio Okada, who 
combined  experimental  and  mathematical  modeling  to  un-
derstand  MEG  signals  from  pyramidal  neurons.  Equipped 
with my new knowledge of the biophysics underlying MEG, 
I constructed more complex models that included details of 
the structure and physiology of pyramidal neurons and other 

cortical neuron types. This endeavor spanned several years 
that also included the birth of the ﬁ rst of my three children. 

To  my  delight,  the  detailed  model  yielded  novel  and  non-
intuitive  predictions  about  rhythms.  Speciﬁ cally,  it  predicted 
that beta rhythms emerge from the integration of two sets of 
synaptic  inputs  that  are  roughly  synchronous  and  that  excite 
different  parts  of  pyramidal  cell  dendrites.  These  inputs  drive 
alternating electrical currents up and down within the dendrites 
to  reproduce  rhythms  remarkably  consistent  with  recordings. 
The model not only accounted for many features of the MEG 
rhythms in S1 but also suggested how these rhythms inﬂ uence 
sensory  processing.  I  subsequently  tested  these  secondary 
predictions with the MEG data, and to my surprise they were 
conﬁ rmed! This discovery was thrilling since the mathematical 
model was now predicting what the data from new experiments 
would look like. Finally, pieces of the puzzle were ﬁ tting together!
The  close  agreement  between  the  model’s  output  and 
the recorded human data gives us conﬁ dence in the model’s 
predictions about how neurons generate beta rhythms. More 
importantly, the model suggests how rhythms inﬂ uence brain 
function. Through continued collaboration with Chris Moore 
and  other  neurophysiologists  and  neurosurgeons,  we  are 
currently testing model-derived predictions with electrode re-
cordings. We may discover the pieces do not ﬁ t together ex-
actly as the model suggests. However, through collaboration 
and the interplay of interdisciplinary methods, I am convinced 
we can build interpretive bridges between neural activity and 
human brain functions. Solving the puzzle of brain rhythms 
will be an important and exciting step along the way.

and  somatosensory  areas.   Beta  rhythms   are  about  15–30  Hz.   Gamma 
rhythms  are relatively fast, ranging from about 30–90 Hz, and signal an 
activated or attentive cortex. Additional rhythms include  spindles , brief 
8–14 Hz waves associated with sleep, and  ripples , brief bouts of 80–200 
Hz oscillations. An interesting feature of EEG rhythms is that their char-
acteristics are remarkably similar across mammalian brains from mice to 
humans, despite 17,000-fold differences in brain mass (Figure 19.8). 

Time (sec)

Blink artifacts

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Electrode
positions

Alpha rhythms

Beta rhythms

50 μV

▲ FIGURE 19.7
A normal EEG.  The subject is awake 
and quiet, and recording sites are indi-
cated at the left. The first few seconds 
show normal alpha activity, which has 
frequencies of 8–13 Hz and is largest in 
the occipital regions. About halfway 
through the recording, the subject 
opened his eyes, signaled by the large 
blink artifacts on the top traces (arrows), 
and alpha rhythms were suppressed.

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   651
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   651

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

652

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Alpha rhythms

(neocortex)

Spindles

(neocortex)

Ripples

(hippocampus)

K-complex

(a)  

10 sec

350 msec

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0.01

)
z
H

(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

Bat

Gerbil

Rat

Rabbit

Dog

Chimp

Sheep
Baboon

Ripple

Gamma

Spindle
Alpha

Theta
Slow 1

Slow 3

Mouse Hamster Guinea

pig

Cat

Pig

Human

Macaque

10-1

100

101

102

103

104

(b)  

Brain weight (g)

▲ FIGURE 19.8
EEG rhythms across species.  (a) Examples of alpha rhythms, spindles, and ripples 
from human, macaque monkey, cat, rabbit, and rat. Note that the 10 sec calibration for 
alpha rhythms also applies to the spindles. (b) Relationship between the brain weight 
and main frequency for each type of EEG rhythm across species. Each colored line 
represents the frequencies of a single type of rhythm recorded from several species 
(the absence of data about a particular rhythm for a species does not necessarily 
mean that species lacks that rhythm). Note how little the properties of the EEG 
rhythms vary despite the vast range of brain sizes. (Source: Buzsáki et al., 2013)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   652
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   652

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

653

 While  analysis  of  an  EEG  cannot  tell  us   what   a  person  is  thinking, 
it can help us know  if  a person is thinking. In general, high-frequency, 
low-amplitude rhythms are associated with alertness and waking, or the 
dreaming stages of sleep. Low-frequency, high-amplitude rhythms are as-
sociated  with  nondreaming  sleep  states,  certain  drugged  states,  or  the 
pathological condition of coma. This is logical because when the cortex is 
most actively engaged in processing information, whether generated by 
sensory input or by internal processes, the activity level of cortical neu-
rons is relatively high but also relatively unsynchronized. In other words, 
each neuron, or a very small group of neurons, is vigorously involved in 
a slightly different aspect of a complex cognitive task; it ﬁ res rapidly but 
not  quite  simultaneously  with  most  of  its  neighbors.  This  leads  to  low 
synchrony, so EEG amplitude is low, and gamma and beta rhythms domi-
nate. In contrast, during deep sleep, cortical neurons are not engaged in 
information processing, and large numbers of them are phasically excited 
by a common, slow, rhythmic input. In this case, synchrony is high, so 
EEG amplitude is high. 

 Mechanisms and Meanings of Brain Rhythms 
 Electrical rhythms abound in the cerebral cortex. But how are they gen-
erated, and what functions, if any, do they perform? Let’s take a look at 
each of these questions. 

 The Generation of Synchronous Rhythms. The activity of a large set of 
neurons will produce synchronized oscillations in one of two fundamental 
ways: (1) They may all take their cues from a central clock, or  pacemaker , 
or (2) they may share or distribute the timing function among themselves 
by  mutually  exciting  or  inhibiting  one  another. The  ﬁ rst  mechanism  is 
analogous to a band with a leader, with each musician playing in strict 
time to the beat of the leader’s baton (Figure 19.9a). The second mecha-
nism is more subtle because the timing arises from the collective behavior 
of the cortical neurons themselves. Musically, it is more like a jam session 
(Figure 19.9b). 

 The concept of shared synchronous rhythm can be easily demonstrated 
by  a  group  of  people,  even  nonmusical  ones.  Simply  tell  them  to  begin 
clapping, but give them no instructions about how fast to clap or whose 
beat to follow. Almost immediately they will all be clapping in synchrony! 
How? By listening and watching each other, they will adjust their clap-
ping  rates  to  match.  A  key  factor  is  person-to-person  interaction;  in  a 
network  of  neurons,  these  interactions  occur  via  synaptic  connections. 
People  naturally  tend  to  clap  within  a  narrow  range  of  frequencies,  so 
they  don’t  have  to  adjust  their  timing  very  far  in  order  to  clap  in  syn-
chrony.  Likewise,  some  neurons  may  ﬁ re  at  certain  frequencies  much 
more than others. This kind of collective, organized behavior can gener-
ate rhythms of impressive dimensions, which can move in space and time. 
Have  you  ever  been  part  of  a  human  wave  in  the  stands  of  a  sold-out 
football stadium? 

 Many different circuits of neurons can generate rhythmic activity. A very 
simple model oscillator, consisting of just one excitatory and one inhibitory 
neuron, is shown in Figure 19.10. Most real neural oscillators include far 
more neurons but similar basic features: a source of constant excitatory 
drive, feedback connections, and synaptic excitation and inhibition. 

 Within the mammalian brain, rhythmic, synchronous activity is usu-
ally coordinated by a combination of the pacemaker and collective meth-
ods.  For  example,  the  thalamus,  with  its  massive  input  to  all  of  the 

(a)  

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 19.9
Two mechanisms of synchronous 
rhythms.  Synchronous rhythms can 
(a) be led by a pacemaker or (b) arise 
from the collective behavior of all 
 participants.

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   653
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   653

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

654

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Constantly

active

excitatory

input

E cell

I cell

Excitatory input
axon firing pattern

E cell 
firing pattern

I cell 
firing pattern

One
cycle

▲ FIGURE 19.10
A two-neuron oscillator.  One excitatory 
cell (E cell) and one inhibitory cell (I cell) 
synapse upon each another. As long as 
there is a constant excitatory drive 
(which does not have to be rhythmic) 
onto the E cell, activity will tend to trade 
back and forth between the two neu-
rons. One activity cycle through the net-
work will generate the pattern of firing 
shown in the dashed box.

cortex, can act as a powerful pacemaker. Under certain conditions, tha-
lamic neurons can generate very rhythmic action potential discharges 
(Figure 19.11). But how do thalamic neurons oscillate? Some thalamic 
cells have a particular set of voltage-gated ion channels that allow each 
cell to generate very rhythmic, self-sustaining discharge patterns even 
when there is no external input to the cell. The rhythmic activity of each 
thalamic  pacemaker  neuron  then  becomes  synchronized  with  many 
other thalamic cells via a hand-clapping kind of collective interaction. 
Synaptic connections between excitatory and inhibitory thalamic neu-
rons force each individual neuron to conform to the rhythm of the group. 
These coordinated rhythms are then passed to the cortex by the thala-
mocortical axons, which excite cortical neurons. In this way, a relatively 
small  group  of  centralized  thalamic  cells  (acting  as  the  band  leader) 
can compel a much larger group of cortical cells (acting as the band) to 
march to the thalamic beat (Figure 19.12). 

 Some  rhythms  of  the  cerebral  cortex  do  not  depend  on  a  thalamic 
pacemaker but rely instead on the collective, cooperative interactions of 
cortical neurons themselves. In this case, the excitatory and inhibitory 
interconnections of the neurons result in a coordinated, synchronous pat-
tern of activity that may remain localized or spread to encompass larger 
regions of cortex. 

Stimulus
current

200

600
Time (msec)

1000

1400

1800

+30

0

–30

–60

)

V
m

(
 
l

a

i
t

n
e

t

 

o
p
e
n
a
r
b
m
e
M

(a)  

+30

0

–30

–60

)

V
m

(
 
l

a

i
t

 

n
e
t
o
p
e
n
a
r
b
m
e
M

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 19.11
A one-neuron oscillator.  At times during sleep states, thalamic neurons fire in 
rhythmic patterns that do not reflect their input. Shown here are intracellular 
recordings of membrane voltage in such a case. (a) A short pulse (less than 
0.1 second) of stimulus current was applied, and the cell responded with al-
most 2 seconds of rhythmic firing, first with bursts at about 5 Hz and then 
with single spikes. (b) Two of the bursts expanded in time; each burst is a 
cluster of five or six action potentials. (Source: Adapted from Bal and 
McCormick, 1993, Fig. 2.)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   654
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   654

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

655

 Functions of Brain Rhythms. Cortical rhythms are fascinating to watch in 
an EEG, and they parallel so many interesting human behaviors that we 
are compelled to ask: Why so many rhythms? More importantly, do they 
serve a purpose? There are no satisfactory answers yet. Ideas abound, but 
deﬁ nitive  evidence  is  scarce.  One  hypothesis  for  sleep-related  rhythms 
is that they are the brain’s way of disconnecting the cortex from sensory 
input. When you are awake, the thalamus allows sensory information to 
pass  through  it  and  be  relayed  up  to  the  cortex. When  you  are  asleep, 
thalamic neurons enter a self-generated rhythmic state that prevents or-
ganized sensory information from being relayed to the cortex. While this 
idea has intuitive appeal (most people do prefer to sleep in a dark, quiet 
environment), it does not explain why rhythms are necessary. Why not 
just steadily inhibit the thalamus and allow the cortex to rest quietly? 

 A  function  for  fast  rhythms  in  the  awake  cortex  has  also  been  pro-
posed. One scheme for understanding visual perception takes advantage 
of the fact that cortical neurons responding to the same object are syn-
chronously active. Walter Freeman, a neurobiologist at the University of 
California, Berkeley, pioneered the idea that neural rhythms are used to 
coordinate activity between regions of the nervous system. Both sensory 
and motor systems of the awake brain often generate bursts of synchro-
nous neural activity that give rise to EEG gamma rhythms (30–90 Hz). 
 By momentarily synchronizing the fast oscillations generated by dif-
ferent regions of cortex, perhaps the brain binds together various neural 
components into a single perceptual construction. For example, when you 
are trying to catch a basketball, different groups of neurons that simul-
taneously respond to the speciﬁ c shape, color, movement, distance, and 
even  the  signiﬁ cance  of  the  basketball  tend  to  oscillate  synchronously. 
The fact that the oscillations of these scattered groups of cells (those that 
together  encode  “basketballness”)  are  highly  synchronous  would  some-
how tag them as a meaningful group, distinct from other nearby neurons, 
thereby unifying the disjointed neural pieces of the “basketball puzzle.” 
The evidence for this idea is indirect, far from proven, and understand-
ably controversial. 

 For now, the functions of rhythms in the cerebral cortex are largely a 
mystery. One plausible hypothesis is that most rhythms have no direct 
function. Instead, they may be intriguing but unimportant by-products of 
the tendency for brain circuits to be strongly interconnected, with various 
forms of excitatory feedback. When something excites itself, whether it 
is an audio ampliﬁ er or the human stadium wave, it often leads to insta-
bility or oscillation. Feedback circuits are essential for the cortex to do 
all the marvelous things it does for us. Oscillations may be the unavoid-
able consequence of so much feedback circuitry, unwanted but tolerated 
by necessity. Even if they don’t have a function, however, EEG rhythms 
provide us with a convenient window on the functional states of the brain. 

Cortex

Output
pathways

Thalamus

Afferent
pathways

▲ FIGURE 19.12
Rhythms in the thalamus drive rhythms 
in the cerebral cortex.  The thalamus 
can generate rhythmic activity because of 
the intrinsic properties of its neurons and 
because of its synaptic interconnections. 
In the thalamus, green represents a pop-
ulation of excitatory neurons, and black 
represents a population of inhibitory neu-
rons.

 The Seizures of Epilepsy 
 Seizures, the most extreme form of synchronous brain activity, are always 
a sign of pathology. A  generalized seizure  involves the entire cerebral 
cortex of both hemispheres. A  partial seizure  involves only a circum-
scribed area of the cortex. In both cases, the neurons within the affected 
areas ﬁ re with a synchrony that never occurs during normal behavior. 
As a consequence, seizures are usually accompanied by very large EEG 
patterns. The cerebral cortex, probably because of its extensive feedback 
circuitry, is never far from the runaway excitation we know as a seizure. 
Isolated seizures are not uncommon during a lifetime, and 7–10% of peo-

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   655
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   655

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

656

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

ple in the general population have had at least one. When a person ex-
periences repeated seizures, the condition is known as  epilepsy . About 
0.7%  of  people  worldwide  (50  million)  have  epilepsy.  Epilepsy  is  more 
common in developing countries, particularly in rural areas, presumably 
because of higher rates of untreated childhood epilepsy, infections, and 
poor pre- and postnatal care. The diagnosis of epilepsy occurs most often 
in young children and among the elderly (Figure 19.13). Childhood epi-
lepsy is usually congenital, caused by genes or a disease or abnormality 
present at birth, whereas the elderly tend to acquire epilepsy as a conse-
quence of conditions such as stroke, tumors, or Alzheimer’s disease. 

 Epilepsy is more a symptom of disease than a disease itself. Its causes 
can sometimes be identiﬁ ed, including tumors, trauma, genetics, meta-
bolic dysfunction, infection, and vascular disease, but in many cases, the 
cause of epilepsy is not known. Different types of seizures have different 
underlying mechanisms. Some forms of epilepsy show a genetic predis-
position, and many of the genes responsible have been identiﬁ ed. These 
genes code for a diverse array of proteins, including ion channels, trans-
porters, receptors, and signaling molecules. Several mutations of genes 
that encode for sodium channel proteins, for example, have been linked 
to rare familial forms of epilepsy. These mutated sodium channels tend 
to stay open a bit longer than normal, allowing more sodium current to 
enter  the  neurons  and  thus  making  neurons  hyperexcitable.  Another 
group of mutations that lead to epilepsy impair synaptic inhibition medi-
ated by GABA by affecting its receptors, enzymes critical for its synthesis 
or transport, or proteins involved in its release. 

 Research suggests that some seizures reﬂ ect an upset of the delicate 
balance of synaptic excitation and inhibition in the brain. Other seizures 
may  be  due  to  excessively  strong  or  dense  excitatory  interconnections. 
Drugs that block GABA receptors are very potent  convulsants  (seizure-
promoting agents). The withdrawal of chronic depressant drugs, such as 
alcohol or barbiturates, may also trigger seizures. A variety of drugs are 
useful for the therapeutic suppression of seizures, and these  anticonvul-
sants  tend to counter excitability in various ways. For example, some act 
by prolonging the inhibitory actions of GABA (e.g., barbiturates and ben-
zodiazepines  [see  Figure  6.22]),  while  others  decrease  the  tendency  for 
certain  neurons  to  ﬁ re  action  potentials  at  a  high  frequency  (e.g.,  phe-
nytoin and carbamazepine). 

 The behavioral features of a seizure depend on the neurons involved 
and the patterns of their activity. During most forms of generalized sei-
zures, virtually all cortical neurons participate, so behavior is completely 

▲ FIGURE 19.13
Incidence of epilepsy by age.  The graph plots 
the number of new cases of epilepsy per 100,000 
people, as a function of age at the time of diagno-
sis. Data were compiled from 12 studies per-
formed in developed countries. (Source: D.J. 
Thurman, http://iom.edu/~/media/Files/Activity%20
Files/Disease/Epilepsy/Thurman%202.pdf.)

s
e
s
a
c
 
y
s
p
e

l
i

 

p
e
w
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

I

0
0
0

,

0
0
1
 
r
e
p

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Age (years)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   656
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   656

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

657

disrupted  for  many  minutes.  Consciousness  is  lost,  while  all  muscle 
groups  may  be  driven  by  tonic  (ongoing)  activity  or  by  clonic  (rhyth-
mic) patterns, or by both in sequence, the so-called  tonic–clonic seizure . 
 Absence seizures  characterize a childhood form of epilepsy, consisting of 
less than 30 seconds of generalized, 3 Hz EEG waves accompanied by loss 
of consciousness. An EEG recorded during an absence seizure illustrates 
several very striking abnormalities (Figure 19.14). The voltage patterns 
are extraordinarily large, regular, and rhythmic and are generated syn-
chronously across the entire brain. Despite this dramatic pattern of ac-
tivity, the motor signs of an absence seizure are strangely subtle, only 
ﬂ uttering eyelids or a twitching mouth. 

 Partial  seizures  can  be  instructive.  If  they  begin  in  a  small  area  of 
motor cortex, they can cause clonic movement of part of a limb. In the late 
1800s, British neurologist John Hughlings Jackson observed the progres-
sion of seizure-related movements across the body, looked at the lesions 

2

5

8

1

4

7

3

6

9

(a)

5 sec

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

(b)

▲ FIGURE 19.14
An EEG of a generalized epileptic seizure.  (a) EEG electrodes are placed at 
various positions on the scalp. (b) They detect a brief absence seizure that 
begins abruptly, is synchronized across the entire head, generates strong neural 
activity with rhythms of about 3 Hz, and ends abruptly after about 12 seconds. 
(Source: J.F. Lambert and N. Chantrier.)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   657
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   657

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

658

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

in his patients’ brains after they died, and correctly inferred the basic so-
matotopic map of the motor cortex (see Chapter 14). If seizures begin in a 
sensory area, they can trigger an abnormal sensation, or  aura , such as an 
odd smell or sparkling lights. Most bizarre are the partial seizures that 
elicit more well-formed auras such as  déjà vu  (the feeling that something 
has happened before) or hallucinations. Sometimes involving the cortex 
of  the  temporal  lobes,  including  the  hippocampus  and  amygdala,  they 
can impair memory, thought, and consciousness. In some cases, partial 
seizures may spread uncontrollably and become generalized seizures. 

SLEEP 
SLEEEP 

 Sleep and dreams—they are mysterious, even mystical to some people, 
and a favorite subject of art and literature, philosophy, and science. Sleep 
is a powerful master. Each night we abandon our companions, our work, 
and our play and enter the cloister of sleep. We have only limited control 
over  the  decision;  we  can  postpone  sleep  for  a  while,  but  eventually  it 
overwhelms us. We spend about one-third of our lives sleeping, and one-
quarter of that time in a state of active dreaming. 

 Sleep may be universal among higher vertebrates and perhaps among 
all animals. Research suggests that even the fruit ﬂ y,  Drosophila , sleeps. 
Prolonged sleep deprivation is devastating to proper functioning, at least 
temporarily, and in some animals (such as rats and cockroaches, though 
probably not in humans), it may even cause death. Sleep is essential to 
our lives, almost as important as eating and breathing. But why do we 
sleep? What purpose does it serve? Despite many years of research, the 
joke remains that the only thing we are sure of is that sleep overcomes 
sleepiness. But one of the wonderful things about science is that the lack 
of consensus inspires a ﬂ ourishing of theories, and sleep research is no 
exception. 

 We can still describe what we cannot explain, and sleep has been richly 
studied. Let’s begin with a deﬁ nition:  Sleep is a readily reversible state of 
reduced responsiveness to, and interaction with, the environment.  (Coma 
and general anesthesia are not readily reversible and do not qualify as 
sleep.)  In  the  sections  that  follow,  we  discuss  the  phenomenology  and 
neural mechanisms of sleep and dreaming. 

 The Functional States of the Brain 
 During a normal day, you experience two very different and noticeable 
types of behavior: waking and sleeping. It is much less obvious that your 
sleep also has very distinct phases or states. Several times during a night, 
you  enter  a  state  called   rapid  eye  movement  sleep ,  or   REM  sleep,  
when  your  EEG  looks  more  awake  than  asleep,  your  body  (except  for 
your eye and respiratory muscles) is immobilized, and you conjure up the 
vivid, detailed illusions we call dreams. The rest of the time, you spend in 
a state called  non-REM sleep , in which the brain does not usually gener-
ate complex dreams. (Non-REM sleep is also sometimes called  slow-wave 
sleep  because of its domination by large, slow EEG rhythms.) These fun-
damental behavioral states—awake, non-REM sleep, and REM sleep—
are produced by three distinct states of brain function (Table 19.1). Each 
behavioral state is also accompanied by large shifts in body function. 

 Non-REM sleep seems to be a period for rest. Muscle tension through-
out  the  body  is  reduced,  and  movement  is  minimal.  It  is  important  to 
realize that the body is  capable  of movement during non-REM sleep but 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   658
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   658

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

659

TABLE 19.1  Characteristics of the Three Functional States of the Brain
Behavior

Non-REM Sleep

Awake

REM Sleep

EEG
Sensation
Thought
Movement

Low voltage, fast
Vivid, externally generated
Logical, progressive
Continuous, voluntary

High voltage, slow
Dull or absent
Logical, repetitive
Occasional, involuntary

Low voltage, fast
Vivid, internally generated
Vivid, illogical, bizarre
Muscle paralysis; movement commanded 

by the brain but not carried out

Rapid eye movement

Often

Rare

Often

only rarely does the brain command it to move, usually to brieﬂ y adjust 
the body’s position. The temperature and energy consumption of the body 
are  lowered.  Because  of  an  increase  in  activity  of  the  parasympathetic 
division of the ANS, heart rate, respiration, and kidney function all slow 
down, and digestive processes speed up. 

 During non-REM sleep, the brain also seems to rest. Its rate of energy 
use, and the general ﬁ ring rates of its neurons, is at their lowest point 
of  the  day.  The  slow,  large-amplitude  EEG  rhythms  indicate  that  the 
 neurons of the cortex are oscillating in relatively high synchrony, and ex-
periments suggest that most sensory input cannot even reach the  cortex. 
While there is no way to know for certain what people are  thinking when 
they are asleep, studies indicate that mental processes also hit their daily 
low during the non-REM state. When awakened, people often recall noth-
ing, or only brief, fragmentary, plausible thoughts with few visual images. 
Detailed, entertaining, irrational dreams are rare, although not absent, 
during non-REM sleep. William Dement, a pioneering sleep researcher at 
Stanford University, characterizes non-REM sleep as  an idling brain in 
a movable body.  

 In  contrast,  Dement  calls  REM  sleep   an  active,  hallucinating  brain 
in a paralyzed body.  REM sleep is dreaming sleep. Although the REM 
period accounts for only a small part of our sleep time, it is the part most 
researchers get excited about (and this is the state that most excites the 
brain), perhaps because dreams are so intriguing and enigmatic. If you 
awaken someone during REM sleep, as Dement, Eugene Aserinsky, and 
Nathaniel  Kleitman  ﬁ rst  did  in  the  mid-1950s,  the  person  will  likely 
report visually detailed, lifelike episodes, often with bizarre story lines—
the kinds of dreams we love to talk about and try to interpret. 

 The  physiology  of  REM  sleep  is  also  bizarre.  The  EEG  looks  almost 
indistinguishable  from  that  of  an  active,  waking  brain,  with  fast,  low-
voltage ﬂ uctuations. This is why REM sleep is sometimes referred to as 
paradoxical sleep. In fact, the oxygen consumption of the brain (a mea-
sure  of  its  energy  use)  is  higher  in  REM  sleep  than  when  the  brain  is 
awake  and  concentrating  on  difﬁ cult  mathematical  problems.  The  pa-
ralysis that occurs during REM sleep is caused by an almost total loss of 
skeletal muscle tone or  atonia . Most of the body is actually  incapable  of 
moving! Respiratory muscles do continue to function but just barely. The 
muscles controlling eye movement and the tiny muscles of the inner ear 
are the exceptions; these are strikingly active. With lids closed, the eyes 
occasionally dart rapidly back and forth. These bursts of rapid eye move-
ment are the best predictors of vivid dreaming, and at least 90% of people 
awakened during or after them report dreams. 

 Physiological control systems are dominated by sympathetic activity 
during REM sleep. Inexplicably, the body’s temperature control system 
simply quits, and core temperature begins to drift downward. Heart and 
respiration  rates  increase  but  become  irregular.  In  healthy  people,  the 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   659
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   659

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

660

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

clitoris and penis become engorged with blood and erect, although this 
usually  has  nothing  to  do  with  any  sexual  content  of  dreams.  Overall, 
during REM sleep, the brain seems to be doing everything except resting. 

 The Sleep Cycle 
 Even a good night’s sleep is not a steady, unbroken journey. It normally 
begins with a period of non-REM sleep. Figure 19.15 shows that a typical 
full night of sleep includes a regular cycling of eye movements, physiologi-
cal functions, and penile erections through non-REM and REM periods. 
It is obvious that sleep takes the brain through a repetitive roller coaster 
ride of activity, and sometimes the ride is pretty wild (Box 19.2). Roughly 
75% of total sleep time is spent in non-REM and 25% in REM, with pe-
riodic cycles between these states throughout the night. Non-REM sleep 
is generally divided into four distinct stages. During a normal night, we 
slide through the stages of non-REM, then into REM, then back through 

Non-
REM

Non-
REM REM

Non-
REM REM

Non-
REM REM

Non-
REM REM

REM

Awake

Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4

s
e
g
a

t
s
 
G
E
E

(a)  

e
y
E

s
t

n
e
m
e
v
o
m

75

65

55

26

22

18

14

30

20

10

0

e

t

a
r
 
t
r
a
e
H

e

t

a
r
 
n
o

i
t

a
r
i
p
s
e
R

n
o

i
t
c
e
r
e
e

 

l
i

n
e
P

(b)  

▲ FIGURE 19.15
Physiological changes during non-
REM and REM sleep.  (a) This graph 
 represents one night of sleep, starting 
with a transition from awake to stage 1 
non-REM sleep. The sleep cycle pro-
gresses through the deeper stages of 
non-REM sleep, then into REM sleep. It 
is repeated several times, but each cycle 
has shorter and shallower non-REM pe-
riods and longer REM periods. (b) These 
graphs show regular increases in heart 
rate, respiration rate, and penile erection 
during the REM periods of one night 
sleep. (Source: Adapted from Purves 
et al., 2004, Fig. 27.7.)

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time of day (h)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   660
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   660

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

661

BOX 19.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Walking, Talking, and Screaming in Your Sleep

Sleep is not always serene and stationary. Talking, walk-

ing,  and  screaming  are  common,  usually  occurring  during 
non-REM  sleep.  If  this  seems  surprising,  remember  that 
REM  sleep  is  accompanied  by  almost  total  body  paralysis. 
You would therefore be incapable of walking or talking during 
REM sleep, even if your dream “urged” you to do it.

Sleepwalking, or somnambulism, peaks at about age 11. 
Although 40% of us were sleepwalkers as children, few of us 
sleepwalk as adults. Sleepwalking usually occurs during the 
ﬁ rst stage 4 non-REM period of the night. A full-blown sleep-
walking incident involves open eyes and movement around 
the room, the house, or even outside, with enough awareness 
to avoid objects and climb stairs. Cognitive functioning and 
judgment are severely impaired. It is often difﬁ cult to awaken 
sleepwalkers because they are in deep, slow-wave sleep. The 
best treatment is a guiding hand back to bed. Sleepwalkers 
usually have no memory of the incident the next morning.

Almost everyone practices sleep talking, somniloquy, now 
and then. Unfortunately, sleeping speech is often so garbled 

or nonsensical that a curious listener is disappointed by its 
emptiness.

More dramatic are sleep terrors, also known as night ter-
rors, which are most common in children 5–7 years old. A 
girl screams in the middle of the night. Her parents rush to 
her bedside, frantic to know what has alarmed her. The girl 
cries  inconsolably,  unable  to  explain  her  horrifying  experi-
ence. After 10 agonizing minutes of shrieking and ﬂ ailing, she 
ﬁ nally sleeps quietly, leaving the parents shaken and bafﬂ ed. 
The next morning she is bright and cheerful, with no recollec-
tion of the night’s misadventure. Sleep terrors are distinctly 
different from nightmares, which are vivid, complex dreams, 
outwardly quiet, that occur during REM sleep. By contrast, 
sleep  terrors  begin  in  stage  3  or  4  of  non-REM  sleep,  and 
the  experience  is  not  dreamlike  but  a  feeling  of  uncontrol-
lable panic, accompanied by greatly increased heart rate and 
blood pressure. They usually pass with adolescence and are 
not a symptom of a psychiatric disorder.

the non-REM stages again, repeating the cycle about every 90 minutes. 
These cycles are examples of  ultradian rhythms , which have faster pe-
riods than circadian rhythms. 

 EEG rhythms during the stages of sleep are shown in Figure 19.16. An 
average, healthy adult becomes drowsy and begins to sleep, ﬁ rst enter-
ing stage 1 non-REM sleep. Stage 1 is transitional sleep, when the EEG 
alpha rhythms of relaxed waking become less regular and wane, and the 
eyes make slow, rolling movements. Stage 1 is ﬂ eeting, usually lasting 
only a few minutes. It is also the lightest stage of sleep, meaning that 
we  are  most  easily  awakened.  Stage  2  is  slightly  deeper  and  may  last 
5–15  minutes.  Its  characteristics  include  the  occasional  8–14  Hz  oscil-
lation of the EEG called the  sleep spindle , which is generated by a tha-
lamic pacemaker (see Figure 19.12). In addition, a high-amplitude sharp 
wave called the  K complex  is sometimes observed. Eye movements almost 
cease. Next follows stage 3, and the EEG begins large-amplitude, slow 
delta rhythms. Eye and body movements are few. Stage 4 is the deepest 
stage of sleep, with large EEG rhythms of 2 Hz or less. During the ﬁ rst 
cycle of sleep, stage 4 may persist for 20–40 minutes. Then sleep begins to 
lighten again, ascends through stage 3 to stage 2 for 10–15 minutes, and 
suddenly enters a brief period of REM sleep, with its fast EEG beta and 
gamma rhythms and sharp, frequent eye movements. 

 As the night progresses, there is a general reduction in the duration 
of non-REM sleep, particularly in stages 3 and 4, and an increase in the 
REM periods. Half of the night’s REM sleep occurs during its last third, 
and the longest REM periods may last 30–50 minutes. Still, there seems 
to be an obligatory refractory period of about 30 minutes between periods 
of REM; in other words, each REM period is followed by at least 30 min-
utes of non-REM sleep before the next REM period can begin. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   661
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   661

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

662

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Alpha rhythms

Beta and gamma rhythms

Beta and gamma rhythms

Theta rhythms

Spindle

K complex

Delta rhythms

Awake

REM 
sleep

Stage 1
non-REM
sleep

Stage 2
non-REM
sleep

Stage 3
non-REM
sleep

Stage 4
non-REM
sleep

0

5

Delta rhythms

10

Time (sec)

15

20

▲ FIGURE 19.16
EEG rhythms during the stages of sleep.  (Source: Adapted from Horne, 1988, 
Fig. 1.1)

 What is a normal night’s sleep? Your mother may have insisted that 
you  need  a  “good  8  hours”  of  sleep  each  night.  Research  suggests  that 
normal requirements vary widely among adults, from about 5–10 hours 
per night. The average length is about 7.5 hours, and the sleep duration 
of  about  68%  of  young  adults  is  between  6.5  and  8.5  hours.  Teenagers 
may ﬁ nd it especially challenging to get enough sleep. Research by Mary 
Carskadon at Brown University suggests that sleep requirements do not 
decrease  between  preadolescence  and  early  teen  years,  but  changes  in 
circadian timing mechanisms make it progressively harder for teenagers 
to fall asleep early in the evening. This process often coincides with the 
move to high school and an earlier start of the school day. As a result, 
many  students  are  chronically  sleep-deprived,  which  is  an  unhealthy 
condition. Too little sleep can reduce cognitive, emotional, and physical 
well-being. 

 What is the proper length of sleep time for you? The best measure of 
successful  sleep  is  the  quality  of  your  time  awake.  You  need  a  certain 
amount of sleep in order to maintain a reasonable level of alertness. Too 
much daytime sleepiness can be more than annoying; it can be danger-
ous if it interferes with driving, for example. Because of the wide varia-
tions  among  individuals,  you  must  decide  for  yourself  how  much  sleep 
you need. 

 Why Do We Sleep? 
 All  mammals,  birds,  and  reptiles  appear  to  sleep,  although  only  mam-
mals and some birds have a REM phase. Sleep time varies widely, from 
about  18  hours  a  day  in  bats  and  opossums  to  about  3  hours  a  day  in 
horses and giraffes. Many people argue that a behavior as pervasive as 
sleep must have a critical function; otherwise, some species would have 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   662
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   662

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

663

Left

Right

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

5 sec

▲ FIGURE 19.17
Sleep in the bottlenose dolphin.  These EEG patterns were recorded from the 
right and left hemispheres of swimming dolphins. (a) High-frequency activity on 
both sides during alert wakefulness. (b) Large delta rhythms of deep sleep only 
on the right side, with fast activation on the left. (c) The patterns shift to opposite 
hemispheres some time later. (Source: Lyamin et al., 2008, Fig. 1.)

lost the need to sleep through evolution. Whatever the function, there is 
good reason to believe sleep is mainly for the brain. Cognitive impairment 
is the most immediate and obvious consequence of sleep deprivation. A 
restful  8  hours  in  bed  without  sleep  might  allow  your  body  to  recover 
from physical exertion, but you would not be at your best mentally the 
next day. 

 Some animals apparently have more reason  not  to sleep than others. 
Imagine living your entire life in deep or turbulent water, yet needing to 
breathe air every minute or so. Even a quick nap would be awkward, at 
best. This is precisely the situation with dolphins and whales, yet they 
sleep  about  as  much  as  humans  do.  Remarkably,  bottlenose  dolphins 
sleep with only one cerebral hemisphere at a time: about 2 hours of non-
REM sleep on just one side, then 1 hour awake on both sides, 2 hours of 
non-REM sleep on the other side, and so on, for a total of about 12 hours 
per night (Figure 19.17). (This gives new meaning to the phrase “being 
half  asleep.”)  There  is  no  evidence  that  dolphins  or  whales  have  REM 
sleep. Another unusual sleep strategy is used by the blind Indus River 
dolphin of Pakistan. This dolphin uses sonar to navigate through muddy, 
turbid, sweeping currents, and during monsoon season it must never stop 
swimming or it will come to grief on the rocks and debris of the ﬂ ooded es-
tuary it calls home. Still, the Indus River dolphin seems to sleep, snatch-
ing “microsleeps” 4–6 seconds long while continuing to swim slowly. Its 
many microsleeps add up to about 7 hours in a 24-hour day. 

 Dolphins  have  evolved  extraordinary  sleep  mechanisms  that  adapt 
them  to  a  demanding  environment.  But  the  fact  that  dolphins  are  not 
sleepless reinforces our question: What is so important about sleeping? 

 No  single  theory  of  the  function  of  sleep  is  widely  accepted,  but  the 
most reasonable ideas fall into two categories: theories of  restoration  and 
theories of  adaptation . The ﬁ rst category is a commonsense explanation: 
We sleep in order to rest and recover and to prepare to be awake again. 
The second category is less obvious: We sleep to keep us out of trouble, to 
hide from predators when we are most vulnerable or from other harmful 
features of the environment, or to conserve energy. 

 If sleep is restorative, what is it restoring? Quiet rest is certainly not a 
substitute for sleep. Sleeping does something more than simple resting. 
Prolonged sleep deprivation can lead to serious physical and behavioral 
problems (Box 19.3). Unfortunately, no one has yet identiﬁ ed a particular 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   663
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   663

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

664

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 19.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Longest All-Nighter

In  1963,  Randy  Gardner  was  a  17-year-old  high  school 

student  with  an  ambitious  idea  for  a  San  Diego  Science 
Fair project. On December 28 he awoke at 6 a.m. to begin. 
When he ﬁ nished 11 days (264 hours) later, he had broken 
the world’s record for nonstop wakefulness, under the con-
tinuous scrutiny of two friends and, during the last 5 days, 
fascinated  sleep  researchers.  He  had  used  no  drugs,  not 
even caffeine.

The experience was not pleasant. After 2 days without 
sleep,  Randy  became 
irritable  and  nauseated,  had 
trouble remembering, and could not even watch television. 
By the fourth day, he had mild delusions and overwhelming 
fatigue, and by the seventh day, he had tremors, his speech 
was slurred, and his EEG no longer showed alpha rhythms. 
At times he was paranoid or hallucinating. Fortunately, he 
did not become psychotic, despite the predictions of some 
experts. On the contrary, on his last awake night, he beat 
one  of  his  better  rested  observers  at  an  arcade  baseball 

game, and he gave a coherent account of himself at a na-
tional press conference.

When he ﬁ nally went to bed, he slept for almost 15 hours 
straight, then stayed awake 23 hours to wait for nightfall, and 
slept for another 10.5 hours. After the ﬁ rst sleep, his symp-
toms  had  mostly  disappeared,  and  within  a  week,  he  was 
sleeping and behaving normally.

One of the most interesting things about Randy’s ordeal is 
that there were no lasting harmful effects. The same is not true 
for some animals deprived of sleep. If rats are kept awake for 
long periods, they progressively lose weight while consum-
ing  much  more  food,  become  weak,  accumulate  stomach 
ulcers and internal hemorrhages, and even die. They seem 
to suffer from an impairment of their ability to regulate body 
temperature and metabolic needs. Total sleep deprivation is 
not necessary. Prolonged REM sleep loss alone is detrimen-
tal. These results may imply that sleep provides something 
physiologically essential.

physiological process that is clearly restored by sleep or an essential sub-
stance that is made or a toxin that is destroyed while sleeping. Sleep does 
prepare us to be effectively awake again. But does sleep renew us in the 
same way that eating and drinking do, by replacing essential substances, 
or the way the healing of a wound repairs damaged tissues? For the most 
part, evidence indicates that sleep is not a time of increased tissue re-
pair for the body. However, it is possible that brain regions such as the 
cerebral cortex can achieve some form of essential “rest” only during non-
REM sleep. 

 Adaptation theories of sleep take many forms. Some large animals eat 
small animals; a stroll in the moonlight is far too risky for a squirrel liv-
ing in owl and fox territory. The squirrel’s best strategy may be to stay 
safely tucked away in an underground burrow during the night, and sleep 
is a good way to enforce such isolation. At the same time, sleep may be an 
adaptation for conserving energy. While sleeping, the body does only just 
enough work to stay alive, core temperature drops, temperature regula-
tion is depressed, and the rate of calories burned is kept low. 

 Functions of Dreaming and REM Sleep 
 In  many  ancient  cultures,  people  believed  that  dreams  were  a  window 
on some higher world and a source of information, guidance, power, or 
enlightenment. Perhaps they were right, but the collective wisdom of the 
past does not agree on exactly how to interpret the meaning of dreams. 
Today we must take a step backward and ﬁ rst ask whether dreams even 
have  meaning. Dreams are difﬁ cult to study. Obviously, we can’t directly 
observe the dreams of someone else, and even the dreamer has access to 
them  only  after  he  or  she  has  awakened  and  perhaps  forgotten  or  dis-
torted the experience. Modern explanations of dreaming lean heavily on 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   664
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   664

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

665

studies of REM sleep rather than dreaming because the phenomena of 
REM can be objectively measured. But it is important to remember that 
the  two  are  not  synonymous.  Some  dreams  can  occur  outside  of  REM 
sleep, and REM sleep has many peculiar features that have nothing to do 
with dreaming. 

 Do we need to dream? No one knows, but the body does seem to crave 
REM  sleep.  It  is  possible  to  deprive  sleepers  of  REM  sleep  speciﬁ cally 
by  waking  them  every  time  they  enter  the  REM  state;  when  they  fall 
asleep a minute or two later, it is inevitably into a non-REM state, and 
they can accumulate an entire night of relatively pure non-REM sleep. 
As Dement ﬁ rst observed, after several days of this annoying treatment, 
sleepers attempt to enter the REM state much more frequently than nor-
mal. When they are ﬁ nally allowed to sleep undisturbed, they experience 
REM rebound  and spend more time in REM proportional to the duration 
of their deprivation. Most studies have found that REM deprivation does 
not cause any major psychological harm during the daytime. Again, it is 
important not to interpret REM deprivation as dream deprivation, since 
during  REM  deprivation,  dreams  may  continue  to  occur  during  sleep 
onset and during non-REM periods. 

 Sigmund  Freud  suggested  many  functions  for  dreams.  For  Freud, 
dreams  were  disguised  wish  fulﬁ llment,  an  unconscious  way  for  us  to 
express our sexual and aggressive fantasies, which are forbidden while 
we are awake. Bad dreams might help us conquer the anxiety-provoking 
events of life. Recent theories of dreaming are more biologically based. 
Allan  Hobson  and  Robert  McCarley  of  Harvard  University  propose  an 
“activation–synthesis hypothesis,” which explicitly rejects freudian, psy-
chological interpretations. Instead, dreams, or at least some of their bi-
zarre  features,  are  seen  as  the  associations  and  memories  of  the  cere-
bral cortex that are elicited by the random discharges of the pons during 
REM sleep. Thus, the pontine neurons, via the thalamus,  activate  various 
areas of the cerebral cortex, elicit well-known images or emotions, and 
the cortex then tries to  synthesize  the disparate images into a sensible 
whole. Not surprisingly, the “synthesized” dream product may be quite 
bizarre and even nonsensical because it is triggered by the semirandom 
activity of the pons. Evidence for the activation–synthesis hypothesis is 
mixed. It does predict the weirdness of dreams and their correlation with 
REM sleep. But it does not explain how random activity can trigger the 
complex and ﬂ uid stories that many dreams contain nor how it can evoke 
dreams that recur night after night. 

 Many researchers have suggested that REM sleep, and perhaps dreams 
themselves, have an important role in memory. None of the evidence is 
deﬁ nitive,  but  intriguing  hints  indicate  that  REM  sleep  somehow  aids 
the integration or consolidation of memories. Depriving humans or rats 
of REM sleep can impair their ability to learn a variety of tasks. Some 
studies show an increase in the duration of REM sleep after an intense 
learning experience. In one study, Israeli neuroscientist Avi Karni and 
his colleagues trained people to identify the orientation of a small line in 
their peripheral visual ﬁ eld. The task was made difﬁ cult by presenting 
the visual stimulus for a very short period of time. With repeated practice 
over days, people got much better at this task; surprisingly, their perfor-
mance also improved between evening and morning, after a night’s sleep. 
Karni found that if people were deprived of REM sleep, their learning of 
the task did not improve overnight. Depriving them of non-REM sleep, on 
the other hand, actually enhanced their performance. Karni hypothesizes 
that this kind of memory requires a period of time to strengthen and that 
REM sleep is particularly effective for this purpose. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   665
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   665

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

666

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 You may have heard about sleep learning, the notion that you can study 
for an exam by simply listening to a tape of the material while you bliss-
fully snooze away. Sounds like a student’s fantasy, right? Unfortunately, 
it is exactly that and no more. There is no scientiﬁ c evidence for sleep 
learning,  and  careful  studies  have  shown  that  the  very  few  things  re-
called the next morning were heard when the subjects brieﬂ y woke up. In 
fact, sleep is a profoundly amnesic state. Most of our dreams, for example, 
seem to be lost forever. Although we dream profusely during each of the 
four or ﬁ ve REM periods every night, we usually remember only the last 
dream before waking. Also, when we brieﬂ y wake up to do something in 
the middle of the night, we have often forgotten the incident by morning. 
 At this point you are probably confused about the functions of dream-
ing and REM sleep. So are we. Unfortunately, there is not enough evi-
dence to support or dismiss any of the theories we have discussed. There 
are also many other creative and plausible ideas that we do not have the 
space to present here. 

 Neural Mechanisms of Sleep 
 Until the 1940s, it was generally believed that sleep was a passive pro-
cess: Deprive the brain of sensory input, and it will fall asleep. However, 
when the sensory afferents to an animal’s brain are blocked, the animal 
continues to have cycles of waking and sleeping. We now know that sleep 
is an active process that requires the participation of a variety of brain 
regions. As we saw in Chapter 15, wide expanses of the cortex are actu-
ally controlled by very small collections of neurons much deeper in the 
brain. These cells act like the switches or tuners of the forebrain, altering 
cortical excitability and gating the ﬂ ow of sensory information into it. The 
full details of these control systems are complex and not fully understood. 
But we can summarize a few basic principles: 
 1. The neurons most critical to the control of sleeping and waking are part 
of the diffuse modulatory neurotransmitter systems (see Chapter 15, 
Figures 15.12 to 15.15). 

 2. The  brain  stem  modulatory  neurons  using  norepinephrine  and  sero-
tonin ﬁ re during waking and enhance the awake state; some neurons 
using acetylcholine enhance critical REM events, and other cholinergic 
neurons are active during waking. 

 3. The diffuse modulatory systems control the rhythmic behaviors of the 
thalamus, which in turn controls many EEG rhythms of the cerebral 
cortex; slow, sleep-related rhythms of the thalamus apparently block 
the ﬂ ow of sensory information up to the cortex. 

 4. Sleep  also  involves  activity  in  descending  branches  of  the  diffuse 
modulatory systems, such as the inhibition of motor neurons during 
dreaming. 
 There  are  three  basic  kinds  of  evidence  for  the  localization  of  sleep 
mechanisms in the brain. Lesion data reveal changes in function after a 
part of the brain is removed, results of stimulation experiments identify 
changes following the activation of a brain region, and recordings of neu-
ral activity determine the relationship between that activity and differ-
ent brain states. 

 Wakefulness and the Ascending Reticular Activating System. Lesions in 
the brain stem of humans can cause sleep and coma, suggesting that the 
brain stem has neurons whose activity is essential to keeping us awake. 
Italian neurophysiologist Giuseppe Moruzzi and his colleagues,  working 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   666
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   666

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

667

Acetylcholine
(midbrain, pons)

▲ FIGURE 19.18
Key components of the modulatory 
systems that regulate waking and 
sleeping. 

Acetylcholine
(basal forebrain)

Hypocretin (orexin)
(lateral hypothalamus)

Histamine
(midbrain)

Serotonin
(raphe nuclei) Norepinephrine

(locus coeruleus)

in the 1940s and 1950s, began to sort out the neurobiology of the brain 
stem’s control of waking and arousal. They found that lesions in the mid-
line structures of the brain stem caused a state similar to non-REM sleep, 
but lesions in the lateral tegmentum, which interrupted ascending sen-
sory inputs, did not. Conversely, electrical stimulation of the midline teg-
mentum of the midbrain, within the reticular formation, transformed the 
cortex from the slow, rhythmic EEGs of non-REM sleep to a more alert 
and aroused state with an EEG similar to that of waking. Moruzzi called 
this  ill-deﬁ ned  region  of  stimulation  the   ascending  reticular  activating 
system  (mentioned in Chapter 15). This area is now much better deﬁ ned, 
anatomically and physiologically, and it is clear that Moruzzi’s stimula-
tion was affecting many different sets of ascending modulatory systems. 
 Several  sets  of  neurons  increase  their  ﬁ ring  rates  in  anticipation  of 
awakening and during various forms of arousal. They include cells of the 
locus coeruleus, which contain norepinephrine, serotonin-containing cells 
of the raphe nuclei, acetylcholine-containing cells of the brain stem and 
basal forebrain, midbrain neurons that use histamine as a neurotrans-
mitter, and neurons of the hypothalamus that use  hypocretin (orexin)  as 
a transmitter (Figure 19.18). Collectively, these neurons synapse directly 
on the entire thalamus, cerebral cortex, and many other brain regions. 
The general effects of their transmitters are a depolarization of neurons, 
an increase in their excitability, and a suppression of rhythmic forms of 
ﬁ ring.  These  effects  are  most  clearly  seen  in  the  relay  neurons  of  the 
thalamus (Figure 19.19). 

 Hypocretin (also known as orexin; see Chapter 16) is a small peptide 
neurotransmitter expressed mainly by neurons whose cell bodies are in 
the  lateral  hypothalamus.  The  axons  of  hypocretin  (orexin)-secreting 
 neurons project widely in the brain, and they strongly excite cells of the 
cholinergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and histaminergic 
modulatory systems. When the peptide was ﬁ rst discovered, researchers 
thought hypocretin (orexin) was involved speciﬁ cally in feeding behavior 
(see Chapter 16), but it clearly has a more general role. The peptide also 
promotes wakefulness, inhibits REM sleep, facilitates neurons that en-
hance certain kinds of motor behavior, and is involved in the regulation 
of neuroendocrine and autonomic systems. The loss of hypocretin (orexin) 
neurons leads to a sleep disorder called  narcolepsy  (Box 19.4). 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   667
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   667

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

668

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Non-REM

Awake

ACh or NE or 5-HT

or histamine

(a)  

2 sec

(b)  

300 msec

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 19.19
Modulating thalamic rhythmicity during waking and sleeping.  (a) Thalamic neurons 
at rest have a tendency to generate slow, delta frequency rhythms of intrinsic burst- 
firing (left). Under the influence of several neuromodulators such as ACh, NE, and 
 histamine, neurons depolarize and switch to a more excitable single-spiking mode 
(right). This may resemble what happens during transitions from non-REM sleep to the 
waking state. Expanded views of rhythmic bursting (b) and single-spiking (c) are also 
shown. (Source: Adapted from McCormick and Pape, 1990, Fig. 14.)

 Falling  Asleep  and  the  Non-REM  State.  Falling  asleep  involves  a  pro-
gression of changes over several minutes, culminating in the non-REM 
state. It is not entirely clear what initiates non-REM sleep, although cer-
tain  sleep-promoting  factors  contribute  (as  we  will  describe  later),  and 
there is a general decrease in the ﬁ ring rates of most brain stem modula-
tory neurons (those using NE, 5-HT, and ACh). Although most regions of 
the basal forebrain seem to promote alertness and arousal, a subset of its 
cholinergic neurons increases their ﬁ ring rate with the onset of non-REM 
sleep and are silent during wakefulness. 

 Early stages of non-REM sleep include the EEG sleep spindles, des-
cribed earlier, which are generated in part by the inherent rhythmicity 
of  thalamic  neurons  (see  Figure  19.11).  As  non-REM  sleep  progresses, 
spindles  disappear  and  are  replaced  by  slow  delta  rhythms  (less  than 
4 Hz). Delta rhythms may also be a product of thalamic cells, occurring 
when their membrane potentials become even more negative than dur-
ing  spindle  rhythms  (and  much  more  negative  than  during  waking). 
Synchronization of activity during spindle or delta rhythms is due to neu-
ral interconnections within the thalamus and between the thalamus and 
cortex.  Because  of  the  strong,  two-way  excitatory  connections  between 
the thalamus and cortex, rhythmic activity in one is often strongly and 
widely projected upon the other. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   668
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   668

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

669

BOX 19.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy is a bizarre and disabling disturbance of sleep-

ing and waking. Despite the sound of the name, it is not a 
form of epilepsy. It can include some or all of the following 
manifestations.

Excessive  daytime  sleepiness  can  be  severe  and  often 
leads  to  unwanted  “sleep  attacks.”  Cataplexy  is  a  sudden 
muscular paralysis while consciousness is maintained. In the 
middle  of  a  normal  day,  sufferers  suddenly  collapse  into  a 
state similar to REM sleep. Cataplexy is often brought on by 
strong  emotional  expression,  such  as  laughter  or  tears,  or 
by  surprise  or  sexual  arousal,  and  it  usually  lasts  less  than 
a  minute.  Sleep  paralysis,  a  similar  loss  of  muscle  control, 
occurs  during  the  transition  between  sleeping  and  waking. 
Sometimes occurring in the absence of narcolepsy, it can be 
very disconcerting; even though conscious, a person may be 
unable  to  move  or  speak  for  several  minutes.  Hypnagogic 
hallucinations  are  graphic  dreams,  often  frightening,  that 
can accompany sleep onset and may occur following sleep 
 paralysis.  Sometimes  such  dreams  ﬂ ow  smoothly  with  real 
events that occurred just prior to falling asleep.

EEG monitoring reveals a distinct difference between nar-
coleptic and normal sleep. A narcoleptic person goes directly 
from waking into a REM phase, whereas normal adult sleep-
ers always enter a long period of non-REM sleep ﬁ rst. Most 
narcolepsy symptoms might be interpreted as an abnormal 
intrusion of the characteristics of REM sleep into waking.

The  prevalence  of  narcolepsy  varies  widely,  affecting 
about 1 in 1000–2000 people in the U.S. population but only 
1 in 500,000 in Israel, for example. The typical age of onset 
is 12–16 years. The disorder has a genetic component, and 
a high percentage of narcoleptics have a particular form of 
the  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  gene.  However,  about 
25%  of  the  general  population  has  the  narcoleptic  form  of 
the HLA gene, yet the large majority do not develop narco-
lepsy. Environmental factors may also play an important role. 
A recent study in China found that the onset of narcolepsy in 
children varies with the seasons and tends to be highest fol-
lowing winter-related respiratory infections. There was a par-
ticularly sharp rise in cases of narcolepsy just after the H1N1 
inﬂ uenza pandemic in 2009–2010, followed by a decrease in 
the two years following. Narcolepsy rates increased both in 
Europe, where many people were vaccinated against H1N1, 
and in China, where vaccines were not available.

Narcolepsy occurs in goats, donkeys, ponies, and more 
than a dozen breeds of dogs. In 1999, Emmanuel Mignot, Seiji 
Nishino, and their research team at Stanford University found 
that canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation of the gene 
for a hypocretin receptor. Also in 1999, Masashi Yanagisawa 
and  his  group  at  the  University  of  Texas  Southwestern 

Medical  Center  deleted  the  genes  responsible  for  the  pep-
tide neurotransmitter hypocretin in mice and found that the 
animals were narcoleptic. Basic animal research of this sort 
quickly inspired important studies of human narcolepsy.

In 2000, two research teams discovered that the brains 
of  human  narcoleptics  have  about  10%  or  less  of  the  nor-
mal complement of hypocretin-containing neurons (Figure A). 
Their CSF has immeasurably low levels of hypocretin, whereas 
hypocretin  is  found  at  normal  levels  in  nearly  every  other 
neurological  disease.  Human  narcolepsy  almost  certainly 
 results  from  the  selective  death  of  hypocretin-containing 
neurons in most cases. Unlike in some animal versions of the 
disease, hypocretin deﬁ ciency is rarely caused by mutations 
of the hypocretin or hypocretin receptor genes. The reason 
hypocretin  neurons  die  in  narcoleptic  patients  is  unknown, 
although there is strong evidence that some kind of autoim-
mune  process  is  involved.  Fragments  of  viral  proteins  may 
mimic hypocretin, somehow priming immune cells to attack 
hypocretin-releasing cells.

There  is  no  cure  for  narcolepsy  yet,  and  current  treat-
ments aim only to relieve the symptoms. Frequent naps, am-
phetamines,  and  a  drug  called  modaﬁ nil  may  help  daytime 
 sleepiness,  while  tricyclic  antidepressant  drugs  (which  have 
REM-suppressant  effects)  may  reduce  cataplexy  and  sleep 
paralysis.  The  discovery  that  hypocretin  deﬁ ciency  underlies 
narcolepsy suggests an obvious potential treatment; adminis-
ter hypocretin or its agonists. Results from human trials have 
so far been disappointing. One problem is that hypocretin does 
not penetrate the blood–brain barrier very well. Transplantation 
of  hypocretin  neurons  has  shown  some  promise  in  animal 
studies, but no human trials have been attempted.

Optic
tract

Optic
tract

Figure A
 Hypocretin (orexin)-containing neurons in the hypothalamus of a 
normal brain (left) and a narcoleptic brain (right). (Source: Adapted 
from Thannickal et al., 2000, Fig. 1)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   669
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   669

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

670

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Mechanisms of REM Sleep. REM is such a different state from non-REM 
that we would expect some clear neural distinctions. Many cortical areas 
are at least as active during REM sleep as they are during waking. For 
example, neurons of the motor cortex ﬁ re rapidly and generate organized 
motor patterns that attempt to command the entire body but succeed only 
with a few muscles of the eye and inner ear and those essential for respi-
ration. The elaborate dreams of REM sleep certainly require the cerebral 
 cortex. However, the cortex is not necessary for the  production  of REM sleep. 
 The use of PET and fMRI imaging in the waking and sleeping human 
brain has provided fascinating glimpses of the activity patterns that dis-
tinguish  waking  from  REM  and  non-REM  sleep.  Figure  19.20a  shows 
the  difference  in  brain  activity  between  REM  sleep  and  waking.  Some 
areas, including primary visual cortex, were about equally active in the 
two states. However, extrastriate cortical areas and portions of the limbic 
system  were  signiﬁ cantly  more  active  during  REM  sleep  than  waking. 
Conversely, regions of the frontal lobes were noticeably less active during 
REM. Figure 19.20b contrasts the brain activity in REM and non-REM 
sleep. The primary visual cortex and a number of other areas are signiﬁ -
cantly less active during REM sleep, but extrastriate cortex is more active 
than it is in non-REM. These results paint an intriguing picture of what 
happens when we sleep. During REM, there is an explosion of extrastriate 
activity, presumably during the times when we dream. However, there is 
no corresponding activity increase in the primary visual cortex, suggest-
ing that the extrastriate excitation is internally generated. The emotional 
component of dreams might derive from the heightened limbic activation. 
The low activity in the frontal lobe suggests that high-level integration or 
interpretation of the extrastriate visual information might not take place, 
leaving us with a buzz of uninterpreted visual imagery. 

 The control of REM sleep, as with the other functional brain states, 
derives from diffuse modulatory systems in the core of the brain stem, 
particularly  the  pons.  The  ﬁ ring  rates  of  the  two  major  systems  of  the 

REM - Wake

REM - Non-REM

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 19.20
PET images of the waking and sleeping human brain. These images show 
brain activity in horizontal sections. (a) Colors represent differences in activity 
 between REM sleep and waking; green, yellow, and red indicate higher activation 
during REM, and purples indicate lower activation during REM. Note the dark 
notch at the bottom (posterior) edge of the section, indicating that striate cortex 
is equally active in the two states. (b) REM sleep compared with non-REM sleep. 
In REM, striate cortex is less active. (Source: Braun et al., 1998, Fig. 1.)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   670
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   670

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

671

▲ FIGURE 19.21
Control of the onset and offset of REM 
periods by brain stem neurons.  This 
graph shows the relative firing rates of 
REM-associated neurons during a single 
night. Periods of REM sleep are green. 
REM-on cells are cholinergic neurons of 
the pons, and they increase their firing 
rates just before the onset of REM sleep 
(red line). REM-off cells are noradrenergic 
and serotonergic neurons of the locus 
coeruleus and raphe nuclei, respectively, 
and their firing rates increase just before 
the end of REM sleep (blue line). (Source: 
McCarley and Massaquoi, 1986, Fig. 4B.)

Non-REM REM

4

3

2

REM-on cells
REM-off cells

e
t
a
r
 
g
n
i
r
i

1F

0

1

2

5
3
Hours since sleep onset

4

6

7

8

upper brain stem, the locus coeruleus and the raphe nuclei, decrease to 
almost nothing before the onset of REM (Figure 19.21). However, there 
is a concurrent sharp increase in the ﬁ ring rates of ACh-containing neu-
rons in the pons, and some evidence suggests that cholinergic neurons 
induce  REM  sleep.  It  is  probably  the  action  of  ACh  during  REM  sleep 
that causes the thalamus and cortex to behave so much like they do in 
the waking state. 

 Why don’t we act out our dreams? The same core brain stem systems 
that control the sleep processes of the forebrain also actively inhibit our 
spinal motor neurons, preventing the descending motor activity from ex-
pressing itself as actual movement. This is clearly an adaptive mecha-
nism, protecting us from ourselves. In rare cases, usually elderly men, 
dreamers seem to act out their dreams; they have a hazardous condition 
known  as   REM  sleep  behavior  disorder .  These  people  often  sustain  re-
peated injuries, and even their spouses have fallen victim to their noc-
turnal ﬂ ailings. One man dreamed he was in a football game and tackled 
his bedroom bureau. Another imagined he was defending his wife from 
attack, when in fact he was beating her in her bed. The basis for this REM 
disorder seems to be disruption of the brain stem systems that normally 
mediate REM atonia. Experimental lesions in certain parts of the pons 
can cause a similar condition in cats. During REM periods, they may seem 
to chase imaginary mice or investigate invisible intruders. Disorders of 
REM control mechanisms, caused by a deﬁ ciency of hypocretin (orexin), 
also contribute to the problems of people with narcolepsy (see Box 19.4). 

 Sleep-Promoting Factors. Sleep researchers have searched intensively 
for chemicals in the blood or cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) that promote or 
even cause sleep. Many sleep-promoting substances have been identiﬁ ed 
in sleep-deprived animals. We will describe some of the major ones here. 
One key sleep substance is adenosine.  Adenosine  is used by all cells to 
build some of the most basic molecules of life, including DNA, RNA, and 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Adenosine is also released by some neu-
rons and glia and acts as a neuromodulator at synapses throughout the 
brain. It’s a substance that might appeal to the millions who drink cof-
fee, tea, and cola. From ancient times, antagonists of adenosine receptors, 
such as caffeine and theophylline, have been used to keep people awake. 
Conversely, the administration of adenosine or its agonists increases sleep. 
Extracellular levels of natural brain adenosine are higher during waking 
than while sleeping. Levels progressively increase during prolonged wak-
ing  periods  and  sleep  deprivation,  and  they  gradually  decrease  during 
sleep. Waking-related changes in adenosine levels occur not in the entire 
brain, but only in certain sleep-related regions. These two properties of 
adenosine—its sleep-promoting effect and the levels that track the need 
for sleep—strongly suggest it is an important sleep-promoting factor. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   671
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   671

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

672

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 How might adenosine promote sleep? Adenosine has an inhibitory  effect 
on the diffuse modulatory systems for ACh, NE, and 5-HT that tend to pro-
mote wakefulness. This suggests that sleep may be the result of a molecu-
lar chain reaction. Neural activity in the awake brain increases  adenosine 
levels, thereby increasing the inhibition of neurons in the modulatory sys-
tems associated with wakefulness. Enhanced suppression of the  “wakeful” 
modulatory systems makes it more likely that the brain will fall into the 
slow-wave  synchronous  activity  characteristic  of  non-REM  sleep.  After 
sleep begins, adenosine levels slowly fall, and activity in the modulatory 
systems gradually increases until we wake up to start the cycle anew. 

 Another important sleep-promoting factor is  nitric oxide (NO) . Recall 
that NO is a small, mobile, gaseous molecule that can diffuse easily across 
membranes and serves as a retrograde (postsynaptic to presynaptic) mes-
senger  between  certain  neurons  (see  Chapter  6).  The  wake-promoting 
cholinergic neurons of the brain stem express particularly high levels of 
the synthesizing enzyme for NO. Brain NO levels are highest during wak-
ing, and they rise rapidly with sleep deprivation. How does NO promote 
sleep? Studies have shown that NO triggers the release of adenosine. As 
we  have  seen,  adenosine  promotes  non-REM  sleep  by  suppressing  the 
activity of neurons that help to sustain waking. 

 Sleepiness is one of the most familiar consequences of infectious dis-
eases,  such  as  the  common  cold  and  the  ﬂ u.  There  are  direct  links  be-
tween  the  immune  response  to  infection  and  the  regulation  of  sleep. 
In  the  1970s,  physiologist  John  Pappenheimer  of  Harvard  University 
 identiﬁ ed a muramyl dipeptide in the spinal ﬂ uid of sleep-deprived goats 
that facilitated non-REM sleep. Muramyl peptides are usually produced 
only  by  the  cell  walls  of  bacteria,  not  brain  cells,  and  they  also  cause 
fever and stimulate immune cells of the blood. It is not clear how they 
appear in CSF, but they may be synthesized by bacteria in the intestines. 
More  recent  research  has  implicated  several   cytokines ,  small  signaling 
peptides involved in the immune system, in the regulation of sleep. One 
of them is  interleukin-1 , which is synthesized in the brain by glia, and by 
macrophages, cells throughout the body that scavenge foreign material. 
Like adenosine and NO, interleukin-1 levels increase during waking, and 
in  humans  its  levels  peak  just  before  the  onset  of  sleep.  Interleukin-1 
promotes  non-REM  sleep  even  when  the  immune  system  has  not  been 
challenged.  When  given  to  humans,  it  induces  fatigue  and  sleepiness. 
Interleukin-1 also stimulates the immune system. 

 Another  endogenous  sleep-promoting  substance  is   melatonin ,  a  hor-
mone secreted by the pea-sized pineal body (see the appendix to Chapter 7). 
Melatonin is a derivative of the amino acid tryptophan. It has been called 
the “Dracula of hormones” because it is released only when the environ-
ment darkens—normally at night—and its release is inhibited by light. In 
humans, melatonin levels tend to rise around the time we become sleepy 
in the evening, peak in the early morning hours, and then fall to baseline 
levels by the time we awaken. Evidence suggests that melatonin helps 
initiate  and  maintain  sleep,  but  its  precise  role  in  natural  sleep–wake 
cycles  is  not  clear.  In  recent  years,  melatonin  has  become  popular  as 
an over-the-counter sleep-promoting drug. Although it has shown some 
promise in treating the symptoms of jet lag and the insomnia that affects 
some older adults, the general effect of melatonin on improving sleep re-
mains debatable. 

 Gene Expression during Sleeping and Waking. Research into the neural 
function  of  sleep  has  beneﬁ ted  from  studies  at  various  levels  of  analy-
sis, including sleep behavior, brain physiology, and the action of diffuse 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   672
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   672

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

673

 modulatory systems. Methods from molecular neurobiology have also con-
tributed interesting facts. While the pieces do not all ﬁ t together quite yet, 
it is clear that the behavioral states of sleeping and waking are different 
even at the molecular level. For example, in the macaque monkey, most 
areas of cerebral cortex show higher rates of protein synthesis in deep 
sleep than in light sleep. In rats, levels of cAMP in several brain areas 
have been found to be lower during sleeping than waking. 

 Research  has  demonstrated  that  sleeping  and  waking  are  associated 
with differences in the expression of certain genes. Chiara Cirelli and Giulio 
Tononi,  working  at  the  Neurosciences  Institute  in  San  Diego  and  at  the 
University of Wisconsin, have studied the expression of thousands of genes 
in rats that were awake or asleep. The vast majority of genes were expressed 
at the same level in the two states. However, the 0.5% of genes that showed 
different levels of expression may provide insight into what happens in the 
brain during sleep. Most of the genes that were more highly expressed in 
the awake brain could be placed into one of three groups. One group in-
cludes what are called  immediate early genes , genes that code for transcrip-
tion factors that affect the expression of other genes. Some of these genes 
appear to be related to changes in synaptic strength. The low expression 
of these genes during sleep may be associated with the fact that learning 
and memory formation are largely absent in this state. The second group of 
genes comes from  mitochondria. Increased expression of these genes may 
play a role in satisfying the higher metabolic demands of the awake brain. 
The third group includes genes related to responses to cellular stress. 

 A different group of genes was most highly expressed during sleep, and 
some of them might contribute to increased protein synthesis and syn-
aptic plasticity mechanisms that complement those most prevalent dur-
ing waking. An important point is that the sleep-related changes in gene 
expression were speciﬁ c to the brain, and they did not change in other 
tissues, such as the liver and skeletal muscle. This is consistent with the 
widely held hypothesis that sleep is a process generated by the brain for 
the beneﬁ t of the brain. 

CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS 
CIRCCADIANN RHYTHMS 

 Almost all land animals coordinate their behavior according to  circadian 
rhythms , the daily cycles of daylight and darkness that result from the 
spin  of  the  Earth.  (The  term  is  from  the  Latin   circa ,  “approximately,” 
and  dies,  “day.”) The precise schedules of circadian rhythms vary among 
 species. Some animals are active during daylight hours, others only at 
night, and others mainly at the transitional periods of dawn and dusk. 
Most physiological and biochemical processes in the body also rise and fall 
with daily rhythms; body temperature, blood ﬂ ow, urine production, hor-
mone levels, hair growth, and metabolic rate all ﬂ uctuate (Figure 19.22). 
In humans, there is an approximately inverse relationship between the 
propensity to sleep and body temperature. 

 When the cycles of daylight and darkness are removed from an ani-
mal’s environment, circadian rhythms continue on more or less the same 
schedule because the primary clocks for circadian rhythms are not astro-
nomical (the sun and Earth) but biological in the brain. Brain clocks, like 
all clocks, are imperfect and require occasional resetting. Now and then 
you readjust your watch to keep it in sync with the rest of the world (or at 
least the time on your computer). Similarly, external stimuli, such as light 
and  dark,  or  daily  temperature  changes,  help  adjust  the  brain’s  clocks 
to  keep  them  synchronized  with  the  coming  and  going  of  the   sunlight. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   673
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   673

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

674

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Sleep

Awake

Sleep

Awake

Sleep

s
s
e
n
t
r
e
A

l

)

C
°
(
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

h
t
w
o
r
G

)
L
m
/
g
n
(
 
e
n
o
m
r
o
h

80

40

0
38

37

36

15

10

5

0

15

10

)
L
m
0
0
1

 

/

g
μ
(

5

0

3

2

1

 
l

o
s
i
t
r
o
C

 

i

m
u
s
s
a

t

o
P

)
h

/

q
E
m

(

6

12

18

24
Time of day (h)

6

12

18

24

▲ FIGURE 19.22
Circadian rhythms of physiological functions.   Fluctuations over two consecutive 
days are shown here. Alertness and core body temperature vary similarly, but growth 
hormone and cortisol levels in the blood are highest during sleep, although at differ-
ent times. The bottom graph shows the excretion of potassium by the kidneys, 
which is highest during the day. (Source: Adapted from Coleman, 1986, Fig. 2.1.)

Circadian  rhythms  have  been  well  studied  at  behavioral,  cellular,  and 
molecular levels. Brain clocks are an interesting example of the link be-
tween the activity of speciﬁ c neurons and behavior. 

 Biological Clocks 
 The ﬁ rst evidence for a biological clock came from a brainless organism, 
the mimosa plant. The mimosa raises its leaves during the day and lowers 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   674
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   674

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

675

them at night. It seemed obvious to many people that the plant simply 
reacted to sunlight with some kind of reﬂ ex movement. In 1729, French 
physicist  Jean  Jacques  d’Ortous  de  Mairan  tested  the  obvious;  he  put 
some mimosa plants in a dark closet and found that they continued to 
raise and lower their leaves. But a surprising new observation can still 
lead to a wrong conclusion. It was de Mairan’s opinion that the plant was 
still somehow sensing the sun’s movement, even in the darkness. More 
than a century later, Swiss botanist Augustin de Candolle showed that a 
similar plant in the dark moved its leaves up and down every 22 hours, 
rather than every 24 hours, according to the sun’s movement. This im-
plied that the plant was not responding to the sun and very likely had an 
internal biological clock. 

 Environmental time cues (light/dark, temperature and humidity vari-
ations) are collectively termed  zeitgebers  (German for “time givers”). In 
the  presence  of  zeitgebers,  animals  become   entrained   to  the  day–night 
rhythm  and  maintain  an  activity  cycle  of  exactly  24  hours.  Obviously, 
even  small,  consistent  errors  of  timing  could  not  be  tolerated  for  long. 
A 24.5-hour cycle would, within 3 weeks, completely shift an animal from 
daytime to nighttime activity. When mammals are completely deprived 
of  zeitgebers,  they  settle  into  a  rhythm  of  activity  and  rest  that  often 
has  a  period  more  or  less  than  24  hours,  in  which  case  their  rhythms 
are  said  to   free-run .  In  mice,  the  natural  free-running  period  is  about 
23 hours, in hamsters it is close to 24 hours, and in humans it tends to be 
 24.5–25.5 hours (Figure 19.23). 

 It is quite difﬁ cult to separate a human from all possible zeitgebers. 
Even inside a laboratory, society provides many subtle time cues, such as 
the sounds of machinery, the comings and goings of people, and the on–off 
cycling of heating and air conditioning. Some of the most secluded envi-
ronments are deep caves, which have been the sites for several  isolation 

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

s
y
a
D

Natural
situations

Free-
running
in an
isolated
situation 

Entrained 
to a 
24-hour
day

Midnight

Noon

Midnight

Noon

Midnight

Time of day

▲ FIGURE 19.23
Circadian rhythms of sleep and wakefulness.  This is a plot of 
one person’s daily sleep-wake cycles over a period of 45 days. 
Each horizontal line is a day; solid lines indicate sleep, and 
dashed lines indicate waking. A triangle indicates the point of 
the day’s lowest body temperature. The subject was first ex-
posed to 9 days of natural 24-hour cycles of light and dark, 
noise and quiet, and air temperature. During the middle 25 days, 
all time cues were removed, and the subject was free to set his 
own schedule. Notice that the sleep–wake cycles remained sta-
ble, but each lengthened to about 25 hours. The subject was 
now free-running. Notice also that the low point of body temper-
ature shifted from the end of the sleep period to the beginning. 
During the last 11 days, a  24-hour cycle of light and meals was 
reintroduced, the subject again entrained to a day-long rhythm, 
and body temperature gradually shifted back to its normal point 
in the sleep cycle. (Source: Adapted from Dement, 1976, Fig. 2.)

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   675
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   675

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

676

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

studies. When people in caves are allowed to set their own schedules of ac-
tivity for months on end—waking and sleeping, turning lights on and off, 
and eating when they choose—they initially settle into roughly a  25-hour 
rhythm. But after days to weeks, their activity may begin to free-run with 
a surprisingly long period of 30–36 hours. They may stay awake for about 
20 hours straight, then sleep for about 12 hours, and this pattern seems 
perfectly normal to them at the time. 

 In isolation experiments, behavior and physiology do not always con-
tinue to cycle together. Recent studies have found that body temperature 
and other physiological measures may continue to change reliably over a 
24-hour cycle, even if people are entrained on a 20-hour or 28-hour “day” 
with artiﬁ cial lighting. This means that the rhythms of  temperature and 
sleeping–waking, which are normally synchronized to a 24-hour period, 
become desynchronized. In the cave experiments described earlier, there 
can be even larger differences in the periods of behavioral and physiologi-
cal cycles, when people are allowed to set their own schedules. Normally, 
our  lowest  body  temperature  occurs  shortly  before  we  awaken  in  the 
morning, but when desynchronized, this temperature nadir can drift, ﬁ rst 
 moving earlier into the sleep period, and then into waking time. Sleep 
quality and waking comfort are impaired when cycles are  desynchronized. 
One implication of this desynchronization is that the body has more than 
one biological clock because sleeping–waking and  temperature can cycle 
at their own pace, uncoupled from one another. 

 Desynchronization  may  occur  temporarily  when  we  travel  and  force 
our  bodies  suddenly  into  a  new  sleep–wake  cycle.  This  is  the  familiar 
experience known as jet lag, and the best cure is bright light, which helps 
resynchronize our biological clocks. 

 The  primary  zeitgeber  for  mature  mammals  is  the  light–dark  cycle. 
A mother’s hormone levels may be the ﬁ rst zeitgeber for some mammals, 
however, already entraining their activity levels in the womb. In stud-
ies of various adult animals, effective zeitgebers have also included the 
periodic availability of food or water, social contact, environmental tem-
perature cycles, and noise–quiet cycles. Although many of these are much 
less effective than light–dark cycles, they may be important for particular 
species, in certain circumstances. 

 The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: A Brain Clock 
 A  biological  clock  that  produces  circadian  rhythms  consists  of  several 
components: 

Pituitary

 Light sensor → Clock → Output pathway 

 One or more input pathways are sensitive to light and dark and entrain 
the  clock  and  keep  its  rhythm  coordinated  with  the  circadian  rhythms 
of the environment. The clock itself continues to run and keep its basic 
rhythm even when the input pathway is removed. Output pathways from 
the clock allow it to control certain brain and body functions according to 
the timing of the clock. 

 Mammals have a tiny pair of neuron clusters in the hypothalamus that 
serves as a biological clock: the  suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) , intro-
duced in Chapter 15. Each SCN has a volume of less than 0.3 mm 3 , and 
its  neurons  are  among  the  smallest  in  the  brain.  They  are  located  on 
either side of the midline, bordering the third ventricle (Figure 19.24). 
When the SCN is stimulated electrically, circadian rhythms can be shifted 
in  a   predictable  way.  Removal  of  both  nuclei  abolishes  the  circadian 
 rhythmicity  of  physical  activity,  sleeping  and  waking,  and  feeding  and 

Hypothalamus

SCN

Optic
chiasm

Third
ventricle

SCN

Optic chiasm

▲ FIGURE 19.24
The human suprachiasmatic nuclei.  
Two SCN reside within the hypothala-
mus, just above the optic chiasm and 
next to the third ventricle. The sagittal 
view is followed by a frontal view, sec-
tioned at the dashed line.

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   676
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   676

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

677

8

20

8

20

8

20

8

20

8
Time of day (h)

20

8

20

8

20

8

Awake
Non-REM1
Non-REM2

REM

40.0

38.0

36.0

Awake
Non-REM1
Non-REM2

REM

40.0

38.0

36.0

e
t
a
t
S

 
)

C

˚
(
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

(a)  

e
t
a
S

t

 
)

C

˚
(
 
e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

8

20

8

20

8

20

8

8

20

8

20

Time of day (h)

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 19.25
The SCN and circadian rhythms.  (a) Normal squirrel monkeys kept in a constantly lit 
environment display circadian rhythms of about 25.5 hours. The graph shows the 
stages of waking–sleeping and concurrent variations in body temperature. The animals’ 
activity states were defined as awake, two levels of non-REM sleep (non-REM1 or 
non-REM2), or REM sleep. (b) Circadian rhythms are abolished in monkeys with 
 lesions in both SCN, kept in the same constant light environment. Notice that persis-
tent high-frequency rhythms of both activity and temperature result from SCN lesions. 
(Source: Adapted from Edgar et al., 1993, Figs. 1, 3.)

drinking (Figure 19.25). In hamsters, the transplantation of a new SCN 
can restore rhythms within 2–4 weeks (Box 19.5). The brain’s internal 
rhythms never return without an SCN. Lesions in the SCN do not abolish 
sleeping, however, and animals will continue to coordinate their sleeping 
and waking with light–dark cycles if they are present. Sleep  appears to be 
regulated by a mechanism other than the circadian clock, which depends 
primarily on the amount and timing of prior sleep. 

 Because  behavior  is  normally  synchronized  with  light–dark  cycles, 
there  must  also  be  a  photosensitive  mechanism  for  resetting  the  brain 
clock. The SCN accomplishes this via the retinohypothalamic tract: Axons 
from ganglion cells in the retina synapse directly on the dendrites of SCN 
neurons. This input from the retina is necessary and sufﬁ cient to entrain 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   677
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   677

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

678

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 19.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Mutant Hamster Clocks

Golden  hamsters  are  perfectionists  of  circadian  timing. 

When  placed  in  constant  darkness,  they  continue  sleeping 
and waking, running on their wheels, and eating and drinking 
over an average period of 24.1 hours for weeks on end.

It was this dependability that made neuroscientists Martin 
Ralph and Michael Menaker, then working at the University of 
Oregon, notice when one of the hamsters in their laboratory 
began punching in with 22.0-hour cycles during a period of 
3 weeks in the dark. This maverick male was bred with three 
females  of  unimpeachable  circadian  character  (their  free-
running periods were 24.01, 24.03, and 24.04 hours—quite 
normal). When 20 pups from the three resulting litters were 
tested  in  the  dark,  their  free-running  periods  were  evenly 
split into two narrow groups. Half had periods of 24.0 hours 
and half had periods of 22.3 hours. Further cross-breeding 
showed that the hamsters with the shorter circadian periods 
had one mutant copy of a gene (tau) that was dominant over 
their normal gene. After further breeding, Ralph and Menaker 
found that animals with two copies of the mutant tau gene 
had free-running periods of only 20 hours! The tau mutation 
was  eventually  identiﬁ ed  as  a  speciﬁ c  kinase  that  interacts 
with certain clock genes (see Figure 19.27).

Hamsters with mutant circadian rhythms provided a con-
vincing way to answer a fundamental question: Is the SCN 
the  brain’s  circadian  clock?  Ralph,  Menaker,  and  their  col-
leagues  found  that  when  both  SCNs  of  a  hamster  were 

ablated,  rhythms  were  entirely  lost.  But  rhythms  could  be 
restored to these ablated animals by simply transplanting a 
new SCN into their hypothalamus and waiting about a week.
The  key  ﬁ nding  was  that  hamsters  receiving  transplants 
 adopted the circadian rhythm of the transplanted SCN, not the 
rhythm they were born with. In other words, if a genetically nor-
mal hamster with SCN lesions received an SCN from a donor 
with one copy of the mutant tau gene, it subsequently cycled 
at about 22 hours. If its transplanted SCN came from an animal 
with two mutant taus, it cycled at 20 hours. This is very com-
pelling evidence that the SCN is the master circadian clock in 
the hamster brain and probably in our own brain as well.

Short circadian periods were often devastating to a mutant 
hamster’s  lifestyle  when  it  was  placed  into  normal   24-hour 
light and dark cycles. A hamster’s normal preference is to be 
active  at  night,  but  most  tau  animals  could  not  completely 
entrain to the 24-hour rhythm. Instead, they found their activ-
ity  periods  continually  shifting  through  various  parts  of  the 
light–dark cycle.

A similar problem sometimes occurs in people, most often 
in the elderly. Due to an age-dependent shortening of the cir-
cadian rhythm, overwhelming sleepiness begins in early eve-
ning, and awakening comes at 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning. 
Some people are unable to entrain their sleep–wake cycles to 
a daily rhythm and, like the mutant hamsters, ﬁ nd their activity 
cycles constantly shifting with respect to daylight.

sleeping and waking cycles to night and day. When recordings are made 
from neurons of the SCN, many are indeed sensitive to light. Unlike the 
more  familiar  neurons  of  the  visual  pathways  (see  Chapter  10),  SCN 
neurons have very large, nonselective receptive ﬁ elds and respond to the 
 luminance of light stimuli rather than their orientation or motion. 

 Research  in  the  last  decade  suggests,  surprisingly,  that  the  retinal 
cells synchronizing the SCN are neither rods nor cones. It had long been 
known that eyeless mice cannot use light to reset their clocks, but  mutant 
mice  with  intact  retinas  that  lack  rods  and  cones  can!  Since  rods  and 
cones  were  the  only  known  photoreceptors  in  mammals,  it  remained  a 
mystery how light could affect the circadian clock without them. 

 This  mystery  was  solved  by  David  Berson  of  Brown  University  and 
his  colleagues.  They  discovered  a  new  photoreceptor  in  the  retina  that 
was not at all like rods and cones but was, remarkably, a very  specialized 
type of ganglion cell. Recall from Chapter 9 that ganglion cells are retinal 
 neurons  whose  axons  send  visual  information  to  the  rest  of  the  brain; 
ganglion cells, like nearly all other neurons in the brain, were not sup-
posed to be directly sensitive to light. The light-sensitive ganglion cells, 
however, express a unique type of photopigment called  melanopsin , which 
is not present in rods and cones. These neurons are very slowly excited by 
light, and their axons send a signal directly to the SCN that can reset the 
circadian clock that resides there. 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   678
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   678

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

679

)
h
/
s
t
n
u
o
c
(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

3000

2000

1000

0

0

12

24

36

48

Time (h)

▲ FIGURE 19.26
Circadian rhythms of the SCN isolated 
from the rest of the brain.  The activity of 
a clock gene was monitored in 100 indi-
vidual SCN neurons maintained in tissue 
culture. Each neuron generates a strong 
circadian rhythm that is well coordinated 
with the other neurons. (Source: Adapted 
from Yamaguchi et al., 2003, Fig. 1)

 Output axons of the SCN mainly innervate nearby parts of the hypo-
thalamus, but some also go to the midbrain and other parts of the dien-
cephalon. Because almost all SCN neurons use GABA as their primary 
 neurotransmitter, presumably they inhibit the neurons they innervate. 
It  is  not  yet  clear  how  the  SCN  sets  the  timing  of  so  many  important 
behaviors. Extensive lesions in the efferent SCN pathways disrupt circa-
dian rhythms. In addition to the axonal output pathways, SCN neurons 
may  rhythmically  secrete  the  peptide  neuromodulator  vasopressin  (see 
Chapter 15). 

 SCN Mechanisms 
 How do neurons of the SCN keep time? It’s clear that each SCN cell is a 
minuscule clock that keeps time with regular ticks and tocks of its mo-
lecular  machinery.  The  ultimate  isolation  experiment  has  been  simply 
to remove neurons from the SCN of an animal and grow each cell alone 
in a tissue culture dish, segregating them from the rest of the brain and 
from each other. Nevertheless, their rates of action potential ﬁ ring, glu-
cose utilization, vasopressin production, and protein synthesis continue 
to vary with rhythms of about 24 hours, just as they do in the intact brain 
(Figure 19.26). SCN cells in culture can no longer be entrained to light–
dark  cycles  (input  from  the  eyes  is  necessary  for  this),  but  their  basic 
rhythmicity remains intact and expresses itself just as it does when an 
animal is deprived of zeitgebers. 

 SCN cells communicate their rhythmic message to the rest of the brain 
through  efferent  axons,  using  action  potentials  in  the  usual  way,  and 
rates of SCN cell ﬁ ring vary with a circadian rhythm. However, action 
potentials are not necessary for SCN neurons to maintain their rhythm. 
When tetrodotoxin (TTX), a blocker of sodium channels, is applied to SCN 
cells, it blocks their action potentials but has no effect on the rhythmicity 
of their metabolism and biochemical functions. When the TTX is removed, 
action potentials resume ﬁ ring with the same phase and frequency they 
had originally, before the TTX, implying that the SCN clock keeps run-
ning even without action potentials. SCN action potentials are like the 
hands of a clock; removing the clock’s hands does not stop the innards of 
the clock from working, but it does make it impossible to read the time in 
the usual way. 

 What is the nature of this clock that functions without action potentials? 
Research in a wide range of species indicates that it is a molecular cycle 
based on gene expression. The molecular clock used in humans is similar 
to those found in mice, fruit ﬂ ies ( Drosophila ), and even bread mold. In 
 Drosophila  and mice, the system involves a variety of  clock genes.  Some 
of the more important genes in mammals are known as  period (per) ,  cryp-
tochrome , and  clock.  Although the details vary across species, the basic 
scheme is a negative feedback loop. Many of the details were ﬁ rst worked 
out  in  experiments  performed  by  Joseph  Takahashi  and  his  colleagues 
at Northwestern University, who named the  clock  gene (an acronym for 
 circadian locomotor output cycles kaput ). A clock gene is transcribed to 
produce mRNA that is then translated into proteins. After a delay, the 
newly manufactured proteins send feedback and interact with the tran-
scription  mechanism,  causing  a  decrease  in  gene  expression.  As  a  con-
sequence of decreased transcription, less protein is produced, and gene 
expression again increases to start the cycle anew. This entire cycle takes 
about 24 hours, and thus it is a circadian rhythm (Figure 19.27). 

 If each SCN neuron is a clock, there must be a mechanism to coordinate 
the thousands of cellular clocks so that the SCN as a whole  transmits a 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   679
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   679

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

680

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 19.27
Clock genes.  In the SCN, clock genes 
produce proteins that inhibit further 
transcription. Gene transcription and the 
firing rate of individual SCN neurons 
cycle up and down over 24 hours. The 
cycles of many cells are synchronized by 
light exposure (input from the retina) and 
by interactions of the SCN neurons.

Output to brain

Clock
gene

–
mRNA

Protein

SCN

Retinal input

single, clear message about time to the rest of the brain. Light informa-
tion from the retina serves to reset the clocks in the SCN neurons each 
day,  but  the  SCN  neurons  also  communicate  directly  with  each  other. 
Surprisingly,  the  coordination  of  rhythms   between   SCN  cells  seems  to 
be  independent  of  action  potentials  and  normal  synaptic  transmission 
because TTX does not block them. Also, the SCN of the very young rat 
brain coordinates circadian rhythms perfectly well, even before it has de-
veloped any chemical synapses. The nature of neuron-to-neuron commu-
nication within the SCN is poorly understood, but in addition to classical 
chemical synapses, it includes other chemical signals, electrical synapses 
(gap junctions), and the participation of glia. 

 Research  has  shown  that  nearly  every  cell  of  the  body,  including 
those  in  the  liver,  kidney,  and  lung,  has  a  circadian  clock.  The  same 
types of gene transcription feedback loops that drive the SCN clock also 
drive the clocks in these peripheral tissues. When cells from liver, kid-
ney,  or  lung  are  grown  in  isolation,  each  exhibits  a  circadian  rhythm 
of  its  own.  Under  normal  conditions  in  an  intact  body,  however,  all 
cells’  clocks  are  under  the  master  control  of  the  SCN.  How  does  the 
SCN govern the innumerable clocks scattered throughout the body’s or-
gans? Several signaling pathways seem to be important. The SCN has a 
strong circadian inﬂ uence on the autonomic nervous system, core body 
temperature, adrenal gland hormones such as cortisol, and neural cir-
cuits  that  control  feeding,  movement,  and  metabolism  (Figure  19.28). 
Each of these processes in turn regulates many of the body’s circadian 
clocks.  Body  temperature,  for  example,  has  a  powerful  effect  on  the 
clocks of peripheral tissues. It drops sharply by about 1°C each night 
under the inﬂ uence of the SCN (see Figure 19.22). This pulse of cooling 
helps to ensure that the clocks of the internal organs all remain set to 
the daily rhythms of the SCN and thus to the cycles of environmental 
dark and light. Interestingly, the SCN’s circadian clock is very resistant 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   680
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   680

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

681

SCN

Autonomic

nervous system

Body

temperature

Hormones
(cortisol)

Feeding, metabolism,

and locomotion

Liver

▲ FIGURE 19.28
Control pathways from the SCN to peripheral circadian clocks.  The SCN 
 regulates circadian clocks throughout the body (including the liver shown here) 
via its control over the ANS; core body temperature; cortisol and other hormones; 
and feeding, locomotion, and metabolism. (Source: Adapted from Mohawk et al., 
2012, Fig. 3.)

to  temperature changes; this makes sense because it ensures that the 
SCN, which controls core temperature changes, is not destabilized by its 
own control signals. 

 The complex systems that coordinate the body’s clocks are not perfect. 
Odd  feeding  schedules,  chronic  doses  of  methamphetamine  and,  as  we 
mentioned  previously,  extreme  living  conditions  (long-term  cave  dwell-
ing) can all desynchronize the body’s circadian clocks. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Rhythms are ubiquitous in the vertebrate central nervous system. They 
also span a broad range of frequencies, from more than 500 Hz in the cor-
tical EEG to once per year (0.00000003 Hz) for many seasonal behaviors, 
such as the autumn mating of deer, the winter hibernation of chipmunks, 
and the instinct that drives migrating swallows to return to Capistrano, 
California every March 19. According to local legend, in 200 years, these 
swallows have missed the date only twice. In some cases, these rhythms 

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   681
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   681

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

682

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

are based on intrinsic brain mechanisms; in some, they result from envi-
ronmental factors; and in others, such as the SCN clock, they represent 
an interaction of a neural process and zeitgebers. 

 While the purpose of some rhythms is obvious, the functions of many 
neural rhythms are unknown. Indeed, some rhythms may have no func-
tion at all but arise as a secondary consequence of neural interconnec-
tions that are essential for other, nonrhythmic, purposes. 

 Among the most conspicuous yet inexplicable of brain rhythms is sleep. 
Sleep provides a fascinating set of problems for neuroscience. Unlike most 
studies of single ion channels, single neurons, or the systems mediating 
perception and movement, sleep research begins with profound ignorance 
about a most basic question: Why? We still don’t know why we spend one-
third of our lives sleeping, most of that time languid and vegetative and 
the rest of it paralyzed and hallucinating. Sleep and dreams may have no 
vital function, but they can be studied and enjoyed nevertheless. Ignoring 
the functional question will not be a satisfying approach for long, how-
ever. For most neuroscientists, asking “Why?” remains the deepest and 
most challenging problem of all.    

K E Y   T E R M S

The Electroencephalogram
electroencephalogram (EEG) 

Sleep
rapid eye movement sleep (REM 

(p. 646)

magnetoencephalography 

(MEG) (p. 648)

generalized seizure (p. 655)
partial seizure (p. 655)
epilepsy (p. 656)

sleep) (p. 658)

non-REM sleep (p. 658)
atonia (p. 659)
ultradian rhythm (p. 661)

Circadian Rhythms
circadian rhythm (p. 673)
zeitgeber (p. 675)
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) 

(p. 676)

clock gene (p. 679)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  Why do EEGs with relatively fast frequencies tend to have smaller amplitudes than EEGs with 

slower frequencies?

2.  The human cerebral cortex is very large and must be folded extensively to ﬁ t within the skull. 
What do the foldings of the cortical surface do to the brain signals that are recorded by an EEG 
electrode at the scalp?

3.  Sleep seems to be a behavior of every species of mammal, bird, and reptile. Does this mean that 
sleep performs a function essential for the life of these higher vertebrates? If you do not think so, 
what might be an explanation for the abundance of sleep?

4.  An EEG during REM sleep is very similar to an EEG when awake. How do the brain and body in 

REM sleep differ from the brain and body when awake?

5.  What is a likely explanation for the brain’s relative insensitivity to sensory input during REM 

sleep compared to the waking state?

6.  The SCN receives direct input from the retina, via the retinohypothalamic tract, and this is how 
light–dark cycles can entrain circadian rhythms. If the retinal axons were somehow disrupted, 
what would be the likely effect on a person’s circadian rhythms of sleeping and waking?

7.  What differences would there be in the behavioral consequences of a free-running circadian clock 

versus no clock at all?

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   682
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   682

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER 19    BRAIN RHYTHMS AND SLEEP

683

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Brown RE, Basheer R, McKenna JT, Strecker 

RE, McCarley RW. 2012. Control of sleep and 
wakefulness. Physiological Reviews 92:
1087–1187.

Buzsáki G. 2006. Rhythms of the Brain. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

computation. Annual Review of Neuroscience 
32:209–224.

Goldberg EM, Coulter DA. 2013. Mechanisms of 

epileptogenesis: a convergence on neural cir-
cuit dysfunction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
14:337–349.

Carskadon MA, ed. 1993. Encyclopedia of Sleep 

and Dreaming. New York: Macmillan.

Fries P. 2009. Neuronal gamma-band synchro-
nization as a fundamental process in cortical 

Mohawk JA, Green CB, Takahashi JS. 2012. 
Central and peripheral circadian clocks in 
mammals. Annual Review of Neuroscience 
35:445–462.

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   683
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   683

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   684
645–684_Bear_19_revised_final.indd   684

12/20/14   5:49 AM
12/20/14   5:49 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY

Language

INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS LANGUAGE?

Human Sound and Speech Production

 BOX 20.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Thinking in Different Languages

Language in Animals
Language Acquisition
Genes Involved in Language

FOXP2 and Verbal Dyspraxia
Genetic Factors in Speciﬁ c Language Impairment and Dyslexia

THE DISCOVERY OF SPECIALIZED LANGUAGE AREAS IN 
THE BRAIN

Broca’s Area and Wernicke’s Area

 BOX 20.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Assessing Hemispheric Language Dominance

LANGUAGE INSIGHTS FROM THE STUDY OF APHASIA

 BOX 20.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Uncovering Language Areas of the Brain, 
by Nina Dronkers

Broca’s Aphasia
Wernicke’s Aphasia
The Wernicke–Geschwind Model of Language and Aphasia
Conduction Aphasia
Aphasia in Bilinguals and Deaf People

ASYMMETRICAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN THE TWO 
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES

Language Processing in Split-Brain Humans

Left Hemisphere Language Dominance
Language Functions of the Right Hemisphere

Anatomical Asymmetry and Language

LANGUAGE STUDIES USING BRAIN STIMULATION AND HUMAN 
BRAIN IMAGING

The Effects of Brain Stimulation on Language
Imaging of Language Processing in the Human Brain

 BOX 20.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hearing Sight and Seeing Touch

CONCLUDING REMARKS

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   685
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   685

685685
685685685

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

686

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Language is a remarkable system for communication that has an enor-
mous  impact  on  our  lives.  You  can  walk  into  a  café  and  order  a  large 
skinny mocha cappuccino with a dash of vanilla and be reasonably certain 
you will not be handed a bucket of mud. You can speak on the telephone 
with someone thousands of miles away and explain to them both the com-
plexities  of  quantum  physics  and  the  emotional  toll  the  physics  course 
is  having  on  your  social  life.  There  are  endless  debates  about  whether 
animals also have language, but there is no question that the complex 
and ﬂ exible system of language we use is unique to humans. Without lan-
guage, we could not learn most of what we study in school, and this would 
greatly limit what we could accomplish. 

 More than just sounds, language is a system by which sounds, sym-
bols, and gestures are used for communication. Language comes into our 
brains through the visual and auditory systems, and we produce speech 
and writing with our motor system. But the brain processing between 
the sensory and motor systems is the essence of language. Because ani-
mals are of limited use in studying human language, for many years, lan-
guage was studied primarily by linguists and psychologists rather than 
neuroscientists.  Much  of  what  we  know  about  the  brain  mechanisms 
responsible for language is derived from studies of language deﬁ cits re-
sulting from brain damage. Numerous different aspects of language can 
be selectively disrupted, including speech, comprehension, and naming, 
suggesting that language is processed in multiple, anatomically distinct, 
stages. More recently, the imaging of activity in the human brain with 
fMRI and PET has given us intriguing insights into the complex circuits 
underlying language. 

 Language is universal in human society, perhaps because of special-
ized  brain  organization.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  over  5000  lan-
guages and dialects throughout the world, and languages differ in many 
ways, such as the order in which nouns and verbs are arranged. But de-
spite differences in syntax, from Patagonia to Katmandu, all languages 
convey the subtleties of human experience and emotion. Consider the fact 
that no mute tribe of people has ever been found, not even in the remotest 
corner of the world. Many scientists believe the universality of language 
is  a  consequence  of  the  fact  that  the  human  brain  has  evolved  special 
language-processing systems. 

WHAT IS LANGUAGE? 
WHAAT IS LAANGUAGE? 

Language  is a system for representing and communicating information 
that uses words combined according to grammatical rules. Language can 
be expressed in a variety of ways including gestures, writing, and speech. 
Speech  is an audible form of communication built on the sounds humans 
produce. Speech comes naturally to humans: Even with no formal train-
ing,  children  raised  in  a  normal  language  environment  will  invariably 
learn to understand spoken language and to speak. Reading and writing, 
on the other hand, require years of formal training, and more than 10% of 
the world’s population is illiterate. 

 Human Sound and Speech Production 
 Across  the  animal  kingdom,  a  variety  of  systems  are  used  to  produce 
sounds,  but  we’ll  focus  on  the  basics  of  sound  production  in  humans 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   686
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   686

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

687

▲ FIGURE 20.1
The human vocal tract. Air exhaled from the lungs 
sets the vocal folds,  located in the larynx, into 
 vibration. The sound produced by the vibration is 
modified by later structures including the pharynx, 
mouth, and nose.

Nasal cavity

Oral cavity

Posterior

Tongue

Arytenoid
muscles    

Glottis    

Vocal folds    

Larynx

Anterior

Thyroid
cartilage    

Pharynx

(Figure 20.1). Human speech involves a remarkable coordination of over 
100 muscles ranging from those controlling the lungs to those of the lar-
ynx  and  the  mouth.  Ultimately  all  of  these  muscles  are  controlled  by 
motor  cortex,  something  we  will  have  a  good  deal  more  to  say  about. 
Human sound begins when a person exhales air out of the lungs. The air 
passes through the  larynx , also known as the voice box. What we call the 
Adam’s apple in the neck is the larynx’s anterior wall of cartilage. Within 
the  larynx  are  the   vocal  folds ,  two  bands  of  muscle  also  called  vocal 
chords, which form a V. The space between the vocal folds is the  glottis . 
Sounds are produced by vibrations in tightened vocal folds, somewhat 
as you can make a buzzing sound by blowing on a tightly held blade of 
grass. If the vocal fold muscles are relaxed, no sound will be produced, 
just as blowing on a loose blade of grass will make no sound; this is what 
happens when we exhale without speaking. The pitch of the sound re-
sults from the frequency of the vocal fold vibrations: Greater tension in 
the  vocal  folds  produces  higher-frequency  vibrations  and  higher  pitch 
sound.  The  sound  is  modiﬁ ed  at  further  stages  of  the  vocal  tract,  in-
cluding the pharynx (especially the throat between larynx and mouth), 
mouth, and nose. Finally, rapid changes in the positions of the tongue, 
lips, and soft palate modulate sound for speech. The fundamental sounds 
that a language uses to communicate are called  phonemes . Different 
spoken languages have  different phonemes that build words unique to 
the  language.  Interestingly,  research  suggests  that  the  words  used  in 
a language may have subtle effects on how people using that language 
think (Box 20.1). 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   687
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   687

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

688

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 20.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Thinking in Different Languages
There are hundreds of different human cultures around the 

globe, each with its own customs, beliefs, and ways of life. 
We are used to the idea that people’s attitudes about what 
is beautiful, delicious, and appropriate vary a good deal from 
place  to  place.  Thinking  may  be  affected  by  culture,  but  it 
shouldn’t be inﬂ uenced by language, which is simply the way 
people express themselves, right? Is it possible that the lan-
guage  a  person  uses  alters  how  the  person  thinks?  In  the 
1950s,  Benjamin  Lee  Whorf  proposed  that  the  language 
people speak constrains their thoughts, perceptions, and ac-
tions, an extreme stance that has been largely abandoned. 
However, language does appear to impact thought in a few 
subtle and intriguing situations. Consider the use of gender in 
language. Most European languages, unlike English, assign 
a gender to inanimate objects. English speakers may occa-
sionally assign gender to an object—“I like that car over there, 
she’s a beauty!”—but this is rare. Contrast that with Italian, in 
which objects are masculine or feminine: teeth, ﬂ owers, and 
the sea—all masculine, who knows why. Or consider French, 
in  which  the  same  three  things  are  feminine.  The  German 
dinner table is a funny arrangement with a masculine spoon, 
a  feminine  fork,  and  a  neutral  knife.  It’s  enough  to  make  a 
college language student’s head spin.

Research suggests that the seemingly random gender as-
signments  used  in  many  languages  may  inﬂ uence  the  way 
people  think  about  the  objects.  In  one  study,  French  and 
Spanish speakers were asked to help make a movie in which 
objects would come to life. The subjects were shown pictures 
of the objects and asked to assign a man’s or woman’s voice. 
The objects were a mixture of ones that have the same gender 

in French and Spanish (e.g., “ballerina”) and others that have 
the opposite gender (e.g., “broom”). The idea of using pictures 
was to avoid the bias that might come from saying the mas-
culine or feminine words of each language. The experimental 
results showed that both French and Spanish speakers were 
signiﬁ cantly more likely to say an object should use a female 
voice when the object has a female gender in their language. 
This was true when the languages agreed about gender, but 
when these languages had different genders for the same ob-
ject, the French and Spanish speakers disagreed about the 
appropriate gender for the voice.

In  another  experiment,  Spanish  and  German  speakers 
were  asked  to  memorize  object–name  pairs  in  which  each 
inanimate object that had male or female gender was paired 
with  a  human  male  or  female  name.  Even  though  the  ex-
perimental  subjects  were  not  asked  any  questions  about 
the qualities of the inanimate objects, speakers of both lan-
guages found it more difﬁ cult to remember object–name pairs 
when the paired human name conﬂ icted with the gender of 
the object in their language. The researchers speculated that 
the  gender  associated  with  the  objects  affected  the  sub-
jects’ memory of them as well as their thinking about them. 
Perception of masculine and feminine properties of inanimate 
objects is just one example of the subtle effects of language. 
Other effects may include inﬂ uences on people’s descriptions 
of color, time, and spatial location.

Further Reading
Deutscher  G.  2010.  Through  the  Looking  Glass:  Why  the  World 

Looks Different in Other Languages. New York: Picador.

 Language in Animals 
 Animals  communicate  with  each  other  in  a  variety  of  ways,  from  the 
dance of a honey bee to the watery bellow of a whale. Animals and hu-
mans also communicate with each other in many ways, such as the verbal 
command we give our dogs, if we’re lucky, to jump down from the mail-
man. But do animals use language as we humans do? Human language 
is a remarkably complex, ﬂ exible, and powerful  system  for communica-
tion that involves the creative use of words according to the rules of a 
systematic grammar. Do other animals have anything similar? Actually, 
there are two questions we want to examine: Do animals naturally use 
language? Can animals be taught human language? These questions are 
difﬁ cult to investigate, but the answers have major implications for the 
evolution of human language. 

 Let’s  ﬁ rst  consider  the  possible  use  of  vocalizations  for  language  in 
nonhuman  primates.  In  the  wild,  chimpanzees  have  been  reported  to 
make tens of different vocalizations. There are alarm calls that express 
fear  and  warn  others  of  a  predator  and  pant-hoots  that  announce  a 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   688
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   688

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

689

chimp’s presence and excitement. However, compared to humans, non-
human  primates  appear  to  have  a  very  limited  range  of  vocalizations, 
and  there  is  little  evidence  that  they  are  based  on  rules  (phonological 
rules) as in humans. Most of the vocalizations chimpanzees make may be 
stereotyped  responses  to  behavioral  situations.  In  comparison,  human 
language is highly creative; limited only by the rules of grammar, it is 
effectively inﬁ nite. New word combinations and sentences are constantly 
being made by humans, and the combinations have clear meaning ac-
cording  to  the  meaning  of  the  individual  words  plus  the  rules  used  in 
arranging them. 

 But  maybe  we  haven’t  been  fair  in  our  comparison;  perhaps  animal 
speech requires that they have a language tutor, just as human children 
must be exposed to language. A variety of animals, including bottlenose 
dolphins and chimpanzees, have undergone training in an attempt to get 
them to speak human language. The harbor seal known as Hoover raised 
by ﬁ shermen in Maine learned to utter phrases that sounded something 
like a drunken man with a New England accent saying “hey hey hello 
there” or “get outta there.” In the 1940s, several psychologists tried rais-
ing baby chimpanzees just like human children, including teaching them 
to speak. Despite extensive training, the chimps and other animals never 
learned  to  utter  anything  like  the  range  of  sounds  and  words  used  by 
humans. In the 1960s, the physician and inventor John Lily, famous for 
his later development of the sensory deprivation tank and studies with 
psychedelic drugs, ﬂ ooded a small house with a few feet of water so that 
a dolphin could live around the clock with humans. As the trainer moved 
between a wet bed and a ﬂ oating desk, she tried to teach the dolphin to 
speak, such as counting with numbers. Despite positive reports, later ex-
periments did not corroborate the results. 

 The lack of a rich chimpanzee spoken language and their inability to 
speak human language are not surprising, given that their vocal tracts 
are not structured to make the sounds humans make. For example, in 
chimpanzees and other nonhuman primates, the larynx is much higher, 
closer to the mouth, making it impossible to make the range of sounds 
used in human speech. An alternative or adjunct to vocalizations for com-
munication in chimpanzees is the use of gestures and facial expressions. 
There is evidence indicating that chimpanzees make gestures with the 
intention of inﬂ uencing the behavior of other animals. In a recent study, 
Catherine Hobaiter and Richard Byrne from the University of St. Andrews 
reported the results of analyzing thousands of gestures categorized into 
66 types. Behavioral reactions in other chimpanzees viewing the gestures 
were used to infer the meaning and intended outcome of each gesture. 
Examples are “groom me,” “follow me,” and “stop that.” Some gestures ap-
peared to have a particular intention, and others were used more ﬂ exibly. 
This is clearly a much more elaborate system of communication than the 
dance of a honey bee. 

 To test and quantify the abilities of animals, a range of studies have 
attempted  to  teach  them  nonverbal  communication  using  words  repre-
sented  by  American  Sign  Language  gestures,  plastic  objects  with  vari-
ous patterns and shapes, or keys with different colors and patterns on a 
keyboard. Well-known examples include the chimpanzee named Washoe, 
trained by Allen and Beatrix Gardner; the gorilla named Koko, trained by 
Francine Patterson; and the bonobo named Kanzi, raised by Sue Savage-
Rumbaugh.  Without  question,  these  animals  learned  the  meanings  of 
gestures or symbols. They showed an ability to understand the meaning 
of phrases in human language, and they were able to use the improvised 
communication systems to request objects and actions from the scientists. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   689
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   689

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

690

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 20.2
Language in animals.

 Whether  we  can  conclude  from  such  studies  that  animals  use  or  can 
use language is controversial. Animals certainly communicate, and to some 
scientists, their systems of communication are sophisticated enough to be 
considered rudimentary language. These simpler systems may hint at the 
origins  of  human  language.  Other  scientists  think  the  distance  between 
human and animal language is too great, that animals do not use language, 
deﬁ ned as communication that is ﬂ exible, able to describe new things, and 
systematic according to rules of grammar. Regardless of your conclusion, 
it is important to distinguish between language, thought, and intelligence. 
Language is not a requirement for intelligence or thought. Nonhuman pri-
mates, dolphins, and humans raised without any language can do many 
things requiring abstract reasoning. Many creative people say they do some 
of their best thinking without words. Albert Einstein claimed that many of 
his ideas about relativity came from visually thinking of himself riding on 
a beam of light while looking at clocks and other objects. In any event, Fido 
does think even if he doesn’t use language as we do (Figure 20.2). 

 Language Acquisition 
 Language  processing  in  the  adult  human  brain  relies  on  carefully  or-
chestrated interactions among a number of cortical areas and subcorti-
cal structures that we will look at in a moment. But how does the brain 
learn to use language? Learning a language,  language acquisition , is a 
remarkable and fascinating process that proceeds in a similar manner in 
all cultures. The gurgles of newborns turn into babbling around 6 months 
of age. By 18 months of age, children understand about 150 words and 
can speak about 50. Interestingly, even at this early age, infants start to 
lose the ability to distinguish sounds they could discriminate earlier; an 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   690
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   690

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

(a)  Spoken

"There are no silences between words"

ThereAre

NoS

ilen

ces

Bet

weenWord

s

(b)  Printed text

THEREDONATEAKETTLEOFTENCHIPS
THE RED ON A TEA KETTLE OFTEN CHIPS or THERE, DON ATE A KETTLE OF TEN CHIPS

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

691

▲ FIGURE 20.3
Word boundaries in spoken and 
written English. (a) Acoustic analysis 
of a spoken sentence demonstrates 
that word boundaries cannot be 
determined simply from sounds. (b) An 
analogous situation might be reading 
text without spaces between words. 
Indeed, some patterns of letters could 
form more than one sentence. (Source: 
Kuhl, 2004.)

 example is a Japanese child’s difﬁ culty discriminating the English “r” and 
“l” sounds because these sounds are not used in Japanese. By 1–2 years of 
age, children’s speech has the tones, rhythm, and accent of the language 
they are exposed to. A 3-year-old can produce full sentences and knows 
roughly  1000  words.  By  adulthood,  a  person  knows  tens  of  thousands 
of words. On the other hand, after puberty, learning a second language 
becomes more difﬁ cult. A critical period for language acquisition is sug-
gested by the difﬁ culty older children have learning a second language 
compared to the ﬁ rst and the difﬁ culty acquiring a ﬁ rst language if they 
were not exposed to any spoken language before puberty. 

 The  speed  at  which  infants  learn  language  belies  the  challenges  in-
volved. When we ﬁ rst hear a foreign language, it sounds rapidly spoken, 
and it is difﬁ cult to determine where one word stops and the next begins. 
This is one of the problems faced by infants learning their native tongue. 
By 1 year of age, however, infants can already recognize the sounds of their 
language and words even though they don’t understand the words. Spoken 
language does not reliably indicate the divisions between words; it’s rather 
like reading text without the spaces (Figure 20.3). Yet, infants must learn 
to understand thousands of words that are all constructed from the same 
small pool of language-speciﬁ c sounds. Jenny Saffran and her colleagues 
at the University of Wisconsin found that this is achieved by  statistical 
learning in the infant. In other words, the child learns that some combi-
nations of sounds are far more likely than others. When a low probability 
combination occurs, it suggests the possible location of a word boundary. 
For example, in the phrase “pretty baby,” the probability that “ty” follows 
“pret” in a single word is higher than “ba” following “ty” in a single word. 
Another cue that infants learn to use is the syllable emphasis most com-
mon in the language. For example in English, the stress is usually on the 
ﬁ rst syllable, and this helps determine where words start and stop. Adults 
of both genders when talking to infants often use “motherese,” in which 
the speech is slower and exaggerated and vowel sounds are more clearly 
articulated. Motherese may assist the child in learning speech sounds. 

 We do not yet know the brain mechanisms by which infants learn to dis-
tinguish and speak words. However, Ghislaine Dehaene-Lambertz et al. 
have found using fMRI that even at the age of 3 months, the brain re-
sponse to spoken words is distributed in a manner similar to that in adults 
(Figure 20.4). Listening to speech activates extensive areas in the tempo-
ral lobe, with the activation strongly biased toward the left hemisphere. 
These ﬁ ndings do not show that the infant brain processes language the 
same as the adult brain, but they indicate a similar early organization of 
auditory areas and lateralization for language. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   691
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   691

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

692

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 20.4
Brain activity in a 3-month-old infant 
 listening to speech. Horizontal sections 
show the planum temporale, superior tem-
poral gyrus, and the pole of the temporal 
lobe that were all significantly activated 
when the infant listened to speech. In the 
fMRI images, red, orange, and yellow indi-
cate increasingly greater brain  activity. 
(Source: Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002.)

 Genes Involved in Language 
 Speech and language disorders run in families and are more likely to co-oc-
cur in identical twins than in fraternal twins. These observations suggest 
that genetic factors play an important role in the  susceptibility to language 
disorders. However, for many years the complex patterns of inheritance in 
language disorders made it difﬁ cult to implicate  particular genes. 

  FOXP2  and Verbal Dyspraxia. The view of how genetics may affect lan-
guage changed dramatically in 1990 with the ﬁ rst publications describing 
a British family known only as KE. In three generations of the KE family, 
about half had  verbal dyspraxia , an inability to produce the coordinated 
muscular movements needed for speech (Figure 20.5a). Their speech was 

Caudate nucleus  p < 0.00001  Cerebellum p < 0.001 

Unaffected family
members:

Affected family
members:

Male
Female

Deceased

Male
Female

Twins

(a)

(b)

Inferior frontal gyrus p < 0.0001

▲ FIGURE 20.5
FOXP2 mutations in the KE family. (a) Inheritance of language deficits in three 
generations of the KE family. (b) In affected KE family members, reduced gray 
matter was found in the caudate nucleus (upper left), cerebellum (upper right), 
and Broca’s area in the frontal lobe (bottom). (Sources: a adapted from Watkins 
et al., 2002; b adapted from Vargha-Khadem et al., 2005.)

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   692
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   692

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

693

largely unintelligible to both the general public and family members, and 
they developed hand signs to supplement spoken language. In addition to 
dyspraxia, the affected members of the KE family had broader difﬁ culties 
involving grammar and language and a lower IQ than unaffected members. 
The deﬁ cit was thought to be language-speciﬁ c rather than a more general 
cognitive impairment because the language problems were observed even 
in affected family members with normal IQs. Brain scans revealed that af-
fected members of the KE family had structural abnormalities in a variety 
of motor structures, including the motor cortex, cerebellum, and striatum 
(caudate and putamen) compared to unaffected members (Figure 20.5b). 
 What is known about the genetics underlying this striking familial lan-
guage disorder? The ﬁ rst thing to note is that unlike previously observed 
inherited language disorders that appeared to involve multiple genes, the 
inheritance pattern seen in the KE family was consistent with the mu-
tation  of  a  single  gene.  This  gene  appears  to  affect  the  development  of 
the motor cortex, cerebellum, and striatum; there are particular deﬁ cits 
in the muscular control of the lower face. The hunt for the culprit gene 
was aided by the discovery of an unrelated boy, known as CS, who had 
a language disorder resembling that in the KE family. Combining what 
was known about CS and the KE family, the mutated gene was eventu-
ally identiﬁ ed as  FOXP2 , which codes a transcription factor responsible 
for turning other genes on and off. It would be incorrect to call  FOXP2  
 the  language gene, but it does appear to be one critical gene involved in 
language.  From  our  two  parents,  we  all  have  two  copies  of  the   FOXP2  
gene, but a mutation in either one is sufﬁ cient to produce severe language 
deﬁ cits. It is a striking ﬁ nding that the change in a single gene can affect 
a complex behavior such as speech. It should be recognized, however, that 
through its action as a transcription factor,  FOXP2  is capable of inﬂ uenc-
ing hundreds of other genes that might be involved in language. 

 Versions  of   FOXP2   are  found  in  many  animals.  It  is  interesting  to 
note that in highly vocal songbirds,  FOXP2  is strongly expressed in brain 
areas  involved  in  song  learning.  An  important  question  is  what  might 
be special in humans that conceivably underlies our extensive language 
abilities compared to those of nonhuman primates. Only two amino acids 
distinguish  the  human  form  of  the   FOXP2   protein  from  the  chimpan-
zee, gorilla, and rhesus monkey form. The evolutionary paths leading to 
humans  and  chimpanzees  diverged  about  six  million  years  ago,  but  it 
has been estimated that the mutations differentiating human and nonhu-
man primate  FOXP2  genes occurred about 200,000 years ago. An exciting 
speculation is that a small and relatively recent mutation in the  FOXP2  
gene set humans on a path toward developing language that was needed 
for higher cognitive function and the development of human culture. 

 Genetic Factors in Speciﬁ c Language Impairment and Dyslexia. After 
the KE family was studied and the  FOXP2  gene implicated in their verbal 
dyspraxia, other individuals unrelated to the KE family were identiﬁ ed 
who  had  various  mutations  of   FOXP2 . Their  speech  impairments  were 
consistent with the idea that a mutation in the  FOXP2  gene alone can 
disrupt the normal development of speech. Affected individuals also ex-
hibited other grammatical and cognitive deﬁ cits, but it is not clear if these 
are distinct deﬁ cits or somehow related to the verbal dyspraxia. 

 Spurred on by the  FOXP2  ﬁ ndings, growing numbers of genes have been 
identiﬁ ed that are potentially involved in common language disorders. For 
example,  speciﬁ c language impairment (SLI)  is found in about 7% of all 
6-year-olds in the United States. This condition consists of a developmental 
delay in the mastery of language that may persist into adulthood and that 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   693
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   693

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

694

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

is not associated with hearing difﬁ culty or more general developmental de-
lays. These children have difﬁ culty learning and using words, especially 
verbs. Because more than 50% of children with SLI have a parent or sibling 
with the condition, there appears to be a strong genetic component. 

 Genetic  studies  of  children  with  SLI  have  identiﬁ ed  a  handful  of 
genes  that  may  be  involved.  Often  mentioned,  in  addition  to   FOXP2 , 
are the genes  CNTNAP2  and  KIAA0319 . More interesting than the long 
acronyms  denoting  these  genes  are  their  functions.   CNTNAP2   codes  a 
neurexin protein; these are proteins on the presynaptic side of synapses 
that serve to hold the presynaptic and postsynaptic elements together. 
The  CNTNAP2  neurexin plays an important role in brain development; 
it appears to be involved in properly locating potassium channels in de-
veloping neurons.  KIAA0319  is thought to be critical for neuronal migra-
tion during neocortical development as well as normal function of adult 
neurons. We have not reached the point of knowing the speciﬁ c neural 
abnormalities underlying SLI, but the candidate genes have focused at-
tention on key aspects of neuronal migration and development. 

 Another common disorder associated with language is  dyslexia,  which 
involves a difﬁ culty learning to read despite normal intelligence and train-
ing. Estimates are that dyslexia occurs in 5–10% of people and is somewhat 
more common in males than in females. The disorder appears to have a 
strong genetic link, as children of a dyslexic parent have a roughly 30% 
chance of being dyslexic, and 30–50% of the siblings of a dyslexic person also 
have dyslexia. A gene often associated with dyslexia is  KIAA0319 , one of the 
genes thought to be involved in speciﬁ c language impairment. Interestingly, 
dyslexia is quite often found in individuals with SLI. Comorbidity of the dis-
orders is about 40–50%, suggesting that they may have similar causes or 
be different manifestations of the same deﬁ cit. Like SLI, dyslexia appears 
to involve deviations from the normal pattern of neocortical development. 

 THE DISCOVERY OF SPECIALIZED LANGUAGE 
THE DDISCOOVERY OF SPECIALLIZED LANGUAGE 
AREAAS IN TTHE BRAIN 
AREAS IN THE BRAIN 

 As in many other areas of neuroscience, only in the last century have we 
come to understand a clear relationship between language and the brain. 
Much of what we know about the importance of certain brain areas is de-
rived from studies of aphasia.  Aphasia  is the partial or complete loss of 
language abilities following brain damage, often without the loss of cogni-
tive faculties or the ability to move the muscles used in speech. 

 During the Greek and Roman Empires, it was commonly thought that 
the  tongue  controls  speech  and  that  speech  disorders  originate  there 
rather  than  in  the  brain.  If  a  head  injury  resulted  in  a  loss  of  speech, 
the treatment involved special gargles or massage of the tongue. By the 
sixteenth  century,  it  had  been  noted  that  a  person  could  suffer  speech 
impairment without paralysis of the tongue. However, in spite of this step 
forward, treatment still included such procedures as cutting the tongue, 
drawing blood, and applying leeches. 

 Around 1770, Johann Gesner published a relatively modern theory of 
aphasia, describing it as the inability to associate images or abstract ideas 
with  their  expressive  verbal  symbols.  He  attributed  this  loss  to  brain 
damage resulting from disease. Gesner’s deﬁ nition makes the important 
observation that in aphasia, cognitive ability may remain intact but some 
function speciﬁ c to verbal expression is lost. Despite the incorrect asso-
ciation  Franz  Joseph  Gall  and  later  phrenologists  made  between  skull 
shape and brain function (see Chapter 1), they too made an  important 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   694
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   694

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

695

 observation about aphasia. They reasoned that cases of brain lesions in 
which speech is lost but other mental faculties are retained suggest that 
there is a speciﬁ c region of the brain used for speech. 

 In  1825,  based  on  many  case  studies,  the  French  physician  Jean-
Baptiste Bouillaud proposed that speech is speciﬁ cally controlled by the 
frontal lobes. But it took another four decades before this idea was gener-
ally accepted. In 1861, Simon Alexandre Ernest Aubertin, Bouillaud’s son-
in-law, described the case of a man who had shot away his frontal skull 
bone in a failed suicide attempt. While treating this man, Aubertin discov-
ered that if a spatula was pressed against the exposed frontal lobe while 
the man was speaking, his speech immediately halted and did not resume 
until the pressure was released. He inferred that the pressure on the brain 
interfered with the normal function of a cortical area in the frontal lobe. 

 Broca’s Area and Wernicke’s Area 
 Also in 1861, French neurologist Paul Broca had a patient who was almost 
entirely unable to speak (the man was called Tan because “tan” was the only 
sound he could produce). The patient died shortly after Broca met him, and 
at the postmortem Broca found a  lesion  in  the  frontal  lobes.  Perhaps  be-
cause of a change in the scientiﬁ c climate, Broca’s case study appears to have 
swung popular opinion around to the idea that there is a language center in 
the brain. In 1863, Broca published a paper describing eight cases in which 
language was disturbed by damage to the frontal lobe in the left hemisphere. 
Additional similar cases, along with reports that speech was not disturbed 
by  right  hemispheric  lesions,  led  Broca  in  1864  to  propose  that  language 
expression is controlled by only one hemisphere, almost always the left. This 
view is supported by results from the  Wada procedure,  in which a single 
hemisphere of the brain is anesthetized. In most cases, anesthesia of the 
left hemisphere, but not the right, disrupts speech. In the 1990s, functional 
brain imaging began to replace the Wada procedure for assessing the domi-
nant hemisphere for language, and the ﬁ ndings are the same (Box 20.2). 

 If one hemisphere is thought to be more heavily involved in a  particular 
task, it is said to be  dominant . The region of the dominant left frontal lobe 
that Broca identiﬁ ed as critical for articulate speech has come to be called 
 Broca’s area  (Figure 20.6). Broca’s work has considerable signiﬁ cance 
as the ﬁ rst clear demonstration that brain functions can be anatomically 
localized. 

 In 1874, German neurologist Karl Wernicke reported that lesions in 
the left hemisphere, in a region distinct from Broca’s area, also disrupt 
normal  speech.  Located  on  the  superior  surface  of  the  temporal  lobe 
between  the  auditory  cortex  and  the  angular  gyrus,  this  region  is  now 
 commonly called  Wernicke’s area  (see Figure 20.6). The nature of the 
aphasia Wernicke observed is different from that associated with damage 
to Broca’s area. Having established that there are two language areas in 
the left hemisphere, Wernicke and others proceeded to construct maps 
of  language  processing  in  the  brain.  Interconnections  between  the  au-
ditory  cortex,  Wernicke’s  area,  Broca’s  area,  and  the  muscles  required 
for speech were hypothesized, and different types of language disabilities 
were attributed to damage in different parts of this system. 

 Although  the  terms   Broca’s  area   and   Wernicke’s  area   are  still  com-
monly used, the boundaries of these areas are not clearly deﬁ ned, and 
they appear to be quite variable from one person to the next. We will also 
see that each area may be involved in more than one language function, 
although that more recent ﬁ nding will make sense only after we look at 
the aphasias produced by damage to Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   695
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   695

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

696

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 20.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Assessing Hemispheric Language Dominance

The  ﬁ rst  reports  that  one  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  is 

dominant for language came from studies of brain-damaged 
patients. A simple procedure used for studying the function of 
a single cerebral hemisphere in people without brain damage 
is  the  Wada  procedure,  developed  by  Japanese-Canadian 
neurologist  Juhn  Wada.  A  fast-acting  barbiturate,  such  as 
sodium amytal, is injected into the carotid artery on one side 
of  the  neck  (Figure  A).  The  drug  is  preferentially  carried  in 
the bloodstream to the hemisphere ipsilateral to the injection, 
where it acts as an anesthetic for about 10 minutes. The ef-
fects are sudden and dramatic. Within a matter of seconds, 
the limbs on the side of the body contralateral to the injection 
become paralyzed along with loss of somatic sensation.

By asking the patient to answer questions, one can assess 
his or her ability to speak. If the injected hemisphere is dominant 
for speech, the patient will be completely unable to talk until the 
anesthesia wears off. If the injected hemisphere is not dominant, 
the person can continue to speak throughout the procedure.

Table  A  shows  that  in  96%  of  right-handed  people  and 
70% of left-handed people, the left hemisphere is dominant 
for speech. Because 90% of all people are right-handed, this 
means that the left hemisphere is dominant for language in 
roughly 93% of people. While small but signiﬁ cant numbers of 
people with either handedness have a dominant right hemi-
sphere,  only  in  left-handers  are  bilateral  representations  of 
speech seen. In the Wada procedure, this is indicated when 

TABLE A 

 Hemispheric Control of Speech in 
Relation to Handedness

Speech 

Representation (%)

Number of 

Handedness

Cases

Left

Bilateral Right

Right
Left

140
122

96
70

  0
15

  4
15

(Source: Rasmussen and Milner, 1977, Table 1.)

an injection into either hemisphere has some disruptive effect 
on speech, although speciﬁ cs of the disruption may be differ-
ent for the two hemispheres.

More recently, fMRI has been used to assess hemispheric 
dominance for language. As fMRI is not invasive and it is not 
limited  by  the  short  duration  of  the  anesthetic  effect  of  so-
dium  amytal,  it  has  advantages  over  the  Wada  procedure. 
The brain images in Figure B were collected while a subject 
was given a word and asked to select a synonym from four 
word options. The brain scans show that frontal, temporal, 
and parietal areas are activated exclusively in the left hemi-
sphere, which is thus dominant for language in this person. 
(Note that the convention with MRI images is to show the left 
hemisphere on the right side of the image.)

Frontal lobe

Middle cerebral 
artery

Parietal
lobe

Temporal
lobe

Left internal
carotid artery

Sodium
amytal

Figure A

Figure B
 (Source: Spreer et al., 2002, Fig. 4.)

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   696
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   696

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

697

Motor cortex

Motor control of
mouth and lips

Broca’s
area

Angular
gyrus

Auditory
cortex

Wernicke’s
area

▲ FIGURE 20.6
Key components of the language system in the left 
hemisphere. In the frontal lobe, Broca’s area lies next to 
the area that controls the mouth and lips in the  motor 
cortex. Wernicke’s area, on the superior surface of the 
temporal lobe, is situated between the auditory cortex 
and the angular gyrus.

LANGUAGE INSIGHTS FROM THE STUDY OF APHASIA 
LANGGUAGEE INSIGHTS FROM TTHE STUDY OF APHASIA 

 As in the studies of Broca and Wernicke, the oldest technique for  studying 
relationships between language and the brain involves correlating func-
tional deﬁ cits with lesions in particular brain areas. The occurrence of 
distinct types of aphasia, as shown in Table 20.1, suggests that language 
is processed in several stages at different locations in the brain. By ex-
amining language deﬁ cits that result from damage to different areas of 
the brain, Nina Dronkers at the University of California at Davis, has 
clariﬁ ed much of the neural machinery of language (Box 20.3). 

TABLE 20.1  Characteristics of Types of Aphasia

Type of Aphasia

Site of Brain Damage

Comprehension

Speech

Impaired
Repetition

Paraphasic
Errors

Motor association cortex 

Good

of frontal lobe

Nonﬂ uent, 

agrammatical

Yes

Posterior temporal lobe

Poor

Fluent, grammatical, 

Yes

Broca’s

Wernicke’s

Conduction
Global

Arcuate fasciculus
Portions of temporal and 

Good
Poor

frontal lobes

Transcortical motor area

Frontal lobe anterior to 

Good

Transcortical sensory

Anomic

Broca’s

Cortex near the junction 
of temporal, parietal, 
and occipital lobes
Inferior temporal lobe

Poor

Good

Yes

Yes

Yes
—

Yes

Yes

meaningless

Fluent, grammatical
Very little

Nonﬂ uent, 

agrammatical

Yes
Yes

No

Fluent, grammatical, 

No

meaningless

Fluent, grammatical

No

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   697
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   697

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

698

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 20.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Uncovering Language Areas of the Brain
by Nina Dronkers

My passion for clinical neuroscience began one day in a 

class at the University of California at Berkeley where I was 
pondering  my  “senioritis”  and  what  to  do  with  my  life  after 
college. My professor showed a video of a man who couldn’t 
read a handwritten message. Paradoxically, the man had just 
written the message himself! Such cases of language distur-
bance after brain injury were what sparked my interest in how 
the brain processes language and continued to fascinate me 
for the next 30 years.

In working with individuals who have sustained brain injuries, 
I have had the unique opportunity to evaluate the relationships 
between affected areas of the brain (as imaged with brain scans) 
and the speech and language deﬁ cits (aphasia) that result from 
the injury. The ﬁ rst thing that struck me in working with indi-
viduals who have aphasia was that the classic relationship be-
tween aphasia syndromes and injury to certain language areas 
was not always as I had learned. I saw patients with Broca’s 
aphasia who did not necessarily have lesions in Broca’s area, 
and  those  with  lesions  in  Broca’s  area  did  not  always  have 
Broca’s aphasia. The same discrepancy held for other aphasia 
syndromes  as  well.  Soon,  my  colleagues  and  I  realized  that 
some deﬁ cits could still be “localized,” but that these needed 
to be narrowed down into smaller components of the speech 
and language system, rather than by entire syndromes. Deﬁ cits 
such  as  coordinating  complex  articulatory  movements  could 
be related to lesions in a small part of the insula, problems with 
the verbatim repetition of low-frequency sentences were seen 
after  injury  to  the  posterior  superior  temporal  gyrus,  and  dif-
ﬁ culty recognizing the syntactic structure of a sentence could 
be related to the lesions in the anterior superior temporal gyrus. 
We found that ﬁ ber pathways in the brain also play an important 
role in language production and comprehension. Destruction 
of  the  arcuate  fasciculus,  for  example,  can  lead  to  a  severe 
speech production disorder. It became clear that while certain 
individual brain structures can play a speciﬁ c role in speech or 
language functions, aphasia syndromes are caused by injury 
to large swaths of brain tissue as well as the ﬁ ber pathways 
that connect them. In the normal brain, all of these structures 
work together in a complex network that helps to support the 
extraordinary language functions we all take for granted.

A  particularly  exciting  time  of  my  life  occurred  in  Paris, 
France,  where  I  had  the  extraordinary  opportunity  to  study 
the brains of Paul Broca’s ﬁ rst two patients. These were the 

cases of aphasia he had examined as a surgeon in 1861 and 
whose  deﬁ cits  led  Broca  to  believe  that  the  inferior  part  of 
the  frontal  lobe  was  important  for  spoken  language.  Since 
so  much  had  been  written  about  Broca’s  area,  particularly 
with  the  growth  of  functional  neuroimaging  with  PET  and 
fMRI  in  cognitive  neuroscience,  it  was  clearly  necessary  to 
revisit these cases and see which anatomical areas were ac-
tually affected in these historic brains. Luckily, the brains had 
never been dissected or discarded, and my colleague, Odile 
Plaisant, and I were tremendously fortunate in being able to 
examine these brains more closely. We could see right away 
that the area we now think of as Broca’s area was only par-
tially affected in these two cases. We were curious to know 
how deeply the injuries extended, and with the expertise of 
Marie-Thérèse Iba-Zizen and Emanuel Cabanis, both neuro-
radiologists, we were actually able to scan these two impor-
tant brains in an MRI scanner and acquired high-resolution 
images with exquisite detail.

What  astonished  us  was  the  degree  of  involvement  of 
other  regions  of  the  brain,  particularly  in  the  insula  and  in 
the  ﬁ ber  tracts  that  travel  throughout  the  brain.  The  case  of 
Mr. Leborgne, or “Tan,” Broca’s ﬁ rst and most famous case, 
had extensive involvement of the insula but only a portion of 
what we now call Broca’s area. In addition, the major ﬁ ber bun-
dles,  including  the  arcuate  and  superior  longitudinal  fasciculi 
that travel between the frontal and posterior parts of the brain, 
were completely destroyed. Broca’s second case, Mr. Lelong, 
had atrophy in the insula, but when the scanner advanced into 
the  deeper  parts  of  the  brain,  we  saw  several  small  lesions 
again in the arcuate and superior longitudinal fasciculi. This had 
never been seen before, and we were quite thrilled to see it 
unfold  as  we  watched.  Thus,  we  saw  that  the  damage  that 
produced the aphasia in these two cases was more extensive 
than previously thought but, in fact, consistent with what we 
see in our current cases of severe Broca’s aphasia.

As a neuroscientist, I feel extraordinarily lucky to be able to 
work with individuals with aphasia who have taught us so much 
about this remarkable part of the body. The brain is, in many 
ways, still an open frontier, with much to be learned about its 
functions, its mechanisms, and its potential for recovery. The 
next generations of neuroscientists will have much to contribute 
to  our  knowledge  of  the  brain  and  will  surely  experience  the 
same excitement of discovery as those who came before them.

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   698
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   698

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

699

 Broca’s Aphasia 
 The syndrome called  Broca’s aphasia  is also known as motor or nonﬂ u-
ent aphasia, because the person has difﬁ culty speaking even though he 
or she can understand language heard or read. The case of David Ford 
is typical. Ford was a radio operator in the Coast Guard when, at age 39 
years, he suffered a stroke. He remained an intelligent man, but he had 
little control over his right arm and leg (demonstrating that his lesion 
was in the left hemisphere). His speech was also abnormal, as the follow-
ing discussion with psychologist Howard Gardner illustrates: 

 “I asked Mr. Ford about his work before he entered the hospital. 

I’m a sig. . . no. . . man. . . uh, well,. . . again.” These words were emitted 
slowly, and with great effort. The sounds were not clearly articulated; each 
syllable was uttered harshly, explosively, in a throaty voice. With practice, 
it was possible to understand him, but at ﬁ rst I encountered considerable 
difﬁ culty in this. 

 “Let me help you,” I interjected. “You were a signal. . . .” 
 “A signal man. . . right,” Ford completed my phrase triumphantly. 
 “Were you in the Coast Guard?” 
 “No, er, yes, yes. . . ship. . . Massachu. . . chusetts. . . Coastguard. . .years.” 

He raised his hands twice, indicating the number “nineteen.” 

 “Could you tell me, Mr. Ford, what you’ve been doing in the hospital?” 
 “Yes,  sure.  Me  go,  er,  uh,  P.T.  nine  o’cot,  speech.  .  .  two  times.  .  . 

read. . . wr. . . ripe, er, rike, er, write. . . practice. . . get-ting better.” 

 “And have you been going home on weekends?” 
 “Why, yes. . . Thursday, er, er, er, no, er, Friday. . . Bar-ba-ra. . . wife. . .

and, oh, car. . . drive. . . purnpike. . . you know. . . rest and. . . tee-vee.” 

 “Are you able to understand everything on television?” 
 “Oh,  yes,  yes.  .  .  well.  .  .  almost.”  Ford  grinned  a  bit.  (Gardner,  1974, 

pp. 60–61) 

 People  with  Broca’s  aphasia  have  difﬁ culty  saying  anything,  often 
pausing to search for the right word. The inability to ﬁ nd words is called 
  anomia   (literally  meaning  “no  name”).  Interestingly,  there  are  certain 
“overlearned” things Broca aphasics can say without much hesitation, such 
as the days of the week and the American Pledge of Allegiance. The hall-
mark of Broca’s aphasia is a telegraphic style of speech, in which mainly 
 content words  (nouns, verbs, and adjectives carrying content speciﬁ c to the 
sentence) are used. For instance, when Mr. Ford was asked about being in 
the Coast Guard, his answer contained the words “ship,” “Massachusetts,” 
“Coast Guard,” and “years,” but little else. Many  function words  (articles, 
pronouns,  and  conjunctions  connecting  the  parts  of  the  sentence  gram-
matically) are left out (there are no ifs, ands, or buts). As well, verbs are 
frequently not conjugated. In the jargon of aphasia deﬁ cits, the inability to 
construct grammatically correct sentences is called  agrammatism.  There 
are some peculiar nuances to the agrammatical tendencies in Broca’s apha-
sia. Ford, for example, could read and use the words “bee” and “oar” but 
had difﬁ culty with the more common words “be” and “or.” This problem is 
related not to the word’s sound but to whether or not it is a noun. In a simi-
lar vein, Broca aphasics have difﬁ culty repeating things spoken to them, 
although they tend to be better with familiar nouns such as “book” and 
“nose.”  Sometimes  they  substitute  incorrect  sounds  or  words  (Ford  said 
“purnpike” for “turnpike”); these are called  paraphasic errors.  

 In contrast to the speech difﬁ culties in Broca’s aphasia, comprehension 
is generally quite good. In the dialogue above, Ford seemed to understand 
the questions asked of him, and for the most part, he said he understood 
what he saw on television. In Gardner’s study, Ford was able to answer 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   699
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   699

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

700

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

simple questions, such as “Does a stone ﬂ oat on water?” However, more 
difﬁ cult questions demonstrated that he did not have completely normal 
comprehension abilities. If he was told “The lion was killed by the tiger; 
which animal is dead?” or “Put the cup on top of the fork and place the 
knife inside the cup,” he had difﬁ culty understanding. This was probably 
related to the fact that he generally had trouble with the function words 
“by” in the ﬁ rst example and “on top of” in the second example. 

 Because  the  most  obvious  difﬁ culty  is  in  producing  speech,  Broca’s 
aphasia is considered a language disturbance toward the motor end of the 
language system. Language is understood but not easily produced. While 
it is true that Broca aphasics are worse at speech than other types of apha-
sics, several characteristics suggest that there is more to the syndrome. 
As pointed out earlier, comprehension is generally good, but comprehen-
sion deﬁ cits can be demonstrated by tricky questions. Also, a simple motor 
deﬁ cit  would  not  explain  the  ability  to  say  “bee”  but  not  “be.”  Finally, 
patients sometimes have considerable anomia, suggesting that they have 
problems “ﬁ nding” words as well as making the appropriate sounds. 

 Wernicke suggested that the area damaged in Broca’s aphasia  contains 
memories for the ﬁ ne series of motor commands required for articulating 
word sounds. Because Broca’s area is near the part of the motor cortex 
that controls the mouth and lips, there is an appealing logic to this idea. 
Wernicke’s theory is still held by some, but there are other ways of looking 
at the problem. For instance, the difference in the aphasic’s ability to use 
content words and function words suggests that Broca’s area and nearby 
cortex may be speciﬁ cally involved in making grammatical sentences out 
of words. This might explain why Mr. Ford could produce sounds such 
as “bee” and “oar” when they represent content words but not when the 
sounds represent the function words “be” and “or.” 

 Wernicke’s Aphasia 
 When Wernicke noted that superior temporal lesions could lead to apha-
sia, the syndrome he observed was quite distinct from Broca’s aphasia. 
Indeed,  Wernicke  suggested  there  were  two  general  types  of  aphasia. 
In Broca’s aphasia, speech is disturbed but comprehension is relatively 
intact.  In   Wernicke’s  aphasia,   speech  is  ﬂ uent  but  comprehension  is 
poor. (Although these descriptions are oversimpliﬁ ed, they are useful for 
remembering these syndromes.) 

 Let’s  consider  the  case  of  Philip  Gorgan,  another  patient  studied  by 

Gardner. 

 “What brings you to the hospital?” I asked the 72-year-old retired butcher 4 
weeks after his admission to the hospital. 

 “Boy, I’m sweating, I’m awful nervous, you know, once in a while I get 
caught up, I can’t mention the tarripoi, a month ago, quite a little, I’ve done 
a lot well, I impose a lot, while, on the other hand, you know what I mean, I 
have to run around, look it over, trebbin and all that sort of stuff.” 

 I attempted several times to break in, but was unable to do so against 
this relentlessly steady and rapid outﬂ ow. Finally, I put up my hand, rested 
it on Gorgan’s shoulder, and was able to gain a moment’s reprieve. 

 “Thank you, Mr. Gorgan. I want to ask you a few—” 
 “Oh sure, go ahead, any old think you want. If I could I would. Oh, I’m 
taking  the  word  the  wrong  way  to  say,  all  of  the  barbers  here  whenever 
they stop you it’s going around and around, if you know what I mean, that 
is tying and tying for repucer, repuceration, well, we were trying the best 
that we could while another time it was with the beds over there the same 
thing. . . .” (Gardner, 1974, pp. 67–68) 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   700
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   700

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

701

 Clearly,  Mr.  Gorgan’s  speech  is  altogether  different  from  that  of 
Mr.  Ford.  Gorgan’s  speech  is  ﬂ uent,  and  he  has  no  trouble  using  func-
tion words as well as content words. If you didn’t understand English, his 
speech would probably sound normal because of its ﬂ uency. However, the 
content does not make much sense. It is a strange mixture of clarity and 
gibberish. Along with their far greater output of speech compared to Broca 
aphasics, Wernicke aphasics also make far more paraphasic errors. Gorgan 
would sometimes use the correct sounds but in an incorrect sequence, such 
as “plick” instead of “clip.” Occasionally, he would stumble around the cor-
rect sound or word, as when, in another conversation, he called a piece of 
paper “piece of handkerchief, pauper, hand pepper, piece of hand paper.” 
Interestingly, he would sometimes use an incorrect word but one categori-
cally similar to the correct word, such as “knee” instead of “elbow.” 

 Because of the stream of unintelligible speech, it is difﬁ cult to assess 
with  speech  alone  whether  Wernicke  aphasics  comprehend  what  they 
hear or read. Indeed, one of the intriguing things about Wernicke apha-
sics is that they frequently appear undisturbed by the sound of their own 
speech and the speech of others, even though they probably don’t under-
stand either. Comprehension is usually assessed by asking the patient to 
respond in a nonverbal manner. For instance, the patient could be asked 
to put object A on top of object B. Questions and commands of this sort 
quickly lead to the conclusion that Wernicke aphasics do not understand 
most instructions. They are completely unable to comprehend questions 
of the sort understood by Broca aphasics. When Gorgan was presented 
with  commands  written  on  cards  (“Wave  goodbye,”  “Pretend  to  brush 
your teeth”), he was often able to read the words but never acted as if he 
understood what they meant. 

 Gorgan’s strange speech was mirrored in his writing and his ability to 
play music. When Gardner gave him a pencil, he spontaneously took it 
and wrote “Philip Gorgan. This is a very good beautifyl day is a good day, 
when the wether has been for a very long time in this part of the cam-
paning. Then we want on a ride and over to for it culd be ﬁ rst time. . . .” 
(p. 71). Likewise, when he sang or played the piano, pieces of the appro-
priate song were intermixed with musical gibberish, and he had a difﬁ -
cult time ending, just as in his speech. 

 Insight about the possible function of Wernicke’s area is provided by 
its  location  on  the  superior  temporal  gyrus  near  the  primary  auditory 
cortex.  Wernicke’s  area  may  play  a  critical  role  in  relating  incoming 
sounds to their meaning. In other words, it is an area specialized for stor-
ing memories of the sounds that make up words. Some have suggested 
that  Wernicke’s  area  is  a  high-order  area  for  sound  recognition  in  the 
same sense that the inferior temporal cortex is thought to be a high-or-
der area for visual recognition. A sound recognition deﬁ cit would explain 
why  Wernicke  aphasics  don’t  comprehend  speech  well.  However,  there 
must be more to Wernicke’s area to account for the odd speech patterns 
and comprehension deﬁ cits. Speech in Wernicke’s aphasia suggests that 
Broca’s area and the system responsible for speech production are run-
ning without control over content. The speech zooms along, swerving in 
every direction like a car with a sleepy driver at the wheel. 

 The Wernicke–Geschwind Model of 
Language and Aphasia 
 Shortly  after  making  his  observations  about  what  came  to  be  called 
Wernicke’s aphasia, Wernicke proposed a model for language processing 
in the brain. Later extended by Norman Geschwind at Boston University, 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   701
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   701

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

702

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Motor cortex

Broca’s
area

Arcuate
fasciculus

▲ FIGURE 20.7
The pathway involved in repeating a spoken word, 
according to the Wernicke–Geschwind model.

Auditory
cortex

Wernicke’s
area

this model is known as the  Wernicke–Geschwind model.  The key ana-
tomical  elements  in  the  system  are  Broca’s  area,  Wernicke’s  area,  the 
 arcuate fasciculus  (a bundle of axons connecting the two cortical areas), 
and the  angular gyrus.  The model also includes sensory and motor areas 
involved in receiving and producing language. To understand what the 
model entails, we’ll consider the performance of two tasks. 

 The  ﬁ rst  task  is  the  repetition  of  spoken  words  (Figure  20.7).  When 
incoming speech sounds reach the ear, the auditory system processes the 
sounds, and neural signals eventually reach the auditory cortex. According 
to the model, the sounds are not understood as meaningful words until 
they are processed in Wernicke’s area. For the person to be able to repeat 
the words, word-based signals are passed to Broca’s area from Wernicke’s 
area via the arcuate fasciculus. In Broca’s area, the words are converted 
to a code for the muscular movements required for speech. Output from 
Broca’s  area  is  sent  to  the  nearby  motor  cortical  areas  responsible  for 
moving the lips, tongue, larynx, and so on. 

 The  second  task  we’ll  consider  is  reading  written  text  aloud 
(Figure 20.8). In this case, the incoming information is processed by the 
visual  system  through  the  striate  cortex  and  higher-order  visual  corti-
cal areas. The  visual signals are then passed to the angular gyrus at the 
junction of the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes. In the cortex of the 
angular gyrus, it is assumed that a transformation occurs so that the out-
put evokes the same pattern of activity in Wernicke’s area as if the words 
were spoken rather than written. From this point, the processing follows 
the same progression as in the ﬁ rst example: Wernicke’s area to Broca’s 
area to motor cortex. 

 This model offers simple explanations for key elements of both Broca’s 
and  Wernicke’s  aphasia.  A  lesion  in  Broca’s  area  seriously  interferes 
with speech production because the proper signals can no longer be sent 
to the motor cortex. On the other hand, comprehension is relatively in-
tact because Wernicke’s area is undisturbed. A lesion in Wernicke’s area 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   702
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   702

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

703

Motor cortex

Broca’s
area

Primary
visual
cortex

Auditory
cortex

Wernicke’s
area

Angular
gyrus

▲ FIGURE 20.8
The pathway involved in repeating aloud a 
written word, according to the Wernicke– 
Geschwind model.

produces  great  comprehension  problems  because  this  is  the  site  of  the 
 transformation of sounds into words. The ability to speak is unaffected 
because Broca’s area is still able to drive the muscles required for speech. 
 The Wernicke–Geschwind model has several errors and oversimpliﬁ -
cations, however. For example, words read do not have to be transformed 
into  a  pseudo-auditory  response,  as  suggested  in  the  reading  task  de-
scribed earlier. In fact, visual information can reach Broca’s area from 
the visual cortex without making a stop at the angular gyrus. One of the 
dangers inherent in any model is overstating the signiﬁ cance of a given 
cortical area for a particular function. It has been found that the severity 
of Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasias depends on how much cortex is dam-
aged  beyond  the  limits  of  Broca’s  and  Wernicke’s  areas.  Also,  aphasia 
is inﬂ uenced by damage to subcortical structures such as the thalamus 
and caudate nucleus, which are not in the model. In surgical cases where 
parts of cortex are removed, the resulting language deﬁ cits are usually 
milder than the deﬁ cits resulting from stroke, which affects both cortical 
and subcortical structures. 

 Another important factor is that there is often signiﬁ cant recovery of 
language function after a stroke, and it appears that other cortical areas 
can sometimes compensate for what is lost. As with many neurological 
syndromes, young children generally recover very well, but even adults, 
especially left-handers, can show good recovery of function. 

 A  ﬁ nal  problem  with  the  Wernicke–Geschwind  model  is  that  most 
aphasias involve both comprehension and speech deﬁ cits. Mr. Ford, with 
Broca’s aphasia, had good comprehension but was confused by complex 
questions.  Conversely,  Mr.  Gorgan,  with  Wernicke’s  aphasia,  had  sev-
eral speech abnormalities in addition to a severe lack of comprehension. 
Therefore,  in  cortical  processing,  the  sharp  functional  distinctions  be-
tween regions as implied by the model do not exist. Despite its problems, 
the Wernicke–Geschwind model continues to be of clinical use because of 
its simplicity and approximate validity. In the latter half of the twentieth 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   703
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   703

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

704

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Motor cortex

Premotor cortex

Broca’s area

Wernicke’s
area

Auditory cortex

▲ FIGURE 20.9
Parallel language pathways. Current models of language processing emphasize 
multiple streams of processing, much like the dorsal and ventral streams de-
scribed for vision. The model here includes two dorsal pathways and a ventral 
pathway. Note that unlike in the Wernicke–Geschwind model, language here is 
not based on a single stream connecting Wernicke’s area with Broca’s area via 
the arcuate fasciculus. One dorsal pathway (blue) connects the superior temporal 
gyrus (Wernicke’s and auditory areas) with premotor cortex and is involved in 
speech production and repeating words. The other dorsal pathway (green) con-
nects the superior temporal gyrus with Broca’s area and is thought to be involved 
in processing complex syntactic structure—that is, the analysis of words arranged 
according to a grammar system. The ventral stream (red) takes the sounds of 
speech and extracts their meaning. (Adapted from Berwick et al., 2013, Fig. 2.)

century,  numerous  more  elaborate  language  models  were  developed  to 
account for the complexities of language and brain processing as well as 
the  shortcomings  of  the  Wernicke–Geschwind  model.  Similar  to  paral-
lel pathways that have been outlined in the visual system, these models 
involve a variable number of parallel pathways with distinct but interact-
ing functions (Figure 20.9). 

 Conduction Aphasia 
 The value of any model involves not only its ability to account for previ-
ous observations but also its ability to predict. Based on his observation 
that distinct forms of aphasia result from lesions in areas of frontal and 
superior temporal cortex, Wernicke predicted that a unique form of apha-
sia should result from a lesion that disconnects these two brain areas but 
leaves the areas themselves intact. In the Wernicke–Geschwind model, 
a  lesion  in  the  ﬁ bers  composing  the  arcuate  fasciculus  could  accom-
plish this. In reality, such disconnection lesions usually involve damage 
to parietal cortex in addition to the arcuate fasciculus, but Broca’s and 
Wernicke’s areas are spared. 

 Wernicke’s  prediction  turned  out  to  be  correct;  aphasia  from  a  dis-
connection  lesion  was  demonstrated  and  is  now  known  as   conduction 
aphasia.  As the model predicts, based on the preservation of Broca’s and 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   704
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   704

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

705

Wernicke’s areas, comprehension is good and speech is ﬂ uent. Patients are 
typically able to express themselves through speech without  difﬁ culty. The 
deﬁ cit that chieﬂ y characterizes conduction aphasia is difﬁ culty in repeat-
ing words. In response to hearing a few words, the patient may  attempt to 
repeat what was said, but the repetition will substitute words, omit words, 
and include paraphasic errors. Repetition is usually best with nouns and 
short common expressions, but it may fail entirely if the spoken words are 
function words, polysyllabic words, or nonsense sounds. Interestingly, a 
person with conduction aphasia comprehends sentences he or she reads 
aloud, even though what is said aloud contains many paraphasic errors. 
This is consistent with the idea that comprehension is good and the deﬁ cit 
occurs between the regions involved in comprehension and speech. 

 One of the sad yet fascinating things about aphasia is the diversity of 
syndromes that occur following strokes. While these syndromes challenge 
language models, each one offers a clue to our understanding of language 
processing. Characteristics of a few other aphasias are listed in Table 20.1. 

 Aphasia in Bilinguals and Deaf People 
 Cases of aphasia in bilingual people and deaf people provide fascinating 
insight about language processing in the brain. Suppose a person knows 
two languages before having a stroke. Does the stroke produce aphasia 
in one language and not the other, or do both languages suffer equally? 
The answer depends on several factors, including the order in which the 
languages were learned, the ﬂ uency achieved in each language, and how 
recently  the  language  was  used.  The  consequences  of  a  stroke  are  not 
always predictable, but the language learned more ﬂ uently and earlier 
in life tends to be relatively more preserved. If the person learned two 
languages at the same time to equivalent levels of ﬂ uency, a lesion will 
probably produce similar deﬁ cits in both languages. If the languages were 
learned at different times in life, it is likely that one language will be af-
fected more than the other. The implication is that the second language 
may make use of different, although overlapping, populations of neurons 
from those used by the ﬁ rst. 

 The study of language deﬁ cits in those who are deaf and/or know sign 
language suggests that there is some universality to language  processing 
in the brain. American Sign Language uses hand gestures to express the 
ideas and emotions most of us convey with spoken language (Figure 20.10). 
Left hemispheric lesions in people who use sign language appear to cause 
language  deﬁ cits  similar  to  those  occurring  in  verbal  aphasics.  There 
are cases analogous to Broca’s aphasia in which comprehension is good 
but  the  ability  to  “speak”  through  sign  language  is  severely  impaired. 
Importantly, the ability to move the hands is not impaired (i.e., the prob-
lem is not with motor control). Rather, the deﬁ cit is speciﬁ c to the use of 
hand movements for the expression of language. 

 There are also sign language versions of Wernicke’s aphasia in which 
the patient signs ﬂ uently but with many mistakes while also having difﬁ -
culty comprehending the signing of others. In one unusual case, a hearing 
man who was the child of deaf parents learned both sign language and 
verbal language. A left hemispheric stroke initially gave him global apha-
sia, but his condition signiﬁ cantly improved with time. An important ob-
servation was that his verbal and sign languages recovered together, as if 
overlapping brain areas were used. While there do appear to be aphasias 
in those using sign language analogous to speech aphasias, there is also 
evidence that signing aphasia and speaking aphasia can be produced by 
left hemispheric lesions in somewhat different locations. 

Me

Index finger
points to and 
touches chest.

Cat

Draw out two
whiskers with
thumb and
index finger.

▲ FIGURE 20.10
“Speaking” in American Sign Language.

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   705
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   705

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

706

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

ASYMMETRICAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN 
ASYMMMETRRICAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN 
THE TTWO CCEREBRAL HEMISPPHERES 
THE TWO CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES 

 We have seen that damage to certain parts of the brain leads to a variety 
of  aphasias.  As  the  early  work  of  Broca  indicated,  language  is  usually 
not handled equally by the two cerebral hemispheres. Some of the most 
valuable and fascinating ﬁ ndings on the language differences of the two 
hemispheres come from  split-brain studies  in which the hemispheres 
are surgically disconnected. Communication between the cerebral hemi-
spheres is normally served by several bundles of axons known as commis-
sures. Recall from Chapter 7 that the largest of these is the great cerebral 
commissure, also called the  corpus callosum  (Figure 20.11). The corpus 
callosum consists of about 200 million axons crossing between the hemi-
spheres. Surely such a huge bundle of ﬁ bers must be of great importance. 
Surprisingly, until about 1950, researchers had been unable to demon-
strate any important role of the corpus callosum. 

 In  split-brain  procedures,  the  skull  is  opened  and  the  axons  making 
up the corpus callosum are severed (Figure 20.12). The hemispheres may 
retain  some  communication  via  the  brain  stem  or  smaller  commissures 
(if they aren’t also severed), but most of the intercerebral communication 
is lost. In the 1950s, Roger Sperry and his colleagues at the University of 
Chicago and later at the California Institute of Technology performed a 
series of experiments, using split-brain animals, to explore the function 
of the corpus callosum and the separated cerebral hemispheres. Sperry’s 
group conﬁ rmed earlier reports that cutting the corpus callosum in a cat or 
monkey has no noticeable effect on the animal’s behavior. Temperament is 
unchanged, and the animals appeared to be normal in coordination, reac-
tion to stimuli, and ability to learn. However, in cleverly devised experi-
ments, Sperry’s group showed that the animals sometimes acted as if they 
had two separate brains. For example, in one experiment, circle and cross 
visual stimuli were both shown to a monkey’s left eye and the animal was 
trained to select the circle. In alternate trials, it was trained to choose the 
cross when the same visual stimuli were presented to the right eye. With 
both eyes open, it is not possible for the monkey (or humans) to know which 

Corpus callosum

Right
hemisphere

Left
hemisphere

▲ FIGURE 20.11
The corpus callosum. The corpus callosum is the largest 
bundle of axons providing communication between the 
 cerebral  hemispheres.

Pons

Cerebellum

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   706
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   706

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

707

Corpus
callosum

Removed bone

Skull

Cerebral
vasculature

Scalpel

▲ FIGURE 20.12
Split-brain surgery in a human. 
To reach and cut the corpus callosum, a 
portion of the skull is removed and the 
cerebral hemispheres are retracted.

eye sees a stimulus, so it appeared that the two cerebral hemispheres were 
learning  opposite  discriminations  at  the  same  time—thinking  with  two 
brains. You might wonder what happens if both eyes simultaneously see 
the stimuli. The answer is that the monkey hesitates and then chooses 
either the cross or the circle and sticks with this choice for a series of trials 
before switching to the opposite stimulus. The scientists speculated that 
the two cerebral hemispheres competed and, on any given trial, one won. 
 Language Processing in Split-Brain Humans 
 Because split-brain monkeys did not appear to have any major deﬁ cits, 
surgeons  felt  they  were  justiﬁ ed  in  cutting  the  corpus  callosum  as  a 
last resort in treating certain types of severe epilepsy in humans. They 
hoped  to  prevent  the  spread  of  epileptic  activity  from  one  hemisphere 
to the other. It may seem questionable to cut 200 million axons on the 
 assumption  that  they  are  not  very  important,  but  the  surgery  is  often 
beneﬁ cial in restoring a seizure-free life. Michael Gazzaniga, then at New 
York University, studied a number of these people. Gazzaniga had ini-
tially worked with Sperry, and his techniques were modiﬁ cations of those 
used with experimental animals. 

 One key methodological feature of studying split-brain humans involves 
careful control to present visual stimuli to only one cerebral hemisphere. 
Gazzaniga  did  this  by  taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  only  the  right 
hemisphere sees objects to the left of the point of ﬁ xation, and only the 
left hemisphere sees objects to the right (see Figure 10.3), as long as the 
eyes can’t move to bring the image onto the fovea (Figure 20.13). Pictures 
or words were ﬂ ashed on for a fraction of a second using a device with a 
camera-like shutter. Note that when a shutter opens it does not present 
a stimulus to one eye and not the other; instead, it presents a stimulus 
to both eyes in such a way that only one cerebral hemisphere “sees” the 
stimulus. Because the images were presented for a shorter time than that 
required to move the eyes, the images were seen by only one hemisphere. 

Projectors

Shutter

Viewing screen

▲ FIGURE 20.13
Visual stimulation of one hemisphere 
in humans. A visual stimulus is briefly 
flashed to the left or right visual field by 
means of a shutter. Each projector 
shows an image to both eyes in such a 
way that only one cerebral hemisphere 
“sees” the image. The display time is 
shorter than the time needed to gener-
ate a saccadic eye movement, thus as-
suring that only one hemisphere sees 
the stimulus.

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   707
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   707

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

708

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Left  Hemisphere  Language  Dominance.  Although  split-brain  humans 
are  normal  in  most  every  way,  there  is  a  striking  asymmetry  in  their 
 ability  to  verbalize  answers  to  questions  posed  separately  to  the  two 
hemispheres. For instance, they can repeat or describe numbers, words, 
and pictures visually presented only in the right visual ﬁ eld because the 
left hemisphere is usually dominant for language. Likewise, they can de-
scribe objects being manipulated only by the right hand (out of view of 
both eyes). These ﬁ ndings would be entirely unremarkable except for the 
fact that such simple verbal descriptions of sensory input are impossible 
for the right hemisphere. 

 If an image is shown only in the left visual ﬁ eld or an object is felt only 
by the left hand, a split-brain person cannot describe it and usually says 
that nothing is there (Figure 20.14). An object could be covertly placed 
in a patient’s left hand, and there would be no verbal indication of even 
noticing. This absence of response is a consequence (and demonstration) 
of the fact that the left hemisphere controls speech in most people. If you 
think about the implications for split-brain people, you’ll realize that they 
have an unusual existence. Following their surgery, they are unable to 
describe anything to the left of their visual ﬁ xation point: the left side of 
a painting, the left side of a room, and so on. What is startling is that this 
doesn’t seem to disturb the patients. 

 Language Functions of the Right Hemisphere. While there is a dramatic 
inability of the right hemisphere to speak, this does not mean it knows noth-
ing of language. It can be demonstrated that the right hemisphere can read 
and understand numbers, letters, and short words as long as the required 
response is nonverbal. In one experiment, the right hemisphere is shown a 
word that is a noun. As already mentioned, the person will say nothing is 
seen. Of course, that’s the talkative left hemisphere speaking, and  it  didn’t 
see anything. But if the person is urged to use the left hand to select a card 
containing a picture corresponding to the word shown, or pick out an object 
by touch, the person can do it (see Figure 20.14). The right hemisphere can-
not do this with more complex words or sentences, but the results clearly 
imply that the right hemisphere does have language comprehension. 

 A study conducted by Kathleen Baynes, Michael Gazzaniga, and their 
colleagues  then  at  the  University  of  California  at  Davis  suggests  that 
the right hemisphere may sometimes also be able to write even if it can’t 

B a l

l

▲ FIGURE 20.14
Demonstrating language comprehension in the right 
 hemisphere. A split-brain person shown a word in the left 
visual field will say nothing is seen. This is because the 
left hemisphere, which usually controls speech, did not 
see the word, and the right hemisphere, which saw the 
word, cannot speak. Information about the word cannot 
be transferred to the verbal left hemisphere without the 
corpus callosum. However, the left hand, which is con-
trolled by the right hemisphere, can pick out the object 
corresponding to the word by touch alone.

B
B

all 
all 

“I don't see
anything” 

Control of
left hand

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   708
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   708

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

speak. In most people, reading, speaking, and writing are all controlled 
by the left hemisphere. However, in a split-brain woman known as V.J., 
this was found not to be true. Words were ﬂ ashed to either her left or her 
right hemisphere. Words seen by her left hemisphere could be spoken but 
not written. Conversely, she could write but not speak words shown to 
her right hemisphere. While this separation of function may be abnormal, 
the case of V.J. indicates that there isn’t necessarily a single brain system 
for all aspects of language located in one hemisphere. 

 Evidence  also  suggests  that  the  right  hemisphere  understands  com-
plex pictures despite its inability to say so. In one experiment, a subject 
was shown a series of pictures in her left visual ﬁ eld, and at one point 
a nude photo appeared in the series. When the researcher asked what 
she saw, she said “Nothing,” but then she began to laugh. She told the 
researcher that she didn’t know what was funny, but that perhaps it was 
the machine used in the experiment. 

 The right hemisphere appears to be more skilled at certain tasks than 
the left hemisphere. For instance, even though the split-brain patients 
were  right-handed  and  thus  their  left  hemispheres  were  much  more 
 practiced  at  drawing,  the  left  hand  controlled  by  the  right  hemisphere 
was  better  at  drawing  or  copying  ﬁ gures  containing  three-dimensional 
perspective. These patients were also better at solving complex puzzles 
with their left hand. It has also been reported that the right hemisphere 
is somewhat better at perceiving nuances in sound. 

 In  some  split-brain  studies,  the  two  hemispheres  initiated  conﬂ ict-
ing behaviors, apparently because they were thinking differently. In one 
task, a patient was asked to arrange a group of blocks to match a pattern 
on  a  small  card.  He  was  told  to  do  this  using  only  his  right  hand  (left 
hemisphere), which is not generally good at this type of task. As the right 
hand struggled to arrange the blocks, the left hand (right hemisphere), 
which knew how to do it, reached in to take over. Only the restraint of the 
experimenter kept the left hand from pushing the right one out of the way 
to solve the puzzle. Another patient studied by Gazzaniga would some-
times ﬁ nd himself pulling his pants down with one hand while pulling 
them up with the other. These bizarre behaviors make a strong case that 
there are two independent brains controlling the two sides of the body. 

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

709

Sylvian fissure

Left hemisphere

 The results of these split-brain studies demonstrate that the two hemi-
spheres can function as independent brains and that they have different 
language abilities. Although the left hemisphere is usually dominant for 
language, the right hemisphere has signiﬁ cant skills in comprehending lan-
guage. It is important to keep in mind that the split-brain studies test the 
ability of each hemisphere to perform on its own. Presumably in the intact 
brain, the callosum allows for synergistic interactions between the hemi-
spheres for language and other functions. 

 Anatomical Asymmetry and Language 
 In the nineteenth century, there were reports of anatomical differences 
between  the  two  hemispheres.  For  example,  it  was  noted  that  the  left 
Sylvian  ﬁ ssure  is  longer  and  less  steep  than  the  right  (Figure  20.15). 
However, as recently as the 1960s, there was considerable doubt about 
the existence of  signiﬁ cant cortical asymmetries. Because of the  strikingly 
asymmetrical control of speech demonstrated by the Wada procedure, it 
would be interesting to know if the two cerebral hemispheres are ana-
tomically different. Some of the ﬁ rst good quantitative data demonstrat-
ing  hemispheric  differences  came  from  the  work  of  Geschwind  and  his 
colleague Walter Levitsky. Initial observations were made of postmortem 

Sylvian fissure

Right hemisphere

▲ FIGURE 20.15
Asymmetry of the Sylvian fissure. 
In most right-handed people, the Sylvian 
fissure in the left hemisphere is longer 
and runs at a shallower angle than the 
fissure in the right hemisphere. (Source: 
Adapted from Geschwind, 1979, p. 192.)

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   709
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   709

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

710

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Right planum
temporale

Occipital
lobes

Left planum
temporale

▲ FIGURE 20.16
Asymmetry of the planum temporale. 
This region on the superior temporal 
lobe is usually significantly larger in the 
left hemisphere. (Source: Adapted from 
Geschwind and Levitsky, 1968, Fig. 1.)

brains, but more recently, the results were conﬁ rmed with magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) (see Box 7.2). 

 The most signiﬁ cant difference seen was in a region called the  planum 
temporale,  which is a part of Wernicke’s area on the superior surface of 
the temporal lobe (Figure 20.16). Based on measurements of 100 brains, 
Geschwind and Levitsky found that in about 65% of the brains, the left 
 planum temporale was larger than the right, whereas in only about 10%, 
the right was larger. In some instances, the left area was more than ﬁ ve 
times larger than the right. Interestingly, the asymmetry in this area is 
seen even in the human fetus, suggesting that it is not a developmental 
consequence of the use of the left hemisphere for speech. Indeed, apes also 
have  a  larger  left  planum  temporale.  This  suggests  the  possibility  that 
speech became dominant in the left hemisphere because of a  preexisting 
size difference. Other studies found that a portion of Broca’s area also tends 
to be larger in the left hemisphere. Are these larger areas in the left hemi-
sphere related to the common dominance of the left hemisphere for speech? 
 More  recent  investigations  of  gray  matter  volume  have  been  made 
using MRI in living subjects, making it possible to test correlations among 
brain anatomy, asymmetries, and language dominance. One challenge in 
these studies is ﬁ nding enough people who are right hemisphere dominant 
for language. Several language areas, including the planum temporale, 
Broca’s area, and the insula, are generally larger in the left hemisphere 
than the right, and this is true in people with a left or right hemisphere 
dominant for language. The big question is whether the hemisphere domi-
nant for language can be predicted from the degree to which the structure 
on the left is larger than on the right. Perhaps some structure on the left 
side is much bigger in a person with a dominant left hemisphere but only 
a little bigger or smaller in a person with a dominant right hemisphere. 

There  have  been  mixed  reports  about  a  correlation  between  the  size 
of the left and right planum temporale and the hemisphere dominant for 
language. There have also been reports about a correlation between the 
language-dominant hemisphere and the relative size of Broca’s area on 
each side of the brain. At present, it appears there may be some correla-
tion between the asymmetric sizes of Broca’s area and the planum tem-
porale with the hemisphere dominant for language, but the correlation is 
not strong enough to allow one to predict the language-dominant hemi-
sphere from anatomical measurements alone. The brain region that pres-
ently appears to best predict which hemisphere is dominant for language 
is the  insula , which is the cerebral cortex within the lateral sulcus that is 
between the temporal and parietal lobes (Figure 20.17). Even though the 
insula has been thought to be involved in human language for some time, 
the relationship  between its size and language lateralization is somewhat 
surprising, as the language functions of the insula have been studied less 
and are less well understood than other language areas in the brain. Also, 
the insula appears to be involved in numerous brain functions ranging 
from  taste  to  emotion.  Further  research  is  needed  to  clarify  its  role  in 
language and its relationship with hemispheric dominance. 

 It has probably occurred to you that a functional human asymmetry 
more obvious than language is handedness. More than 90% of humans are 
right-handed and usually relatively uncoordinated with their left hand, 
implying that in some way the left hemisphere is specialized for ﬁ ne motor 
control. Is this related to the left hemispheric dominance for language? 
The  answer  is  not  known,  but  it  is  interesting  that  humans  are  differ-
ent from nonhuman primates in handedness as well as language. While 
animals of many species show a consistent preference for using one hand, 
there are typically equal numbers of left-handers and right-handers. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   710
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   710

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

711

▲ FIGURE 20.17
The insula. The insula, also called insu-
lar cortex, lies within the lateral sulcus 
between the temporal and parietal lobes.

Caudate nucleus

Putamen

Insula

Globus pallidus

LANGUAGE STUDIES USING BRAIN 
LANGGUAGEE STUDIES USING BBRAIN 
STIMMULATIION AND HUMAN BBRAIN IMAGING 
STIMULATION AND HUMAN BRAIN IMAGING 

 Until late in the twentieth century, language processing in the brain was 
examined mainly by correlating language deﬁ cits with postmortem anal-
ysis of brain damage. But now, aspects of language processing have been 
revealed by electrical brain stimulation and brain imaging with fMRI and 
PET in living humans. 

 The Effects of Brain Stimulation on Language 
 At several points in this book, we have discussed the electrical brain stim-
ulation studies of Wilder Penﬁ eld. Without general anesthesia, patients 
could report the effects of stimulation at different cortical sites. In these 
experiments, Penﬁ eld noted that stimulation at certain locations affected 
speech.  These  effects  occurred  in  three  main  categories:  vocalizations, 
speech arrest, and speech difﬁ culties similar to aphasia. 

 Stimulation of motor cortex in the area that controls the mouth and lips 
caused immediate speech arrest (Figure 20.18). Such a response is logical 
because the activated muscles sometimes pulled the mouth to one side or 
clenched the jaw shut. Stimulation of motor cortex occasionally evoked cries 
or rhythmic vocalizations; importantly, these effects occurred with electrical 
stimulation of motor cortex on either side of the brain. Penﬁ eld found three 
other areas where electrical stimulation interfered with speech, but these 
were only in the dominant left hemisphere. One of these areas appeared to 
correspond to Broca’s area. If this area was stimulated while a person was 
speaking, speech either stopped entirely (with strong stimulation) or became 
hesitant (with weaker stimulation). Some patients were unable to name ob-
jects they could name before and after the brain stimulation. Occasionally, 
they  substituted  an  incorrect  word.  They  apparently  experienced  a  mild 
transient form of anomia. In some subjects, word confusion and speech ar-
rest also resulted from stimulation at two other sites, one in the posterior 
parietal lobe near the Sylvian ﬁ ssure and the other in the temporal lobe. 
These two areas were in the vicinity of the arcuate fasciculus and Wernicke’s 
area, although not perfectly aligned with estimated locations of those areas. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   711
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   711

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

712

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Vocalization or
speech arrest

Central
sulcus

N

R

N

M

A
R

J

M
N
R

J

M

J

N

Aphasic arrest

▲ FIGURE 20.18
Sites where electrical brain stimulation affects language.  Stimulation of motor 
cortex causes vocalizations or speech  arrest by activating facial muscles. At other 
sites, stimulation causes an aphasic arrest in which language is agrammatical or 
anomia is observed. (Source: Adapted from Penfield and  Rasmussen, 1950, Fig. 56.)

N

J

A

R

M

R

A

N
J
M

R
M

J

M

N

G

M

J

A

R

M

M

G

N

M
N
M

R

R

▲ FIGURE 20.19
The effects of brain stimulation in three 
patients being treated for epilepsy. 
Patients were awake, and difficulties in 
speaking or reading were noted. N, nam-
ing difficulty with intact speech  (anomia); 
A, arrest of speech; G,  grammatical er-
rors; J, jargon (fluent speech with frequent 
errors); R, failure to read; M, facial move-
ment errors. (Source: Adapted from 
 Ojemann and Mateer, 1979, Fig. 1.)

 It  is  reassuring  to  ﬁ nd  that  electrical  stimulation  selectively  affects 
speech  in  the  brain  areas  roughly  corresponding  to  those  responsible 
for  aphasia.  However,  the  results  of  stimulation  vary  surprisingly  be-
tween nearby cortical sites and between subjects. In studies similar to 
those  of  Penﬁ eld,  neurosurgeon  George  Ojemann,  at  the  University  of 
Washington,  found  that  the  effects  of  stimulation  are  sometimes  quite 
speciﬁ c. For example, stimulation of small parts of cortex at different lo-
cations can interfere with naming, reading, or repetition of facial move-
ments  (Figure  20.19).  The  data  support  several  important  conclusions. 
First, across different people there is clearly considerable variability in 
the brain areas at which electrical stimulation affects language. Second, 
between patches of cortex involved in different aspects of language are 
other areas not affected by stimulation. We don’t know if further testing 
would have revealed that these in-between patches serve some untested 
role in language or whether these areas are actually not involved in lan-
guage. Third, electrical stimulation at nearby sites can evoke quite dif-
ferent effects, and conversely, stimulation at distant sites can have the 
same effect. These ﬁ ndings suggest that language areas in the brain are 
much more complex than is implied by the Wernicke–Geschwind model. 
Areas involved in language are also more extensive than simply Broca’s 
and Wernicke’s areas, as they have been found to include other cortical 
areas as well as parts of the thalamus and striatum. Within Broca’s area 
and  Wernicke’s  area  there  may  be  specialized  regions,  possibly  on  the 
scale of functional columns in somatosensory cortex or ocular dominance 
columns in visual cortex. It appears that the large language areas identi-
ﬁ ed on the basis of aphasic syndromes may well encompass a good deal 
of ﬁ ner structure. 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   712
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   712

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

713

 Imaging of Language Processing in the Human Brain 
 With the advent of modern imaging techniques, it has become possible to 
observe language processing in the human brain. With positron emission 
tomography  (PET)  and  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI), 
the level of neural activity in different parts of the brain is inferred from 
regional blood ﬂ ow (see Box 7.3). In many ways, brain imaging conﬁ rms 
what was already known about language areas in the brain. For example, 
various language tasks make different portions of cerebral cortex active, 
and the activated areas are generally consistent with areas implicated by 
studies of aphasia. 

 However,  brain  imaging  suggests  that  language  processing  is  more 
complex. In an experiment conducted by Lehericy and associates, brain 
activity was recorded while subjects performed three different language 
tasks (Figure 20.20). In the ﬁ rst task, subjects were instructed to gen-
erate as many words as possible in a particular category such as fruits 
or animals (see Figure 20.20a). In the second task, subjects simply lis-
tened  to  a  story  being  read  aloud  (see  Figure  20.20b).  The  third  task 
required that they silently repeat to themselves a sentence they previ-
ously heard read aloud. (see Figure 20.20c). Note that the location of ac-
tivated brain areas is roughly consistent with the temporal and parietal 

(a)

(b)

(c)

▲ FIGURE 20.20
Bilateral brain activation shown by fMRI. Based on a Wada 
procedure, the subject illustrated here had a strongly dominant 
left hemisphere for language. fMRI shows significant bilateral ac-
tivation of language areas on a (a) word generation task, (b) pas-
sive story listening, and (c) silent sentence repetition. (Source: 
Adapted from Lehericy et al., 2000, Fig 1.)

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   713
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   713

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

714

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

language  areas  discovered  by  examining  aphasia  resulting  from  brain 
lesions.  More   surprising  is  the  extent  to  which  the  brain  activation  is 
bilateral.  Based  on  a  Wada  procedure  for  language  lateralization,  the 
subject shown in Figure 20.20 had a strongly dominant left hemisphere. 
The fMRI results suggest that there is more going on in the nondominant 
hemisphere than the Wada procedure suggests. Signiﬁ cant bilateral acti-
vation is commonly observed in fMRI studies, with ongoing debate about 
its signiﬁ cance. Recent PET and fMRI studies also suggest fascinating 
similarities and differences in language processing of spoken language, 
sign language, and Braille (Box 20.4). 

 In another study, researchers used PET imaging to observe differences 
in  brain  activity  between  the  sensory  responses  to  words  and  the  pro-
duction of speech. They began by measuring cerebral blood ﬂ ow with the 
subject at rest. They then had the person either look at words presented 
on a computer display (“seeing words”) or listen to words being read aloud 

BOX 20.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Hearing Sight and Seeing Touch
The  human  brain  is  a  remarkably  adaptable  organ,  and 

some of the most dramatic examples of brain reorganization 
come from studies of human language processing. The top 

panel  of  Figure  A,  from  an  fMRI  study,  shows  brain  areas 
activated  when  normally  hearing  English  speakers  read 
sentences  in  English.  Areas  in  red  are  those  most  highly 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   714
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   714

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

715

(“hearing words”). By subtracting the levels of blood ﬂ ow at rest from the 
levels during hearing or seeing, blood ﬂ ow levels were  obtained speciﬁ -
cally corresponding to the activity evoked by the sensory input. The re-
sults are shown in the top half of Figure 20.21. Not surprisingly, the visual 
stimuli evoked increased brain activity in striate cortex and extrastriate 
cortex, and the auditory stimuli elicited activity in primary and secondary 
auditory cortex. However, the areas activated in extrastriate cortex and 
secondary auditory cortex did not respond to visual and auditory stimuli 
that  were  not  words.  These  areas  may  be  specialized  for  the  coding  of 
words either seen or heard. The visual stimuli did not evoke noticeably 
increased activity in the area of the angular gyrus and Wernicke’s area, 
as one would expect based on the Wernicke–Geschwind model. 

 Another task studied with PET imaging was repeating words. To know 
what words to repeat, subjects must perceive and process the words by 
either  the  visual  or  the  auditory  system.  Thus,  the  brain  activity  seen 

speciﬁ cally  activated  by  language,  and  areas  in  yellow  are 
somewhat less activated. (Visual activity not associated with 
language has been subtracted out.) There is signiﬁ cant ac-
tivity in the standard language areas of the left hemisphere, 
including Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area, but little activity 
in the right hemisphere.

The center panel of Figure A is the activity seen when 
hearing  English  speakers  saw  sentences  in  American 
Sign  Language  (ASL).  These  people  who  did  not  un-
derstand ASL showed no specific activity after their re-
sponse  to  meaningless  hand  signs  was  subtracted.  On 
the other hand, the bottom panel of Figure A shows the 
response to ASL in deaf subjects who were raised with 
it as their sole language. The activation includes Broca’s 
area  and  Wernicke’s  area  in  the  left  hemisphere,  indi-
cating that ASL activates the same key language areas 
activated  by  spoken  English  in  hearing  subjects.  Even 
more  surprising  is  the  great  deal  of  activity  in  the  right 
hemisphere. Remarkably, the superior temporal gyrus is 
active in response to ASL in deaf subjects, an area that 
would  normally  respond  to  spoken  language  in  hearing 

subjects. As these areas are also active in hearing sub-
jects who are bilingual in ASL, it appears that something 
about the ASL language recruits right hemisphere audi-
tory  areas  in  addition  to  the  usual  left  hemisphere  lan-
guage areas.

A different form of brain reorganization is seen in blind 
subjects  who  read  Braille.  A  system  of  writing  that  uses 
patterns  of  small  bumps  on  paper  to  represent  letters, 
Braille is read by scanning the ﬁ ngertips across the bumps. 
As you would expect, Braille reading activates the somato-
sensory cortex, but other brain areas also activated are a 
real surprise. Figure B shows a PET image obtained from 
a person reading Braille. There is signiﬁ cant activity at the 
occipital pole of the brain (yellow)—unmistakably portions 
of  visual  cortex.  Through  a  process  of  brain  reorganiza-
tion, these blind subjects have a brain that uses traditional 
visual areas to process Braille, similar in spirit to the audi-
tory areas used for ASL in deaf subjects. (The chapters in 
Part IV explore the mechanisms by which sensory experi-
ence can affect brain organization and lead to learning and 
memory.)

▲ Figure A
 Top: Written English, read by hearing subjects. Center: 
ASL, seen by English-speaking hearing subjects. 
Bottom: ASL, seen by deaf subjects. (Source: Neville 
et al., 1998.)

Figure B
 Reading Braille. (Source: Sadato et al., 1996).

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   715
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   715

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

716

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Seeing words

Hearing words

Speaking words

Generating words

▲ FIGURE 20.21
PET imaging of sensation and speech. Relative levels of cerebral blood flow are 
color coded. Red indicates the highest levels, and progressively lower levels are 
represented by orange, yellow, green, and blue. (Source: Posner and Raichle, 
1994, p. 115.)

in  the  repetition  task  should  include  a  component  associated  with  the 
basic perceptual process as well as a component associated with speech. 
To  isolate  the  speech  component,  the  response  pattern  previously  ob-
tained  in  the  simple  sensory  task  was  subtracted  out.  In  other  words, 
the image shown for “speaking words” equals an image corresponding to 
“repeating spoken words” minus an image corresponding to “listening to 
words.” After the subtraction, the blood ﬂ ow pattern indicated high levels 
of  activity  in  primary  motor  cortex  and  the  supplementary  motor  area 
(Figure 20.21, bottom left). There was also increased blood ﬂ ow around 
the Sylvian ﬁ ssure near Broca’s area. However, the PET images showed 
such activity  bilaterally,  and it was even observed when the subjects were 
instructed to move their mouth and tongue without speaking. Since there 
is good evidence that Broca’s area is unilateral, it may not be showing up 
in these images, for reasons unknown. 

 The  ﬁ nal  task  required  the  subjects  to  think  a  little.  For  each  word 
presented,  the  subject  had  to  state  a  use  for  the  word  (e.g.,  if  “cake” 
was presented, the subject said “eat”). To isolate activity speciﬁ c to this 
noun–verb association task (“generating words”), the blood ﬂ ow pattern 
obtained previously for speaking words was subtracted. Areas that were 
activated  in  the  association  task  are  located  in  the  left  inferior  frontal 
area, the anterior cingulate gyrus, and the posterior temporal lobe (see 
Figure 20.21, bottom right). The activity in frontal and temporal cortex 
is believed to be related to the performance of the word-association task, 
whereas the activity in cingulate cortex may be related to attention. 

 There is also evidence from numerous PET and fMRI studies that dis-
tributed and distinct brain areas store information about different cate-
gories of objects. These reports appear consistent with observations show-
ing that brain damage sometimes leads to category-speciﬁ c losses in the 

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   716
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   716

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER 20    LANGUAGE

717

ability to name objects. For example, with a brain lesion a person may be 
able to name tools and some living things such as fruits and vegetables 
but show a large deﬁ cit in the ability to name animals. One such patient 
called a giraffe a kangaroo and a goat a chicken. In a PET imaging ex-
periment, different regions of the temporal lobe were more active when 
a person was asked to name people, animals, and tools. In other studies, 
overlapping but different brain activity patterns were found for concrete 
nouns (e.g., “door”), abstract nouns (e.g., “despair”), concrete verbs (e.g., 
“speak”), and abstract verbs (e.g., “suffer”). The ﬁ ndings in these experi-
ments raise many questions for further research to answer. How might 
the brain process different categories of words differently and integrate 
the results in a uniﬁ ed understanding? What is the distinction between 
brain areas involved in recognition of sensory input and areas that assign 
names or meaning to objects perceived? 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Language  was  one  of  the  most  important  steps  in  human  evolution. 
Communication  between  people  is  such  a  fundamental  aspect  of  being 
human  that  it  is  difﬁ cult  to  imagine  life  without  language.  Current 
 estimates  are  that  the  human  capacity  for  language  evolved  relatively 
recently, around 100,000 years ago. While animals use a great diversity 
of sounds and behaviors to communicate, none of these come close to the 
elaborate and ﬂ exible system of language and speech used by humans. 
Aspects of language acquisition and use have been fruitfully studied in 
songbirds and nonhuman primates, but unlike other brain systems, the 
study of human language requires experiments and observations in hu-
mans. For this reason, experimental approaches are largely limited to be-
havioral studies of language acquisition and function, the consequences 
of lesions, effects of brain stimulation, and brain imaging with fMRI and 
PET.  Even  with  these  few  techniques,  however,  a  great  deal  has  been 
learned. Consistent with the locations of sensory and motor areas in the 
brain, the basics of language organization can be understood. Early stud-
ies focused attention on Broca’s area, which is near the motor cortex and 
associated  with  speech  production,  and  Wernicke’s  area,  which  is  near 
the auditory cortex and associated with speech comprehension. These ob-
servations are still of clinical use today. 

 More recent research has shown that language processing is far more 
complex and engages far more of the brain, than implied by the Wernicke–
Geschwind model. Brain imaging and stimulation studies have revealed 
widespread  brain  areas  in  both  hemispheres  that  are  involved  in  lan-
guage and that vary from one person to the next. From our perspective 
today,  the  complexity  of  language  and  its  extensive  representation  in 
the brain are not so surprising because language involves many differ-
ent components, such as understanding the basis of words in sound, the 
meanings of words, the grammar used to combine words into meaning-
ful statements, naming objects, producing speech, and on and on. As in 
research  on  other  brain  systems  for  sensation,  motor  output,  emotion, 
and  so  on,  we  are  interested  in  the  extent  to  which  language  process-
ing involves a collection of interacting subsystems for different language 
skills. There is clearly still much to be learned. Further brain imaging 
studies will hopefully clarify the  organization of language systems in the 
brain at a ﬁ ner scale than was possible from studying the consequences 
of brain lesions and perhaps identify distinct circuits that serve different 
functions.   

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   717
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   717

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

718

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

K E Y   T E R M S

What Is Language?
language (p. 686)
speech (p. 686)
vocal folds (p. 687)
phonemes (p. 687)
language acquisition 

(p. 690)

verbal dyspraxia (p. 692)
speciﬁ c language impairment 

(SLI) (p. 693)
dyslexia (p. 694)

The Discovery of Specialized 
Language Areas in the Brain
aphasia (p. 694)
Wada procedure (p. 695)
Broca’s area (p. 695)
Wernicke’s area (p. 695)

Language Insights from the 
Study of Aphasia
Broca’s aphasia (p. 699)
anomia (p. 699)
Wernicke’s aphasia (p. 700)

Wernicke–Geschwind model 

(p. 702)

conduction aphasia (p. 704)

Asymmetrical Language 
Processing in the Two Cerebral 
Hemispheres
split-brain study (p. 706)
corpus callosum (p. 706)
planum temporale (p. 710)
insula (p. 710)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  How is it possible for a split-brain human to speak intelligibly if the left hemisphere controls 
speech? Isn’t this inconsistent with the fact that the left hemisphere must direct motor cortex in 
both hemispheres to coordinate movements of the mouth?

2.  What can you conclude about the normal function of Broca’s area from the observation that there 
are usually some comprehension deﬁ cits in Broca’s aphasia? Must Broca’s area itself be directly 
involved in comprehension?

3.  Pigeons can be trained to press one button when they want food and to press other buttons when 
they see particular visual stimuli. This means the bird can “name” things it sees. How would you 
determine whether or not the pigeon is using a new language—“button-ese”?

4.  What does the Wernicke–Geschwind language processing model explain? What data are incon-

sistent with this model?

5.  In  what  ways  is  the  left  hemisphere  usually  language  dominant?  What  does  the  right  hemi-

sphere contribute?

6.  What evidence is there that Broca’s area is not simply a premotor area for speech?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Berwick RC, Friederici AD, Chomsky N, Bolhuis 

JJ. 2013. Evolution, brain, and the nature of 
language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17:89–98.

Bookeheimer S. 2002. Functional MRI of lan-

guage: new approaches to understanding the 
cortical organization of semantic processing. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience 25:51–188.

Friederici, AD. 2012. The cortical language circuit: 
from auditory perception to sentence comprehen-
sion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 16:262–268.

Graham SA, Fisher SE. 2013. Decoding the 
genetics of speech and language. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology 23:43–51.

Kuhl PK. 2010. Brain mechanisms in early lan-

guage acquisition. Neuron 67:713–727.

Saffran EM. 2000. Aphasia and the relationship 
of language and brain. Seminars in Neurology 
20:409–418.

Scott SK, Johnsrude IS. 2002. The neuroanatomi-

cal and functional organization of speech per-
ception. Trends in Neurosciences 26:100–107.

Vargha-Khadem F, Gadian DG, Copp A, Mishkin 

M. 2005. FOXP2 and the neuroanatomy 
of speech and language. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 6:131–138.

685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   718
685–718_Bear_20_revised_final.indd   718

12/20/14   6:46 AM
12/20/14   6:46 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

The Resting Brain, 
Attention, and 
Consciousness

INTRODUCTION
RESTING STATE BRAIN ACTIVITY

The Brain’s Default Mode Network
Functions of the Default Network

ATTENTION

 BOX 21.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Attention-Deﬁ cit Hyperactivity Disorder

Behavioral Consequences of Attention
Attention Enhances Visual Sensitivity
Attention Speeds Reaction Times

Physiological Effects of Attention

Functional MRI Imaging of Human Attention to Location
PET Imaging of Human Attention to Features
Attention Enhances Responses of Neurons in Parietal Cortex
Attention Focuses Receptive Fields in Area V4

Brain Circuits for the Control of Attention
The Pulvinar, a Subcortical Component
The Frontal Eye Fields, Eye Movements, and Attention
Directing Attention with Salience and Priority Maps
A Priority Map in the Parietal Lobe
 BOX 21.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Hemispatial Neglect Syndrome
The Frontoparietal Attention Network

CONSCIOUSNESS

What Is Consciousness?
Neural Correlates of Consciousness

  BOX 21.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Tracking the Neuronal Footprints of 
Consciousness, by Christof Koch
Neuronal Correlates of Alternating Perception in Binocular Rivalry
Visual Awareness and Human Brain Activity
Challenges in the Study of Consciousness

CONCLUDING REMARKS

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   719
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   719

719719

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

720

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 Imagine  yourself  at  the  beach,  lying  in  the  sand  with  your  feet  in  the 
waves. As you take a sip of a cold drink, you stare out at the sky day-
dreaming. This peaceful moment is suddenly interrupted when your at-
tention is grabbed by the dorsal ﬁ n of a shark sticking out of the water 
and  moving  toward  you.  You  jump  up  and  are  about  to  run  when  you 
become aware of the fact that the “shark” is actually a child wearing a 
fake ﬁ n. 

 This imaginary scene includes three mental functions we will examine 
in this chapter. The ﬁ rst is the brain at rest. You might logically think 
the brain activity of a person daydreaming at the beach would be about as 
interesting as looking at a blank piece of paper. On the contrary, recent 
research indicates that in the brain “at rest” a network of areas is busy 
doing things such as diffusely monitoring our surroundings and process-
ing daydreams. 

 When we become more active, the brain must deal with the enormous 
volume  of  information  coming  in  through  our  senses.  Rather  than  try-
ing  to  process  all  of  these  signals  simultaneously,  we  selectively  focus 
on things that catch our attention, such as a shark ﬁ n in the water or 
an object important to us, like a cold drink about to ﬂ y out of our hand. 
Selective  attention,  or  simply   attention ,  is  the  ability  to  focus  on  one 
aspect of sensory input. In the visual system, attention enables us to con-
centrate on one object over many others in our visual ﬁ eld. Interactions 
between  modalities  also  occur.  For  example,  if  you  are  performing  an 
attention-demanding visual task, such as reading a book at a coffee shop, 
you  will  be  less  sensitive  to  the  sounds  of  people  talking  around  you. 
Amidst all the sights, sounds, and tastes coming into our brain, we are 
able to preferentially process some information and ignore the rest. We 
will see that attention has signiﬁ cant effects on perception and that there 
are corresponding changes in the sensitivity of neurons at many locations 
in the brain. 

 A brain function related to attention is consciousness. In general use, 
consciousness  means awareness of something (the fake shark ﬁ n in our 
example). For centuries, philosophers have wrestled with the meaning of 
consciousness,  and  more  recently,  neuroscientists  have  devised  experi-
ments to reveal the neural basis of the conscious brain. The link between 
attention  and  consciousness  appears  to  be  tight,  as  we  are  generally 
aware of what we pay attention to. However, we will see they are actually 
distinctly different processes. 

RESTING STATE BRAIN ACTIVITY 
RESTTING SSTATE BRAIN ACTIVVITY 

 If you go into a quiet room, lie down, and close your eyes (but stay awake), 
what do you suppose your brain is doing? If your answer is “not much,” 
you  are  probably  in  good  company.  In  our  discussions  of  various  brain 
systems,  we  have  described  how  neurons  become  active  in  response  to 
incoming  sensory  information  or  the  generation  of  movement.  Modern 
brain imaging techniques are consistent with this view that, in response 
to behavioral demands, neurons become more active in cortical areas that 
process ongoing perceptual or motor information. It is reasonable to infer 
that the brain is quiet in the absence of active processing. However, when 
the  entire  brain  is  imaged  with  positron  emission  tomography  (PET) 
or  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI),  it  is  found  that  its 
resting state activity  includes some  regions that really are fairly quiet 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   720
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   720

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

721

and others that are surprisingly active. An important question is what, if 
anything, does the resting activity signify? 

 The Brain’s Default Mode Network 
 Human imaging studies suggest that the difference between the brain’s 
resting  state  and  the  activity  recorded  while  a  person  performs  a  task 
may teach us important lessons about the nature of the resting brain and 
the functions that it performs. The existence of resting state activity does 
not  in  itself  allow  us  to  conclude  much.  Conceivably,  the  resting  activ-
ity might vary randomly from moment to moment and person to person, 
and activations associated with behavioral tasks would be superimposed 
on this random background. However, this does not seem to be the case. 
When a person engages in a perceptual or behavioral task, there are de-
creases in the activity of some brain areas at the same time that task-
relevant brain areas become more active. One possibility is that both the 
decreases and increases in activity are related to the task. For example, 
if a person is required to perform a difﬁ cult visual task and ignore irrel-
evant sounds, we might expect the visual cortex to become more active 
and the auditory cortex less active. 

 Two further observations suggest that there is something fundamen-
tal and signiﬁ cant about the resting brain activity. First, the areas that 
show  decreased  activity  compared  to  the  resting  state  are  consistent 
when the nature of the task is changed. It appears that the areas show-
ing decreased activity during behavioral tasks are always active at rest 
and become less active during  any  task. Figure 21.1 summarizes data 
from experiments using nine different tasks involving vision, language, 
and memory. The blue and green patches in the ﬁ gure show brain areas 
in  which  activity  decreased  from  the  resting  state  when  humans  en-
gaged  in  any  of  the  nine  tasks.  The  particular  task  does  not  seem  to 
account  for  the  activity  changes.  Second,  the  patterns  in  brain  activ-
ity changes are consistent across human subjects. These observations 
suggest that the brain might be “busy” even in the state we call rest, 
that the resting activities are consistent, and that these activities are 
decreased when a task is performed. 

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 21.1
The default mode network. (a) Data 
from nine PET imaging studies involving 
different behavioral tasks were averaged 
to produce these lateral and medial 
views of brain activity. The brains have 
been computer “inflated” so activity in 
the sulci can be seen. Brain areas col-
ored blue and green were more active 
during quiet rest periods than during the 
behavioral tasks. (b) Slow fluctuations in 
brain activity are correlated between the 
medial prefrontal cortex and the cingu-
late cortex (arrows in a). These fMRI 
 recordings were made while a person 
quietly fixated on a small cross on a 
 visual display. (Source: Raichle et al., 
2007, Fig. 1.)

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   721
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   721

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

722

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 Brain areas that show more activity in the resting state than during 
behavioral tasks include the medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate 
cortex, posterior parietal cortex, hippocampus, and lateral temporal cor-
tex. Together these areas are called the  default mode network,  or de-
fault network, to indicate that the brain defaults to activity in this group 
of  interconnected  areas  when  it  is  not  engaged  in  an  overt  task.  Some 
scientists  believe  this  network  of  areas  deﬁ nes  a  system  or  a  group  of 
interacting systems in the same sense as we deﬁ ne sensory and motor 
systems. A ﬁ nding consistent with this idea is the striking degree of corre-
lation in brain activity between components of the default mode network. 
Figure 21.1b shows a 5-minute recording made from the two brain areas 
(medial prefrontal, cingulate cortex) indicated by arrows in Figure 21.1a. 
The subject was lying in an fMRI machine doing nothing more than ﬁ xat-
ing on a small crosshair on a visual display. For reasons unknown, there 
were continuous variations in the fMRI signal and there was a remark-
able  degree  of  correlation  between  activity  in  the  distant  brain  areas. 
Whether these ﬂ uctuations are related to thought is not known, but they 
suggest coordination or interaction between brain areas. 

 Establishing the function of the default mode network is challenging 
because  the  brain  areas  involved  participate  in  diverse  activities.  It  is 
tempting to view the resting state activity as an indication of the inner 
life of the brain. When we relax, it is common to daydream, remember, 
and imagine, things referred to as  spontaneous cognition . As the default 
mode network is deactivated during most tasks, it is difﬁ cult to conduct 
experiments examining its function. However, we can infer possible func-
tions of the default network by considering its components and the hand-
ful of tasks that do activate it. For starters, the absence of primary sen-
sory and motor areas is consistent with the idea that the default network 
is not chieﬂ y concerned with taking in sensory information or controlling 
movement. 

 Functions  of  the  Default  Network.   A  variety  of  hypotheses  have  been 
considered for the function of the default network. The two we will con-
sider here are the  sentinel hypothesis  and the  internal   mentation hypoth-
esis . The idea behind the sentinel hypothesis is that even when we rest, 
we must broadly monitor (pay attention to) our environment; in compari-
son, when we are active, we focus our attention on the matter at hand. If 
you imagine our ancient ancestors living in a world harboring constant 
threats, it makes sense that we may have evolved to be always “on the 
lookout.” One experiment with results consistent with this idea found that 
decreases from default network activity are less when a person switches 
from  rest  to  a  peripheral  vision  task  than  from  rest  to  a  foveal  vision 
task. Perhaps the decrease is less when the active task involves periph-
eral vision because at rest we always diffusely monitor our broad visual 
ﬁ eld  (thus,  there  is  less  change  from  this  sentinel  activity  to  an  active 
task involving peripheral vision). Another study reported that the default 
network became activated in an experiment requiring people to broadly 
monitor their peripheral visual ﬁ eld for stimuli at random locations but 
not when they were instructed to focus on one location where a stimulus 
might appear. Also relevant to the sentinel hypothesis is a rare disorder 
known  as   simultagnosia   (a  component  of  Bálint’s  syndrome),  in  which 
people have normal visual ﬁ elds and are able to perceive individual ob-
jects, but are unable to integrate simultaneous information to understand 
a complex scene. For example, shown a picture of an animal, a patient 
said, “There is a round head joining what looks like a powerful body; there 
are four shortish legs; it doesn’t say anything to me; ah, but there is a 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   722
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   722

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

723

▲ FIGURE 21.2
Activation of the default mode network.  In the main experimental 
conditions, subjects were asked to recall a past event or imagine 
an event in the future after seeing a cue word (e.g., dress). In con-
trol tasks, subjects either generated a sentence or named objects 
in response to a cue. Recordings with fMRI show that similar pos-
terior cingulate and medial prefrontal components of the default 
network were activated in the autobiographical memory tasks more 
than in the control tasks. (Source: Addis et al., 2007, Fig. 2.)

small and curly tail so I think it must be a pig.” In other words, this per-
son was not able to put the pieces mentally together and recognized the 
pig  only  because  of  its  distinctive  tail.  Evidence  suggests  that  the  pos-
terior cingulate cortex, a part of the default network, may play a role in 
diffusely monitoring the visual ﬁ eld for stimuli. The speculation is that 
this brain area, which is part of the default network and is damaged in 
simultagnosia, is involved in sentinel activities. 

 The internal mentation hypothesis says that the default mode network 
supports thinking and remembering, the sort of daydreaming we do while 
sitting  quietly.  In  an  experiment  that  suggests  this  hypothesis,  brain 
activity is imaged while subjects are asked to silently recall past events in 
their lives or imagine an event that might happen to them in the future. 
For example, “recall a past event from last week” or “envisage a future 
event in the next 5–20 years.” Brain activity in these autobiographical 
memory tasks is contrasted with activity recorded in control tasks that 
involve the simple use of facts rather than recall and thinking about au-
tobiographical information. In one control task, subjects construct a sen-
tence using a cue word, and in another, they imagine objects bigger and 
smaller than an object named by a cue word. In the memory tasks, the 
hippocampus and neocortical areas in the default network become more 
active; in the control tasks, these brain areas were not activated. The hy-
pothesis is that the memory tasks activate the brain in a manner similar 
to daydreaming about one’s life, unlike the structured use of facts in the 
control tasks. Figure 21.2 shows that recalling past events and imagin-
ing new ones activate similar regions of medial prefrontal and posterior 
cingulate cortex. 

 Although not all scientists agree with the deﬁ nition of a default mode 
network, considerable evidence suggests that certain components of the 
brain are busier while we rest and that they do different things from brain 
areas that become engaged during active tasks. The overall hypothesis is 
that, when the situation requires us to become actively involved in a per-
ceptual or motor task, we switch modes from sentinel and internal men-
tation activities (high default network activity) to focused processing of 
sensory input (low default network activity and increased sensory–motor 
activity). Studying functions of the resting brain is challenging because 
typical experimental tasks (“do this,” “look at that”) shut down the areas 
being studied. One thing that seems clear is that the transition from brain 
activity in the default network at rest to sensory processing in active tasks 
involves a change in the focus of attention—our next topic to explore. 

 ATTENTION 
ATTEENTIONN

 Picture  yourself  at  a  crowded  party  surrounded  by  loud  music  and 
the chatter of hundreds of people. Even though you are bombarded by 
sound from all directions, you are somehow able to concentrate on the 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   723
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   723

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

724

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 conversation you’re having and ignore most of the other noise and talk-
ing. You are  paying attention  to the one conversation. Behind you, you 
hear someone mention your name, and you decide to eavesdrop. Without 
turning around, you start focusing your attention on this other conver-
sation to ﬁ nd out what’s being said about you. This common experience 
of ﬁ ltering auditory input, called the  cocktail party effect,  is an example 
of attention that we use within and across sensory modalities. Because 
its behavioral and neural functions have been studied in detail, we will 
focus on visual attention. 

 Studies of attention often describe it as a limited resource or bottleneck 
in  brain  processing.  It  is  common  to  use  the  term  “selective  attention” 
to emphasize that it is directed to select objects, unlike overall arousal, 
which is unselective. For brevity, we will use “attention,” but this term 
should be taken to mean selective attention. The limit that attention puts 
on brain processing is probably a good thing; one can only imagine how 
overwhelming sensory input might be if we were to simultaneously focus 
on every portion of our visual environment, every sound, and every smell. 
The limited capacity of attention probably explains why trafﬁ c accidents 
are much more common while people are texting or talking on cell phones. 
As we will see, attention has signiﬁ cant effects on behavioral speed and 
precision. While it is not simply a problem of attention, attention-deﬁ cit 
hyperactivity disorder demonstrates how critical attentional mechanisms 
are (Box 21.1). 

BOX 21.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder

It is the last lecture of the school year, and you are failing 

miserably  at  focusing  on  the  instructor  as  you  stare  long-
ingly  at  the  green  grass  and  trees  outside  the  window.  At 
times, we all have difﬁ culty concentrating on our work, sitting 
still, and resisting the urge to play. But for millions of people, 
the syndrome that has come to be called attention-deﬁ cit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) routinely and seriously inter-
feres with their ability to get things done.

The three traits commonly associated with ADHD are inat-
tention,  hyperactivity,  and  impulsiveness.  Children  normally 
exhibit these traits more than adults, but if their behaviors are 
pronounced,  ADHD  may  be  diagnosed.  Estimates  are  that 
5–10% of all school-age children worldwide have ADHD, and 
the disorder interferes with their schoolwork and interactions 
with classmates. Follow-up studies show that many people 
diagnosed  with  ADHD  continue  to  exhibit  some  symptoms 
as adults.

We do not know what causes ADHD, but there are several 
clues. For example, it has been reported that in MRI scans, 
several brain structures, including prefrontal cortex and the 
basal  ganglia,  are  smaller  in  children  with  ADHD.  It  is  not 
known whether these differences are behaviorally signiﬁ cant, 
and they are not reliable enough to be a basis for diagnos-
ing the disorder. However, the possible involvement of these 

structures  is  intriguing  because  they  have  long  been  impli-
cated in the regulation and planning of behavior. You might 
recall Phineas Gage from Box 18.2  in Chapter 18, who ex-
perienced great difﬁ culty making and carrying out plans after 
a severe lesion to his prefrontal cortex.

Several pieces of evidence suggest that heredity plays a 
signiﬁ cant role in ADHD. Children of parents with ADHD are 
more likely to develop it, and a child is much more likely to 
have it if an identical twin does. Nongenetic factors, such as 
brain injury and premature birth, may also be involved. Several 
genes related to the function of dopaminergic neurons have 
been reported to be abnormal in people with ADHD. These 
include the D4 dopamine receptor gene, the D2 dopamine 
receptor gene, and the dopamine transporter gene. We have 
seen in several previous chapters how important dopaminer-
gic transmission is for a variety of behaviors, so it will be a 
challenge to clarify dopamine’s involvement in ADHD.

At present the most common treatment for ADHD, aside 
from  behavioral  therapy,  is  psychostimulant  drugs  such  as 
Ritalin. Ritalin is a mild central nervous system stimulant simi-
lar to amphetamines. It also inhibits the dopamine transporter, 
increasing the postsynaptic effect of dopamine. In many chil-
dren, Ritalin successfully decreases impulsiveness and inat-
tention, although questions about long-term use remain.

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   724
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   724

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

725

▲ FIGURE 21.3
Visual “pop out.”  A salient difference in color automatically draws 
your attention. It may take a moment to even notice the faces 
of the men wearing red. (Source: Courtesy of Steve McCurry 
photographer, Magnum Photos.)

 Daily  life  suggests  that  attention  is  directed  in  two  different  ways. 
Suppose you are walking through a ﬁ eld of grass where amidst the sea 
of green grows a single bright-yellow dandelion. Your attention may be 
automatically drawn to the dandelion because the color “pops out” from 
the  background.  We  say  the  dandelion  “caught  our  attention.”  Certain 
visual features, such as a distinctive color, movement, or a ﬂ ashing light, 
draw our attention automatically (Figure 21.3). This is called  exogenous 
attention  or  bottom–up attention  because the stimulus attracts our 
attention without any cognitive input. Presumably a process like this is 
used by many animals to rapidly detect and evade predators. Quite dif-
ferent is  top–down attention , also called  endogenous attention , in 
which  attention  is  deliberately  directed  by  the  brain  to  some  object  or 
place to serve a behavioral goal. You might be ﬂ ipping through this book 
looking for a passage that you know is in the upper-right corner of a page. 
The search is made easier by the allocation of attention speciﬁ cally to the 
page corner. 

 Behavioral Consequences of Attention 
 In most situations, if we want to visually scrutinize something, we move 
our eyes so that the object of interest is imaged on the fovea in each eye. 
Implicit in this behavior is the fact that most of the time we pay attention 
to the object we are looking at. However, it is also possible to shift attention 
to objects imaged on parts of the retina outside the fovea; this phenom-
enon of “looking out of the corner of one’s eyes” is called  covert attention  
because our gaze doesn’t reveal what we are attending to. Whether on the 
fovea or a more peripheral portion of the retina, focusing attention en-
hances visual processing at that location in several ways. Two ways we’ll 
look at are enhanced visual sensitivity and faster reaction times. 

 Attention Enhances Visual Sensitivity.  Figure 21.4 shows an experiment 
for studying the effects of directing visual attention to different locations. 
The observer ﬁ xated on a central point, and her task was to say whether 
a target stimulus was ﬂ ashed on at a location to the left of the ﬁ xation 
point, to the right, or not at all. The task was difﬁ cult because the target 
was small and ﬂ ashed on very brieﬂ y. The experiment included several 
special procedures for identifying the effects of attention. Each trial began 
with the presentation of a cue stimulus at the ﬁ xation point. The cue was 
either a plus sign, an arrow pointing left, or an arrow pointing right. After 
the cue was extinguished, a variable delay period followed, during which 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   725
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   725

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

726

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Fixation point

Cue

Attended
location

Attention shifts
to right

Target appears at
cued location

Target appears at
uncued location

▲ FIGURE 21.4
An experiment to measure the effect of attention on visual detection.  While 
an observer maintains steady fixation, a cue directs her to shift her attention to 
one side of the computer screen. In each trial, the observer indicates whether a 
circular target is seen on either side of the screen.

only the ﬁ xation point was seen. In half the trials, there was no further 
stimulus, and in the other half, a small target circle was ﬂ ashed on for 15 
msec at either the left or right position. 

 A  key  element  of  the  experiment  is  that  the  cue  was  used  to  direct 
attention. If the central cue was a plus sign, it was equally likely that 
a little circle would appear to either the left or the right. The plus sign 
was thus a “neutral cue.” If the cue was a left arrow, it was four times 
more likely that the target would appear on the left than on the right. If 
the cue was a right arrow, it was four times more likely that the target 
would appear on the right than on the left. If the target appeared to the 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   726
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   726

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

727

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
 
t
e
g
r
a
T

100

50

0

Invalid 

Neutral

Valid

Cue

▲ FIGURE 21.5
The effect of cueing on target detec-
tion.  Detection of a visual target is im-
proved if the location of the upcoming 
target is validly cued. Performance with 
an invalid cue is worse than with a neu-
tral cue that gives no indication of where 
the target will appear.

cued side, the cue was “valid”; the cue was “invalid” if it pointed away 
from where the target would appear. The observer was required to keep 
her eyes pointing straight ahead, but in order to make the most correct 
responses on the difﬁ cult task of detecting the ﬂ ashed circle targets, it 
would be advantageous to make use of the cue. For instance, if the cue 
was a right arrow, it would be beneﬁ cial to try to covertly attend to the 
right target location more than the left. 

 For  each  of  the  subjects  used  in  this  experiment,  the  data  collected 
consisted  of  the  percentage  of  the  time  a  circle  was  correctly  detected. 
Because there was no target circle in half the trials, the observers could 
not get a high percentage correct by “cheating” (i.e., by saying there was 
always a target at the side where the arrow pointed). In trials where the 
central cue was a plus sign, the observers detected the target stimulus in 
about 60% of the trials in which one was presented. When the cue was 
a right arrow, the observers detected the target stimulus to the right on 
about 80% of the trials in which one was presented there. However, when 
the cue pointed right, the observers detected the target stimulus to the 
left in only about 50% of the trials in which one was presented there. With 
the appropriate left–right reversal, the results were about the same with 
left arrows. The results are summarized in Figure 21.5. 

 What  do  these  data  mean?  To  answer,  we  must  imagine  what  the 
observer was doing. Evidently, the expectation of the observer based on 
the cues inﬂ uenced her ability to detect the subsequent targets. It ap-
pears that the arrow cues caused the observer to shift her attention to 
the  side  where  the  arrow  pointed,  even  though  her  eyes  didn’t  move. 
Presumably, this covert shift of attention made it easier to detect the 
ﬂ ashed targets compared to the trials when the central cue was a plus 
sign. Conversely, the observer was less sensitive to the targets on the 
side of ﬁ xation opposite to where the arrow cue pointed. Based on these 
results and those from many other similar experiments, our ﬁ rst con-
clusion about the behavioral effects of attention is that it increases our 
visual sensitivity, making things easier to detect. This is probably one of 
the reasons we can listen in on one conversation among many when we 
give it our attention. 

 Attention  Speeds  Reaction  Times.   Using  an  experimental  technique 
similar to the one discussed earlier, it has been demonstrated that atten-
tion increases the speed of our reactions to sensory events. In a typical 
experiment, an observer ﬁ xated on a central point on a computer screen, 
and  target  stimuli  were  presented  to  either  the  left  or  the  right  of  the 
ﬁ xation point. However, in this experiment, the observer was told to wait 
until  he  perceived  a  stimulus  at  either  location  and  to  press  a  button 
when he did. A measurement was made of how long it took the observer to 
react to the presentation of a stimulus and press a button. Preceding the 
target was a cue stimulus, either a plus sign or an arrow pointing left or 
right. The arrows indicated the side to which a stimulus was more likely 
to appear, whereas the plus sign meant that either side was equally likely. 
 Results from this experiment demonstrated that an observer’s reaction 
times were inﬂ uenced by where the central cue told him to direct his at-
tention. When the central cue was a plus sign, it took about 250–300 msec 
to press the button. When an arrow cue correctly indicated where a target 
would  appear  (e.g.,  right  arrow  and  right  target),  reaction  times  were 
20–30 msec faster. Conversely, when the arrow cue pointed in one direc-
tion and the target appeared at the opposite location, it took 20–30 msec 
longer to react to the target and press the button. The reaction time in-
cluded time for transduction in the visual system, time for visual process-

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   727
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   727

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

728

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

)
c
e
s
m

(
 
e
m

i
t
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
R

300

250

200

Invalid  Neutral

Valid

Cue

▲ FIGURE 21.6
The effect of cueing on reaction time.  
In neutral cue trials, the cue was a plus 
sign, which gave no indication of the 
likely location of the following target. In 
valid cue trials, the arrow cue pointed to 
the location where the target later ap-
peared, speeding reactions to the tar-
gets. When the cue was invalid, pointing 
in a direction opposite to where the tar-
get later appeared, reaction times were 
slower. (Source: Adapted from Posner, 
Snyder, and Davidson, 1980, Fig. 1.)

ing, time to make a decision, time to code for the ﬁ nger movement, and 
time to press the button. Nonetheless, there was a small but reliable ef-
fect based on which direction the arrows directed the observer’s attention 
(Figure 21.6). If we assume that attention to visual objects does not have 
a direct effect on visual transduction or motor coding, we are left with 
the  hypothesis  that  attention  can  alter  the  speed  of  visual  processing, 
or  the  time  to  make  a  decision  about  pressing  the  button.  An  example 
from daily experience underscores the behavioral implications of a reac-
tion time delay due to attention: If you are driving a car at 60 mph and 
attending to something other than the road, a 30 msec delay translates 
into applying the car brakes about 25 feet further down the road, perhaps 
too late to avoid hitting a car or person. 
 Physiological Effects of Attention 
 What  is  happening  in  the  brain  when  we  shift  our  attention  to  some-
thing? For example, in the behavioral studies just discussed, is a subject’s 
performance enhanced because neural activity in a particular brain area 
is  somehow  “better”?  While  it’s  conceivable  that  attention  is  strictly  a 
high-level cognitive process, experiments demonstrate that the effects of 
attention can be observed in numerous sensory areas stretching from the 
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) to visual cortical areas in the parietal 
and temporal lobes. We will look at human brain imaging studies that 
show activity changes associated with the allocation of attention and then 
turn to animal studies that reveal the effects of attention on individual 
neurons. These experiments show the consequences of allocating atten-
tion to a location or feature. 

 Functional MRI Imaging of Human Attention to Location.  A key obser-
vation  made  in  behavioral  studies  of  visual  attention  is  that  enhance-
ments  in  detection  and  reaction  time  are  selective  for  spatial  location. 
When we know where an important stimulus is more likely to appear, we 
move our attention to it and process the sensory information with greater 
sensitivity and speed. A common analogy is that there is a  spotlight of 
 attention  that moves to illuminate objects of particular interest or sig-
niﬁ cance. Experiments using fMRI imaging of the human brain suggest 
that there may be selective changes in brain activity associated with spa-
tial shifts in attention. 

 In one experiment, subjects in the fMRI machine viewed a stimulus 
consisting  of  patches  of  colored  lines  arranged  in  24  sectors  as  shown 
at the bottom of Figure 21.7a. The upper panels in Figure 21.7a show a 
sequence of four sectors, moving out from the ﬁ xation point, that a sub-
ject was cued to attend to. The location of the cued sector changed every 
10 seconds. During the 10-second period, the color and orientation of the 
line segments in all of the sectors changed every 2 seconds. Each time 
the line segments changed, the subject’s task was to press one button if 
the lines were blue and horizontal or orange and vertical, and a second 
button if the lines were blue and vertical or orange and horizontal. The 
reason for having the subjects perform this task was to force them to at-
tend to a particular sector of the stimulus and ignore the rest. Remember 
that subjects always kept their gaze ﬁ xed at the center of the bull’s-eye 
stimulus. 

 The fascinating aspect of this experiment involves what happens when 
the location of the sector being attended to changes. Figure 21.7b shows 
brain activity recorded with the attended sector at four locations at in-
creasing  distance  from  the  ﬁ xation  point.  Notice  how  the  areas  of  en-
hanced brain activity (red and yellow) move away from the occipital pole 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   728
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   728

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

729

Cued
sector

(b)

(a)

▲ FIGURE 21.7
The spotlight of attention.  (a) The stimulus (bottom) consisted 
of patches of vertical and horizontal blue and orange lines ar-
ranged into 24 sectors radiating out from the central fixation 
point. The orientation and color of each sector changed ran-
domly every 2 seconds. From top to bottom, the upper four 
bull’s-eye patterns indicate in red a sequence of four sectors 
that a subject was cued to attend to. (b) Superimposed on a 
schematic image of the brain, red and yellow areas show loca-
tions of enhanced brain activity associated with attention to 
the sector to the left in (a). As attention was directed from cen-
tral to more peripheral vision, cortical enhancement moved 
away from the pole of the occipital lobe (Source: Courtesy of 
J. A. Brefczynski and E. A. DeYoe.)

as the attended sector moves out from the fovea. The pattern of brain ac-
tivity shifts retinotopically, even though the visual stimuli are the same 
regardless of which sector is attended. The hypothesis is that these im-
ages show the neural effect of the spotlight of attention moving to differ-
ent locations. 

 PET  Imaging  of  Human  Attention  to  Features.   The  fMRI  results  dis-
cussed above appear consistent with the behavioral observation that vi-
sual attention can be moved independently of eye position. But attention 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   729
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   729

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

730

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Image 1

Image 2

▲ FIGURE 21.8
Same–different stimuli used for PET 
imaging.  The observer sees image 1 fol-
lowed by image 2. The moving elements 
in the stimuli can change in shape, color, 
and speed of motion from image 1 to 
image 2. The observer responds by indi-
cating whether the stimuli in the two im-
ages are the same or different.

involves more than just location. Imagine walking down a crowded city 
sidewalk in the winter looking for someone. Everyone is bundled in heavy 
coats, but you know your friend will be wearing a red hat. By mentally 
“focusing” on red, it will be much easier to pick out your friend. Evidently, 
we are able to pay particular attention to visual features such as color 
to enhance our performance. Is there any reﬂ ection of this attention to 
features in brain activity? The answer has come from studies using PET 
imaging in humans. 

 Steven  Petersen  and  his  colleagues  at  Washington  University  used 
PET imaging while humans performed a same–different discrimination 
task (Figure 21.8). An image was ﬂ ashed on a computer screen for about 
half  a  second;  after  a  delay  period,  another  image  was  ﬂ ashed.  Each 
image was composed of small elements that could vary in shape, color, 
and speed of motion. The task of the observer was to indicate whether 
the two successive images were the same or different. To isolate the effect 
of  attention,  two  different  versions  of  the  experiment  were  conducted. 
In  selective-attention  experiments, subjects were instructed to pay atten-
tion to just one of the features (shape, color, or speed) and they indicated 
whether  that  feature  was  the  same  or  different  in  the  two  images.  In 
 divided-attention   experiments,  subjects  simultaneously  monitored  all 
features  and  based  their  same–different  judgments  on  changes  in  any 
feature. The researchers then subtracted the divided-attention responses 
from the selective-attention responses to obtain an image of changes in 
brain activity associated with attention to one feature. 

 Figure 21.9 illustrates the results. Different areas of cortex had higher 
activity when different attributes of the stimuli were being  discriminated. 
For instance, whereas ventromedial occipital cortex was affected by at-
tention  in  color  (blue  spots)  and  shape  (orange  spots)  discrimination 
tasks, it was not affected in the speed discrimination task (green spots). 
Conversely, areas in parietal cortex were inﬂ uenced by attention to the 

Corpus callosum

Central
sulcus

Parahippocampal
gyrus

Left medial

Superior
temporal
sulcus

Left lateral

▲ FIGURE 21.9
Feature-specific effects of visual 
 attention.  Symbols indicate where  activity 
in PET images was higher in selective- 
attention experiments relative to divided-
attention experiments. Selective- attention 
was associated with enhanced activity in 
different brain areas when attention was 
directed to speed (green), color (blue), or 
shape (orange). (Source: Adapted from 
Corbetta et al., 1990, Fig. 2.)

Right medial

Right lateral

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   730
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   730

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

731

motion task but not the other tasks. While it is not possible to know with 
certainty  which  cortical  areas  were  highlighted  in  these  experiments, 
areas of heightened activity in the color and shape tasks may have corre-
sponded to areas V4 and IT and other visual cortical areas in the tempo-
ral lobe. The area most affected by performing the motion task was near 
area MT. These effects of attention to different features are roughly con-
sistent with the tuning properties of neurons in extrastriate visual areas 
discussed in Chapter 10. 

 The  important  points  to  take  from  these  and  other  brain  imaging 
studies are that numerous brain areas appear to be affected by atten-
tion and that the particular areas depend on the nature of the behav-
ioral task performed. We’ll now examine two of these areas in detail and 
see how studies in behaving monkeys have clariﬁ ed the neural effects 
of attention. 

 Attention  Enhances  Responses  of  Neurons  in  Parietal  Cortex.   The 
perceptual studies discussed earlier show that attention can be moved 
independently  of  eye  position.  But  what  happens  normally  when  you 
move your eyes to explore your environment? Let’s say you are scruti-
nizing an object imaged on your fovea when a bright light is ﬂ ashed in 
your peripheral visual ﬁ eld. What happens to your attention before, dur-
ing, and after you make a saccadic eye movement to the ﬂ ashed light? 
Behavioral studies show that shifts in attention can occur in about 50 
msec, whereas saccades take about 200 msec. It appears that attention, 
initially focused at the fovea, shifts to the peripheral retina and is fol-
lowed by the saccade. 

 The assumption that attention changes location prior to an eye move-
ment  underlies  an  experiment  performed  by  neurophysiologists  Robert 
Wurtz, Michael Goldberg, and David Robinson at the National Institutes 
of Health. They recorded from several brain areas in monkeys to deter-
mine whether shifts of attention are associated with changes in neural 
activity.  Because  of  the  close  relationship  between  attention  and  eye 
movements, the investigation started with parts of the brain involved in 
generating saccades. 

 The researchers recorded from neurons in the posterior parietal cor-
tex  of  monkeys  while  the  animals  performed  a  simple  behavioral  task 
(Figure 21.10). This cortical area is thought to be involved in directing 
eye  movements,  in  part  because  electrical  stimulation  here  will  evoke 
saccades. In the experiment, a monkey ﬁ xated on a spot on a computer 
display and a stimulus was ﬂ ashed on the peripheral retina at the loca-
tion of the receptive ﬁ eld under study. The monkey was cued to  either 
hold  ﬁ xation  on  the  initial  spot  or  saccade  to  the  ﬂ ashed  stimulus.  In 
either case, the parietal neuron was excited by the stimulus ﬂ ashing in 
its receptive ﬁ eld (Figure 21.11a). The observation that makes this ex-
periment important is that the response to the ﬂ ashed stimulus was sig-
niﬁ cantly enhanced when the animal made a saccade to foveate it com-
pared to trials in which the monkey held ﬁ xation at the initial location 
(Figure 21.11b). Remember, the stimulus is the same in both cases. The 
enhancement effect was seen only when a saccade was made to the re-
ceptive ﬁ eld location but not to other locations and even though the sac-
cade was made after the neuron responded to the target stimulus. This 
suggests that attention moves to the end of the planned saccade before 
the  eyes  move  and  only  neurons  with  receptive  ﬁ elds  at  that  location 
have responses enhanced by the attention shift that precedes the saccade 
(Figure 21.11c). A second interpretation that has to be considered is that 
the enhanced response was a premotor signal related to coding for the 

Fixation point

Screen

Target

Shift of gaze 
due to saccadic 
eye movement

▲ FIGURE 21.10
A behavioral task for directing a mon-
key’s attention.  While recordings are 
made from the posterior parietal cortex, 
the monkey fixates on a point on a com-
puter screen. When a peripheral target 
appears (usually in a neuron’s receptive 
field), the animal makes a saccade to 
the target. (Source: Adapted from Wurtz, 
Goldberg, and Robinson, 1982, p. 128.)

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   731
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   731

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

732

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Receptive
field
Target stimulus

Target 

ON

OFF

Lever

Saccade to
right

Cell
activity

Eye
position

Target 

ON

OFF

Cell
activity

Eye
position

Target 

ON

OFF

Cell
activity

Eye
position

Target  BRIGHT

DIM

Cell
activity

Eye
position

Lever
released

Fixation
point

(a)

(b)

Second target
outside receptive
field
Saccade to
left

(c)

(d)

▲ FIGURE 21.11
The effect of attention on the response of a neuron in posterior parietal cortex.  (a) A neuron in posterior 
 parietal cortex responds to a target stimulus in its receptive field. (b) The response is enhanced if the target presen-
tation is followed by a saccade to the target. (c) The enhancement effect is spatially selective, as it is not seen if a 
saccade is made to a stimulus not in the receptive field. (d) Enhancement is also seen when the task requires the 
animal to release a hand lever when the peripheral spot dims. (Source: Adapted from Wurtz, Goldberg, and 
 Robinson, 1982, p. 128.)

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   732
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   732

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

733

subsequent  eye  movement,  just  as  neurons  in  motor  cortex  ﬁ re  before 
hand movements. To address this possibility, the researchers performed 
a variation of the experiment in which the animal moved its hand rather 
than its eyes to indicate the location of the peripherally ﬂ ashed stimulus 
(Figure 21.11d). Even without a saccade there was an enhanced response 
to  the  target  in  the  receptive  ﬁ eld  suggesting  that,  rather  than  a  pre-
motor signal, the enhanced response was a result of an attention shift 
needed to accurately perform the task. 

 It’s easy to see how response enhancement of the kind observed in pos-
terior parietal cortex might be involved in the behavioral beneﬁ ts of at-
tention discussed earlier. If attention drawn to one location in the visual 
ﬁ eld by a cueing stimulus increases the response to other stimuli near 
that location, this could account for the spatially selective improvement 
in the ability to detect a target. Likewise, the augmented response might 
lead to more rapid visual processing and ultimately faster reaction times, 
as seen in the perceptual experiments. 

 Attention  Focuses  Receptive  Fields  in  Area  V4.   In  a  fascinating  se-
ries  of  experiments,  Robert  Desimone  and  his  colleagues,  then  at  the 
National  Institute  of  Mental  Health,  revealed  surprisingly  speciﬁ c  ef-
fects  of  attention  on  the  receptive  ﬁ elds  of  neurons  in  visual  cortical 
area V4. In one experiment, monkeys performed a same–different task 
with pairs of stimuli within the receptive ﬁ elds of V4 neurons. For ex-
ample, suppose that a particular V4 cell responded strongly to vertical 
and horizontal red bars of light in its receptive ﬁ eld but did not respond 
to vertical or horizontal green bars. The red bars were “effective” stimuli 
and the green bars were “ineffective” stimuli. While the monkey ﬁ xated, 
two stimuli (each either effective or ineffective) were brieﬂ y presented 
at different locations in the receptive ﬁ eld, and after a delay period, two 
more stimuli were presented at the same locations. In an experimental 
session, the animal was cued to base its same–different judgments on 
the successive stimuli at one of the two locations within the receptive 
ﬁ eld. In other words, the animal had to pay attention to one location in 
the receptive ﬁ eld but ignore the other in order to perform the task. The 
animal pushed a lever one way with its hand if the successive stimuli at 
the attended location were the same, and the opposite way if the stimuli 
were different. 

 Consider what happened in a trial when effective stimuli appeared at 
the attended location and ineffective stimuli appeared at the other loca-
tion (Figure 21.12a). Not surprisingly, the V4 neuron responded strongly 
in  this  situation  because  there  were  perfectly  good  “effective”  stimuli 
in  the  receptive  ﬁ eld.  The  monkey  was  then  cued  to  base  its  same–
different  judgments  on  the  stimuli  at  the  other  location  in  the  recep-
tive ﬁ eld (Figure 21.12b). At this location, only green ineffective stimuli 
were presented. The response of the neuron should have been the same 
as before because exactly the same stimuli were in the receptive ﬁ eld, 
right?  Surprisingly,  that  is  not  what  they  observed.  Even  though  the 
stimuli were identical, on average the responses of V4 neurons were less 
than half as great when the animal attended to the area in the neuron’s 
receptive ﬁ eld containing the ineffective stimuli. It’s as if the receptive 
ﬁ eld  contracted  around  the  attended  area,  decreasing  the  response  to 
the  effective  stimuli  at  the  unattended  location.  The  location-speciﬁ c 
 effect that attention has on neural activity in this experiment may be 
directly related to the speciﬁ city discussed earlier in the human detec-
tion experiment. 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   733
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   733

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

734

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Frame 1

Frame 2

Fixation 
point

Receptive
field

Attended
location

(a)  Attention to effective stimulus

Frame 1

Frame 2

Attended
location

(b)  Attention to ineffective stimulus

Stimuli

ON

OFF

Response of
V4 neuron when
effective stimulus
is at attended
location in 
receptive field

Stimuli

ON

OFF

Response of
V4 neuron when
ineffective stimulus
is at attended
location in 
receptive field

▲ FIGURE 21.12
The effect of attention in visual cortical area V4.  The yellow circle indicates 
whether the monkey is attending to (a) the left or (b) the right location in the re-
ceptive field. For this neuron, red bars of light are effective in producing a re-
sponse and green bars are ineffective. Even though the stimuli are always the 
same, the neuron’s response is greater when attention is directed to the effective 
stimuli. (Source: Adapted from Moran and Desimone, 1985, p. 782.)

 Brain Circuits for the Control of Attention 
 We have seen that attention has beneﬁ cial effects on visual processing and 
that it alters the sensitivity of visual neurons. These are the   consequences  
of attention. We now turn to the brain mechanisms that  guide  attention, 
a  topic  that  is  more  difﬁ cult  to  study  because  the  networks  of   cortical 
and  subcortical  structures  involved  are  distributed  across  the  brain. 
Numerous experiments suggest that the brain circuitry responsible for 
saccadic eye movements plays a critical role in guiding attention. This 
link  is  consistent  with  human  behavior  because  we  saccade  to  objects 
that are either salient or of behavioral interest. We won’t examine every 
structure thought to be involved in attention but will highlight a few and 
suggest how control circuits might be organized. 

 The  Pulvinar,  a  Subcortical  Component.   One  structure  that  has  been 
studied for its possible role in guiding attention is the  pulvinar nucleus  
of the thalamus. Several properties of the pulvinar make it interesting. 
As  in  other  neocortical  areas  we  have  discussed,  pulvinar  neurons  re-
spond more robustly when a monkey attends to a stimulus in the recep-
tive ﬁ eld than they do to the same stimulus when attention is directed 
elsewhere. Also,  the  pulvinar  has  reciprocal  connections  with  most  vi-
sual cortical areas of the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes, giving 
it the potential to modulate widespread cortical activity (Figure 21.13). 
Consistent with this anatomical observation, it has been found in mon-
keys  that  when  attention  is  drawn  to  a  pulvinar  receptive  ﬁ eld,  there 

Thalamus

Pulvinar
nucleus

▲ FIGURE 21.13
Pulvinar projections to the cortex.  The 
pulvinar nucleus is in the posterior thala-
mus. It sends widespread efferents to 
areas of cerebral cortex, including areas 
V1, V2, MT, parietal cortex, and inferior 
temporal cortex.

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   734
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   734

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

735

is  increased  synchronization  between  neural  activity  in  the  pulvinar, 
area V4, and area IT. As the pulvinar provides input to V4 and IT, the 
hypothesis  is  that  the  pulvinar  regulates  information  ﬂ ow  in  areas  of 
visual cortex. 

 Humans with pulvinar lesions respond abnormally slowly to stimuli 
on the contralateral side, particularly when there are competing stimuli 
on the ipsilateral side. It has been proposed that such a deﬁ cit reﬂ ects a 
reduced ability to focus attention on objects in the contralateral visual 
ﬁ eld. A similar phenomenon has been observed in monkeys. When mus-
cimol, an agonist of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, is unilater-
ally injected into the pulvinar, the activity of the neurons is suppressed. 
Behaviorally, the injection produces difﬁ culty in shifting attention to con-
tralateral stimuli, which seems similar to the effect of pulvinar lesions 
in humans. Interestingly, injection of the GABA antagonist bicuculline 
appears to facilitate shifting attention to the contralateral side. 

 The Frontal Eye Fields, Eye Movements, and Attention.  Tirin Moore and 
his colleagues, then at Princeton University, examined a cortical area in 
the frontal lobe known as the  frontal eye ﬁ elds  or  FEF  (Figure 21.14). 
There are direct connections between the FEF and numerous areas known 
to  be  inﬂ uenced  by  attention,  including  areas V2, V3, V4,  MT,  and  the 
parietal cortex. Neurons in the FEF have  motor ﬁ elds,  which are small 
areas in the visual ﬁ eld. If a sufﬁ cient electrical current is passed into the 
FEF, the eyes rapidly make a saccade to the motor ﬁ eld of the stimulated 
neurons. 

 In one experiment, Moore et al. trained monkeys to look at a computer 
display  that  contained  numerous  small  spots  of  light.  They  placed  an 
electrode into the FEF and determined the motor ﬁ eld of the neurons at 
the electrode’s tip. The animal’s task was to ﬁ xate on the center of the 
visual  display  but  pay  attention  to  one  of  the  spots,  the  “target”  spot, 
speciﬁ ed by the experimenter. On each experimental trial, if the target 
spot dimmed, the monkey moved a lever with its hand. If the spot did 
not dim, the monkey did not move the lever. By varying the light level, 
the experimenters measured the minimum light difference or threshold 
needed by the monkey to detect the dimming. The task was made difﬁ cult 
for the monkey by “distracter” spots that blinked on and off at random 
times (Figure 21.15a). 

 Unbeknownst to the monkey, on some trials a very small amount of 
electrical current was passed into the FEF electrode. Importantly, the cur-
rent was insufﬁ cient to drive the eyes to the motor ﬁ eld, and the animal 
continued to look at the central ﬁ xation point. The aim of the experiment 
was to determine whether the small electrical stimulation could enhance 
the animal’s ability to detect the dimming of the target spot, a sort of ar-
tiﬁ cial attentional “boost.” The results are summarized in Figure 21.15b. 
The histogram shows that when the target stimulus was located inside 
the motor ﬁ eld, the threshold light difference needed to detect dimming 
of the target was about 10% less with electrical stimulation than with-
out.  The  right  side  of  this  histogram  shows  that  performance  was  not 
enhanced and may actually have been impaired by electrical stimulation 
if the target was outside the motor ﬁ eld (as if attention was drawn to the 
motor ﬁ eld and away from the target). As predicted, electrical stimulation 
in the FEF improved performance in a manner similar to added atten-
tion.  Moreover,  the  effect  of  electrical  stimulation  was  location  speciﬁ c 
just as attentional modulation normally is. 

 If Moore et al.’s results mean that the FEF is part of a system for di-
recting attention and enhancing visual performance in a location-speciﬁ c 

FEF

▲ FIGURE 21.14
The frontal eye fields (FEF) in a 
 macaque brain.  The FEFs are involved 
in the production of saccadic eye 
 movements and may play a role in the 
guidance of attention.

Fixation point

Distracter

(a)

Motor
field

Target

Lever

h

t
i

 

w
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
d
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

 

l

)

%

(
 
n
o

i
t

l

a
u
m

i
t
s
 
l

a
c
i
r
t
c
e
e

l

20

10

0

–10

–20

(b)

Target inside
motor field

Target outside

motor field

▲ FIGURE 21.15
FEF stimulation alters perceptual 
thresholds.  (a) A monkey views spots 
on a visual display; all of the spots blink 
on and off except for the target spot. 
The monkey releases a lever if the target 
spot dims. (b) If the target spot is in the 
motor field of neurons under study, elec-
trical stimulation in the FEF reduces the 
threshold light difference needed to de-
tect that the target spot dimmed. If the 
target is outside the motor field, electri-
cal stimulation slightly increases the 
threshold. (Source: Adapted from Moore 
and Fallah, 2001, Fig. 1.)

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   735
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   735

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

736

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

FEF stimulation

V4 recording

FEF stimulation

(a)

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
l
l

e
c
 
4
V

80

0

(b)

750

Time (msec)

▲ FIGURE 21.16
The effect of FEF stimulation on neu-
ron activity in area V4 in the monkey’s 
brain.  (a) A small electrical current is 
passed into the FEF while the activity of 
a neuron in V4 is recorded. (b) A stimu-
lus is presented in the V4 receptive field 
at time zero. The histogram shows that 
the response to the visual stimulus 
peaks after a short delay and then de-
clines. After 500 msec, the FEF is elec-
trically stimulated (downward arrow) on 
some trials (red) but not on other trials 
(black). Prior to 500 msec, the V4 re-
sponse to the visual stimulus was similar 
whether the stimulus was or was not fol-
lowed by FEF stimulation. After 500 msec, 
the V4 response was greater on trials 
with FEF stimulation (red) than on trials 
without (black). (Source: Adapted from 
Moore and Armstrong, 2003, p. 371.)

manner, how might this work? One possibility is that FEF activity indi-
cating the location of a potential future saccadic eye movement feeds back 
to the cortical areas it is connected to, enhancing activity there. Moore’s 
research group tested this hypothesis by recording in area V4 during elec-
trical stimulation of the FEF. They located electrodes in the two areas 
so that the motor ﬁ eld of the neurons in the FEF overlapped the visual 
 receptive ﬁ elds of the V4 neurons. A visual stimulus was used to excite 
the V4 neuron, and after a 500 msec delay the FEF was electrically stim-
ulated on some trials. Figure 21.16 shows that when the FEF was stimu-
lated (with a current insufﬁ cient to evoke a saccade), the visual response 
of  the  V4  neuron  was  increased  (red)  compared  to  trials  without  FEF 
stimulation (black). Without a visual stimulus to excite the V4 neuron, 
there was no effect of FEF stimulation on the V4 response, suggesting 
that the increased V4 activity was an enhancement of a visual response 
rather than a direct consequence of electrical stimulation. 

 Taken  together,  Moore’s  experiments  suggest  that  FEF  stimulation 
mimics both the physiological and behavioral effects of attention. Other 
scientists  have  found  similar  results  with  electrical  stimulation  of  the 
superior colliculus, another structure involved in generating saccadic eye 
movements. These ﬁ ndings make a compelling case that the guidance of 
attention is integrated with a system involving the FEF and superior col-
liculus that is used to move the eyes. 

 Directing Attention with Salience and Priority Maps.  In the search for 
brain  processes  involved  in  directing  attention,  we  must  consider  both 
bottom–up attention drawn by a stimulus and top–down attention that 
moves to objects of behavioral importance. A now-common hypothesis to 
explain how certain visual features grab your attention (e.g., the yellow 
dandelion  surrounded  by  green  grass)  is  a   salience  map,   an  idea  in-
troduced  by  Laurent  Itti  and  Christof  Koch  at  Caltech.  Rather  than  a 
brain map showing the locations of objects, a salience map shows the loca-
tions of conspicuous features. This concept is illustrated in Figure 21.17. 
In Chapter 10, we saw that the visual system has neurons selective for 
a  variety  of  stimulus  attributes,  such  as  orientation,  color,  and  motion, 
and  that  visual  cortex  is  organized  on  the  basis  of  these  features  (e.g., 
orientation columns). The ﬁ rst stage in the salience map model consists 
of maps of individual features that locate areas of high feature contrast 
(e.g.,  changes  from  rightward  to  leftward  movement  or  red  to  green). 
Through neural interactions within a map, a form of competition might 
suppress responses associated with lower feature contrast. The locations 
of high contrast in each feature map feed into a salience map that locates 
areas of high contrast irrespective of the speciﬁ c features. Competition 
between the locations with high contrast leads to a winning location to 
which  attention is moved. To prevent attention from getting stuck at the 
single most salient location, however, “inhibition of return” prevents suc-
cessive attentional loci from being the same. 

 As  described,  this  model  accounts  only  for  bottom–up  guidance  of 
 attention. We can add top–down attentional modulation to the model in 
Figure 21.17 by inserting top–down cognitive input to either the feature 
maps (“I’m looking for a friend wearing a red hat”) or the salience map 
(“I remember the key ﬁ gure was on the right side of the page in the text-
book”). With this addition, our model no longer simply indicates salience 
(a bottom–up property of stimuli) but instead indicates attentional prior-
ity. A  priority map  is a map showing locations where attention should be 
directed based on stimulus salience and cognitive input. In other words, 
a priority map is a salience map plus top–down effects. 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   736
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   736

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

737

▲ FIGURE 21.17
Guiding attention with a salience map.  
An influential hypothesis for the guidance 
of attention is that the brain uses a sa-
lience map to determine where and what 
we should attend to. The visual input is 
analyzed by neurons that are sensitive to 
the spatial scale of stimulus elements 
and other stimulus features such as 
color, intensity, orientation, motion, and 
so on. The maps for these individual fea-
tures determine where there are signifi-
cant changes in each parameter, such as 
a transition from one color to another, 
light to dark, or contours with different 
orientation. The feature maps are com-
bined into a salience map that identifies 
a “winner”—the most conspicuous ob-
ject across feature maps that will be-
come the next attended location, in this 
case a bag of money. To ensure the sys-
tem does not become locked on a single 
salient object, the “inhibition of return” 
feedback ensures that a current target of 
attention is inhibited from being the next. 
As indicated at the lower right, attention 
is also influenced by top–down factors. 
(Source: Itti and Koch 2001, Fig. 1.)

Area LIP

Central sulcus

Intraparietal
sulcus

▲ FIGURE 21.18
Area LIP, buried in the intraparietal 
sulcus of the macaque brain.  LIP neu-
rons are involved in guiding eye move-
ments and attention.

 A Priority Map in the Parietal Lobe.  Salience and priority maps have been 
studied in visual cortical areas (e.g., V1, V4) as well as cortical areas in 
the parietal and frontal lobes. In a series of studies, Michael Goldberg at 
Columbia University, James Bisley at the University of California, Los 
Angeles, and their colleagues have shown that the  lateral intraparietal 
cortex  (area  LIP)   appears  to  construct  a  priority  map  based  on  both 
bottom–up and top–down inputs (Figure 21.18). Area LIP plays an im-
portant role in directing eye movements, a function clearly related to the 
guidance of attention. Lesions in the parietal cortex are also associated 
with the  neglect syndrome,  in which there is an inability to attend to 
half of the environment (Box 21.2). 

 An experiment demonstrates a salience effect in LIP that is akin to the 
experience you might have walking into a familiar room: You might not 
pay any attention to an old sofa or light ﬁ xture on the wall of your liv-
ing room at home, but your attention would be captured by a new puppy 
jumping on the ﬂ oor. In the experiment, a monkey ﬁ rst sees a computer 
display, and a neuron in area LIP is shown to respond when an object, 
say a star, is ﬂ ashed in its receptive ﬁ eld (Figure 21.19a). In the second 
experiment, eight objects are on the computer display and one of them is 
the star. The animal initially ﬁ xates a point on the bottom of the display 
such that the LIP neuron’s receptive ﬁ eld does not encompass any of the 
objects.  When  the  ﬁ xation  point  is  moved  to  the  center  of  the  display, 
the animal makes a saccade that brings the star into the receptive ﬁ eld. 
Figure 21.19b shows that there is little response in this situation. In a 
third experiment, the animal ﬁ xates the same location at the bottom of 
the computer display, and all of the stimuli are shown except for the star 
(none of the stimuli are in the receptive ﬁ eld). Then, about 500 msec be-
fore  the  animal  makes  a  saccade  to  the  central  ﬁ xation  point,  the  star 
is  turned  on.  When  the  central  ﬁ xation  point  is  displayed,  the  animal 
makes  a  saccade  to  it  and  the  neuron  responds  vigorously  to  the  star 
(Figure 21.19c). Note that in this last version of the experiment, the star 
is not in the receptive ﬁ eld when it is turned on. By the time the eyes move 
and the star enters the receptive ﬁ eld, the eight objects on the display are 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   737
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   737

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

738

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 21.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Hemispatial Neglect Syndrome
In Chapter 12, we brieﬂ y discussed the neglect syndrome, 

in  which  a  person  appears  to  ignore  objects,  people,  and 
sometimes their own body to one side of their center of gaze. 
Some have argued that this syndrome is a unilateral deﬁ cit in 
attention. The manifestations of a neglect syndrome can be 
so bizarre that they’re hard to believe if not directly observed. 
In mild cases, the behavior may not be apparent with casual 
observation. But in severe cases, patients act as if half the 
universe no longer exists. They may shave only one side of 
their face, brush the teeth on only one side of their mouth, 
dress only one side of their body, and eat food from only one 
side of the plate.

Because neglect syndrome is less common following left 
hemispheric damage, it has primarily been studied in regard 
to neglect of the left half of space as a result of damage to 
right cerebral cortex. In addition to neglecting objects to the 
left side, some patients exhibit denial. For instance, they may 
say  that  their  left  hand  isn’t  really  paralyzed  or,  in  extreme 
cases, may refuse to believe that a limb on their left side is 
part of their body. Refer to Figure 12.24 in Chapter 12 as a 
typical example of the distorted sense of space these patients 
have. If asked to make a drawing, they may crowd everything 
into the right half, leaving the left half blank. A particularly dra-
matic example is the paintings shown in Figure A, which were 
painted by an artist as he recovered from a stroke.

If  patients  with  a  neglect  syndrome  are  asked  to  close 
their  eyes  and  point  toward  the  midline  of  their  body,  they 
typically point too far to the right, as if there has been shrink-
age of the left half. If blindfolded and asked to explore objects 
placed on a table before them, patients behave normally in 
exploring objects to the right but are haphazard about prob-
ing to the left. All of these examples point toward a problem 
in relating to the space around them.

Neglect syndrome is most commonly associated with le-
sions in posterior parietal cortex in the right hemisphere, but 
it has also been reported to occur following damage to right 
hemisphere  prefrontal  cortex,  cingulate  cortex,  and  other 
areas. It has been proposed that the posterior parietal cor-
tex  is  involved  in  attending  to  objects  at  different  positions 
in extrapersonal space. If this is true, then neglect syndrome 
might  be  a  disruption  of  the  ability  to  shift  attention.  One 
piece of evidence supporting this hypothesis is that objects in 
the right visual ﬁ eld of patients with a neglect syndrome are 
sometimes  abnormally  effective  in  capturing  attention,  and 
patients may experience difﬁ culty disengaging their attention 
from an object on this side.

It is not clear why the syndrome more often accompanies 
right hemispheric damage than left hemispheric damage. The 
right hemisphere appears to be dominant for  understanding 
spatial  relationships,  and  in  split-brain  studies,  it  has  been 
shown to be superior at solving complex puzzles. This  ﬁ nding 

seems consistent with the greater loss of spatial sense after 
right  hemispheric  lesions.  One  hypothesis  is  that  the  left 
hemisphere  is  involved  in  attending  to  objects  in  the  right 
visual  ﬁ eld,  whereas  the  right  hemisphere  is  involved  in  at-
tending to objects in the left and right visual ﬁ elds. While this 
would account for the asymmetrical effects of left and right 
hemispheric lesions, at present there is only suggestive evi-
dence in support of such a hypothesis. One ﬁ nal riddle about 
neglect syndrome is that there is partial or complete recovery 
in a matter of months (in the ﬁ gure, note the recovery in the 
self-portraits).

Figure A
 Self-portraits during recovery from a stroke that caused a neglect 
syndrome. Two months after suffering a stroke affecting parietal 
cortex on the right side, the artist made the upper-left portrait. There 
is virtually no left side to the face in the painting. About 3.5 months 
after the stroke, there is some detail on the left side but not nearly 
as much as on the right side (upper right). At 6 months (lower left) 
and 9 months (lower right) after the stroke, there is increasingly 
more treatment of the left side of the painting. (Source: Posner and 
Raichle, 1994, p. 152.)

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   738
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   738

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

739

Star flashes in RF

Saccade brings stable

stimulus into RF

Saccade brings stimulus

 into RF after flash on

Receptive field

FP

FP

FP

c
e
s
/
p
s
 
0
5

(a)  

star
on

star
off

(b)  

saccade

end

(c)  

saccade

end

star

turned on

▲ FIGURE 21.19
Evidence for a bottom–up pri-
ority map in area LIP.  (a) An LIP 
neuron responds when an effec-
tive stimulus, a star, is flashed in 
its receptive field. (b) The LIP 
neuron responds little if all eight 
stimuli are present before a sac-
cade brings the star into the re-
ceptive field. (c) If the star is 
turned on 500 msec before the 
saccade, the LIP neuron strongly 
responds after the saccade. FP, 
fixation point. (Source: Adapted 
from Bisley and Goldberg, 2010, 
Fig. 2.)

identical to the second experiment. It appears that the large response in 
the third experiment is a consequence of turning on the star just before 
it entered the receptive ﬁ eld. The hypothesis is that the stimulus onset 
catches the animal’s attention and this enhances the response of the LIP 
neuron. This effect is consistent with a salience map in area LIP in that 
the neuron’s response is strongly modulated by a conspicuous bottom–up 
stimulus. 

 A variation of this experiment brings out a top–down attention  effect. 
This  study  uses  the  same  eight  stimuli,  but  now  they  are  all  always 
shown (no ﬂ ashing stimuli). As before, the animal ﬁ xates on a point on 
the computer display such that none of the stimuli are in the receptive 
ﬁ eld. A small cue stimulus is ﬂ ashed on and off, and this indicates to the 
animal which of the eight stimuli is of behavioral signiﬁ cance in this ex-
perimental trial. In the case illustrated, the LIP neuron does not respond 
to the star cue because it is outside the receptive ﬁ eld (Figure 21.20a). 
The ﬁ xation point then moves to the center of the display and the mon-
key makes a saccade to this location, bringing the star into the receptive 
ﬁ eld  and  the  neuron  responds  to  the  star  (Figure  21.20b).  Finally,  the 
animal makes a saccade to the star stimulus and the LIP response ends 
(Figure 21.20c). Compare this response pattern with that observed with 
identical stimuli when the cue does not match the stimulus that enters 
the receptive ﬁ eld. As before there is no response to the cue—now a trian-
gle rather than a star (Figure 21.20d). When the animal makes the ﬁ rst 
saccade, the star enters the receptive ﬁ eld, but the response is much less 
than before (Figure 21.20e). Finally, the animal makes a second saccade 
to the triangle (Figure 21.20f). 

 Note that in both the ﬁ rst and second experiments there was a condi-
tion in which the animal made a saccade that brought a stable (not previ-
ously ﬂ ashed) star stimulus into the receptive ﬁ eld. From Figure 21.19, we 
conclude that without something like a ﬂ ash to increase its salience, the 
LIP neuron does not respond very much to the star in its receptive ﬁ eld. 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   739
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   739

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

740

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Cue flashed

First saccade to 

display center

Second saccade to 

cued stimulus

Receptive field

FP

Cue

FP

c
e
s
/

p
s
 
0
5

▲ FIGURE 21.20
Evidence for a top–down pri-
ority map in area LIP.  (a) A 
small star-shaped cue stimulus 
flashes on to inform the monkey 
which stimulus is important. The 
cue is outside the receptive field 
and there is no response in the 
LIP neuron. (b) A first saccade 
is made to the center of the 
computer display, bringing the 
star stimulus into the receptive 
field. The neuron responds to 
the star. (c) The monkey makes 
a second saccade to the cued 
star stimulus. (d) In this second 
experiment with the same LIP 
neuron, the cue is a triangle. 
(e) There is a significantly re-
duced response to the star 
when the cue is the triangle. 
(f) The monkey saccades to the 
cued triangle stimulus. (Source: 
Adapted from Bisley and 
Goldberg, 2010, Fig. 4.)

(a)  

Cue on

(b)  

End of first
saccade

(c)  

End of second

saccade

Cue flashed

First saccade to 

display center

Second saccade to 

 cued stimulus

Receptive field

FP

Cue

FP

c
e
s
/
p
s
 
0
5

(d)  

Cue on

(e)  

End of first
saccade

(f)  

End of second

saccade

In Figure 21.20b, there is a much greater response than in Figure 21.20e 
presumably because of a top–down signal informing the LIP neuron that 
in the former case the star is important (for planning the last saccade) 
even though it isn’t ﬂ ashing. A variety of experiments along these lines 
suggest  that  LIP  neurons  carry  information  appropriate  for  a  priority 
map of visual attention. 

 The Frontoparietal Attention Network.  As more is learned about brain 
areas that are affected by attention and areas that appear to hold saliency 
or priority maps, an outline of circuits involved in attention is emerging. 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   740
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   740

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

741

Bottom-up attention

FEF

LIP

V4

Lateral
prefrontal
cortex

(a)  

Lateral
prefrontal
cortex

(b)  

V1, V2

V1, V2

Top-down attention

FEF

Pulvinar and
superior colliculus

LIP

V4

Pulvinar and
superior colliculus

▲ FIGURE 21.21
The frontoparietal attention network in the 
macaque brain.  (a) In bottom–up attention, in-
formation about a conspicuous object is 
passed from visual areas in the occipital lobe to 
area LIP where a salience map is constructed. 
Early attention signals are also seen in prefron-
tal cortex and the frontal eye fields that interact 
with LIP. Signals sent from LIP and FEF may di-
rect the eyes and enhance visual processing in 
occipital visual cortex. (b) In top–down atten-
tion, frontal lobe areas show attentional modu-
lation at the earliest times and signals sent to 
other structures influence eye movements and 
perception. Black arrows: bottom–up signals; 
Red arrows: top–down signals.

The  involved  brain  areas  compose  the   frontoparietal  attention  net-
work ( Figure 21.21). 

 In bottom–up attention, input from visual areas in the occipital lobe 
reaches  area  LIP  where  the  ﬁ rst  critical  step  may  be  the  construction 
of a salience map based on conspicuous objects in the ﬁ eld of view (see 
Figure  21.21a).  The  frontal  eye  ﬁ elds  also  contain  a  salience  map,  but 
salience is signaled there after LIP. Through feedback to visual areas and 
connections with eye movement structures, visual processing of a salient 
object is enhanced and the eyes may move to foveate the object. 

 Top–down control of attention is directed by behavioral goals, and it 
is ﬁ tting that the cortical areas in the frontal lobe appear to be critical. 
Recordings across a range of brain areas show that attention effects fol-
low  a  temporal  sequence,  occurring  ﬁ rst  in  the  frontal  lobe  (prefrontal 
cortex and the frontal eye ﬁ elds) and followed progressively by areas LIP, 
V4 and MT, V2, and then V1 (see Figure 21.21b). The causal relationships 
in  these  brain  areas  are  still  being  investigated,  but  we  can  speculate 
that behavioral goals are established in the frontal and parietal areas, 
information is processed to create a priority map in LIP and FEF, and 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   741
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   741

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

742

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

modulation  of  visual  cortical  areas  enhances  the  perception  of  selected 
 objects. Several of these brain areas, including LIP, FEF, and the supe-
rior colliculus, also serve to guide saccadic eye movements to scrutinize 
the objects allocated attention. 

CONSCIOUSNESS 
CONSSCIOUUSNESS 

 In  previous  chapters,  we  discussed  the  sensory  systems  that  bring  in-
formation  about  our  world  into  the  brain.  In  order  to  serve  behavioral 
goals, we focus our attention on a small subset of the vast sensory input. 
Presumably other animals make a similar tradeoff: Broadly monitor sen-
sory input at a low resolution, perhaps with the default mode network, or 
ﬁ lter out much of the input and pay attention at a higher resolution to only 
the information needed at the moment. Consider the next step in the chain 
of brain events—becoming consciously aware of the world around us. 

 It is probably fair to say neuroscientists tend to be  materialists  in their 
attitudes  about  consciousness,  meaning  that  consciousness  arises  from 
physical processes: Like every other product of the brain, consciousness 
can ultimately be understood as being based on the structure and func-
tion  of  the  nervous  system.  An  alternative  to  materialism  is   dualism,  
which states that the mind and body are different things and one can-
not  be  fully  explained  by  the  other  (i.e.,  consciousness  cannot  be  fully 
explained by physical processes). If it is true that consciousness is based 
on standard physical principles, a logical inference is that it should one 
day be possible to construct a conscious machine. 

 What Is Consciousness? 
 The nature of human consciousness is a problem that has vexed philoso-
phers and scientists for centuries. There are challenges right at the outset; 
even deﬁ ning consciousness is controversial. Sufﬁ ce it to say  numerous 
deﬁ nitions have been offered over the years, and numerous models of con-
sciousness have been proposed. Our intent is not to jump into this contro-
versy. However, considering some of the background issues will lead us to 
a discussion of the type of neuroscientiﬁ c investigations of consciousness 
that might be fruitful. Think of the ways we use the word itself. We say 
that a person who is given a general anesthetic or who is asleep is uncon-
scious and that they become conscious when they wake up. If our hair 
looks weird one day, we might be self-conscious. A person under the inﬂ u-
ence of a hallucinogenic drug is said to be in an altered state of conscious-
ness. When long wavelength light hits our retina, we have the conscious 
experience of the color red. But does “conscious” mean the same thing in 
all of these examples? It seems we use the word in different ways, and 
understanding these facets of consciousness may involve distinct lines of 
neuroscientiﬁ c inquiry. 

 In  1995,  the  philosopher  David  Chalmers  at  the  University  of 
California,  Santa  Cruz,  proposed  a  distinction  that  is  helpful  starting 
point. He outlined what he called the easy problems of consciousness and 
the hard problem. What Chalmers meant by the  easy problems of con-
sciousness  are phenomena that seem answerable by standard scientiﬁ c 
methodology. For example, what is the difference between being awake 
and asleep? We don’t know the full answer to this question, but as we saw 
in Chapter 19, research is revealing much and may someday fully outline 
the nature of conscious wakefulness. Another example comes from stud-
ies of attention. It is sometimes said that we are conscious of things we 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   742
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   742

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

743

pay attention to. Thus experiments on attention may tell us something 
about consciousness. Other brain functions that may give us insight into 
consciousness include our ability to integrate information from sensory 
systems, make decisions about sensory input, and so on. 

 The  hard problem of consciousness  is the experience itself. We ex-
perience the emotion called happiness, the sound of a saxophone, the color 
blue. Why and how do these subjective experiences arise from physical pro-
cesses? When a baby cries, a mother’s soothing touch evokes some pattern 
of activity in the child’s brain, but why is the internal experience a pleasant 
one rather than a feeling of pain, such as the smell of burnt toast, or the 
sound of a car’s horn? We can look for neural activity associated with these 
experiences (the easy part of the problem), but understanding why the ex-
perience is the way it is seems much harder. In reality, none of these prob-
lems we’ve mentioned is easy; it may have been more appropriate to refer 
to the hard problems of consciousness and the seemingly impossible prob-
lem! At any rate, our discussion here will be limited to the “easy” problems. 

 Neural Correlates of Consciousness 
 For  centuries,  the  study  of  consciousness  was  in  the  hands  of  philoso-
phers; it was widely considered beyond the reach of experimental science. 
In recent years, this attitude has changed, and a spectrum of scientists 
are cutting trails through the challenging landscape of consciousness. To 
make headway, we should ask questions that offer some hope of solution 
rather than going immediately after the mysteries of internal experience. 
Christof Koch and Francis Crick, who was awarded a Nobel Prize for his 
work  on  the  structure  of  DNA,  were  two  pioneers  who  collaborated  to 
bring a neuroscientiﬁ c approach to the study of consciousness (Box 21.3). 
Koch deﬁ ned  neural correlates of consciousness   (NCC)  as the mini-
mal neuronal events sufﬁ cient for a speciﬁ c conscious percept. In other 
words,  what  must  happen  in  which  neurons  for  you  to  experience  the 
taste of a strawberry or the feeling of joy? 

 A general experimental approach that has been taken starts with vi-
sual images presented to the eyes that can be seen in two different ways, 
called bistable images. Well-known examples are shown in Figure 21.22. 
The question we are interested in is what happens to brain activity when 
a person or animal switches from one percept to another? For example, in 
Figure 21.22c, at one moment, you see a bunny and later you see a duck 
(but not both at the same time). Since the image is always the same, the 
hypothesis is that changes in neural activity that correlate with changes 
in perception may be related to our conscious awareness of one object or 
the other. Experiments along these lines have been conducted both in an-
imals with single neuron recordings and in humans with PET and fMRI. 

 Neuronal  Correlates  of  Alternating  Perception  in  Binocular  Rivalry.  
Binocular rivalry is a visual effect that has been put to good use exploring 
the neural basis of conscious awareness. In  binocular rivalry , different 
images are seen by the two eyes, and perceptual awareness alternates be-
tween the two images. For example, if one eye sees vertical lines and the 
other sees horizontal lines, a person will perceive alternations at random 
times between only vertical lines, only horizontal lines, and sometimes a 
patchwork of the two orientations. The two images are always the same 
and both eyes are always open, so what and where is something switching 
inside the brain? 

 An experiment along these lines was conducted by David Sheinberg and 
Nikos Logothetis, then at the Baylor College of Medicine. Recordings were 

▲ FIGURE 21.22
Bistable images can be perceived two 
different ways.  (a) The face-vase illu-
sion. (b) The Necker cube can appear to 
have either the surface bordered by 
green or the surface bordered by red 
closest to the observer. (c) A duck or a 
bunny?

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   743
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   743

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

744

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 21.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Tracking the Neuronal Footprints of Consciousness
by Christof Koch

It was an everyday occurrence in the summer of 1988 that 

set my life on a new path while I was teaching summer school 
in Woods Hole on Cape Cod. I had taken an aspirin, but my 
toothache persisted. Lying in bed, I couldn’t sleep because 
of the pounding in my lower molar. Trying to distract myself 
from  the  pain,  I  wondered  how  it  came  to  hurt  so  much.  I 
knew  that  an  inﬂ ammation  of  the  tooth  pulp  sends  electri-
cal  activity  up  one  of  the  branches  of  the  trigeminal  nerve. 
After the signal passes through several relay stations, neo-
cortical neurons become active and discharge their electrical 
impulses. Such bioelectrical activity in this part of the brain 
goes hand in hand with the consciousness of pain, includ-
ing its awful, aching feeling. But how could this physical pro-
cess trigger elusive, nonphysical feelings? It’s just a bunch of 
ions—Na⫹, K⫹, Cl⫺, Ca2⫹ and so on—moving across mem-
branes,  in  principle  no  different  from  similar  ions  sloshing 
around in my liver or electrons moving onto and off transistor 
gates in my laptop. As a physicist, I knew that neither quan-
tum mechanics nor general relativity, the two most powerful 
scientiﬁ c theories that all matter has to obey, make any men-
tion  of  consciousness.  By  dint  of  what  natural  law  could  a 
highly excitable chunk of organized matter exude something 
nonphysical and give rise to subjective states, to ephemeral 
feelings? And so my toothache on that distant summer day 
set  me  on  a  course  to  explore  the  seas  of  consciousness, 
with the brain as my lodestar.

I started what became a 16-year collaboration with Francis 
Crick at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California. Coauthoring 
over 20 papers and book chapters, we advocated for an em-

pirical research program focused on isolating those neurons 
and  brain  regions  that  are  involved  in  generating  a  speciﬁ c 
content of consciousness, such as seeing a horizontal grat-
ing rather than a vertical one or seeing red versus green. We 
felt that no matter what philosophical position people adopt 
in regard to the mind–body problem, ﬁ nding such neuronal 
correlates would be a critical step on the way to an ultimate 
theory of consciousness.

Back in 1990, when Francis and I published our ﬁ rst paper 
on the topic, we were energized by the rediscovery, by Wolf 
Singer and Charlie Gray in Frankfurt, Germany, of 40 Hz syn-
chronized  oscillations  in  the  ﬁ ring  pattern  of  neurons  in  the 
visual cortex of cats. We argued that this so-called “gamma 
band”  activity  was  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  consciousness. 
Reality has turned out more complex than that. Today, it is 
known that such oscillatory activity, widespread in the cortex 
of all species investigated so far, is probably more closely tied 
to  selective  attention  than  to  consciousness,  even  though 
these two processes are often intimately relayed.

We  debated  endlessly  between  ourselves  and  with  a 
small  number  of  colleagues  willing  to  publicly  think  about 
this hitherto banned subject—Nikos Logothetis, Wolf Singer, 
David  Chalmers,  Patricia  Churchland,  Giulio  Tononi,  and 
V.S.  Ramachandran,  to  mention  a  few—about  nerve  cells 
and their circuits, both those that must be involved in con-
sciousness  and  those  that  give  rise  to  the  myriad  types  of 
unconscious behaviors (which we dubbed “zombie systems”) 
such as speed typing, moving the eyes, adjusting limbs in a 
dynamic  environment,  and  so  on.  Today,  the  study  of  the 

made from neurons in inferotemporal cortex (area IT), which we introduced 
as a high-level vision area in Chapter 10. Instead of vertical and horizontal 
lines (or ducks and bunnies), stimuli were used that excited IT neurons. 
Before the experiment, a monkey was trained to pull a left lever if it saw 
an object from the “left object group” and a right lever if it saw an object 
from the “right object group.” For the experiment shown in Figure 21.23, 
the left object group consisted of pictures of starbursts and the right object 
group was composed of pictures of animal and human faces. 

 Once the animal reliably indicated whether an object from the left or 
right group was seen without rivalry, neural recordings in IT were made 
in a rivalry situation. From baseline recordings, the scientists knew that 
the particular cell under study gave a strong response to the presentation 
of a monkey face (to either eye) and little or no response to the starburst 
pattern.  In  the  rivalry  experiment  shown  in  the  ﬁ gure,  a  starburst 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   744
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   744

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

745

neuronal mechanisms underlying both states and content of 
consciousness is carried out by many in both the clinic and 
the laboratory, but in 1990 it helped to have a famous Nobel 
Prize–winning  biologist  as  a  coauthor  (in  particular  before 
attaining the holy state of tenure).

We  continued  to  work  together  until  Francis’s  death  on 
July 28, 2004. Two days before, he phoned me on the way 
to  the  hospital,  calmly  informing  me  that  his  comments  on 
our last manuscript—on a rather obscure brain region called 
the claustrum, an elongated sheet of neurons underneath the 
neocortex, and its putative role in consciousness—would be 
delayed.  His  wife,  Odile  Crick,  recounted  how  in  the  hours 
before  his  death  Francis  hallucinated  about  rapidly  ﬁ ring 
claustrum neurons—a scientist to the end. Today, as I write 

these lines, a new clinical case study of an epileptic patient 
has  just  been  published.  The  neurologists  stimulated  elec-
trodes implanted into the patient’s brain to discover the lo-
cation where her seizures originated. One electrode, located 
close  to  the  left  claustrum,  turned  the  patient’s  conscious-
ness immediately off, repeatedly, and reversibly, for as long 
as  the  electrical  stimulation  lasted.  The  patient  stared,  be-
came unresponsive to commands, and later had no recollec-
tion of these episodes. Ever data-hungry, how Francis would 
have loved this!
References:
Koubeissi MZ, et al. 2014. Electrical stimulation of a small brain 
area reversibly disrupts consciousness. Epilepsy and Behavior 
37:32–35.

Figure A
 The neuronal correlates of consciousness (NCC) are deﬁ ned as the minimal neuronal events jointly sufﬁ cient for any one speciﬁ c conscious 
percept (here, seeing a German Shepherd). (Source: Courtesy of Christof Koch).

 stimulus  was  presented  to  the  left  eye  and  a  monkey  face  to  the  right 
eye. Based on its training, the monkey alternately pulled the left or right 
lever  suggesting  that  it  alternately  perceived  the  starburst  or  monkey 
face. The striking result seen in the neural recording is that the response 
of the IT neuron ﬂ uctuated between low and high activity roughly in sync 
with the animal pulling the left or right lever, even though the stimulus 
was ﬁ xed. 

 The results from this experiment and others indicate that there is a 
correspondence between changes in the activity of IT neurons and percep-
tion. The implication is that binocular rivalry produces an alternation in 
the conscious awareness the monkey has of the rivalrous images and that 
neural activity in IT may be a neural correlate of this awareness. Similar 
experiments  in  other  brain  areas  of  the  monkey  showed  that  with  the 
rivalry  paradigm  the  neural–perceptual  correspondence  was  relatively 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   745
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   745

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

746

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

left eye

right eye

Visual
stimulus:

Lever pulled:

left

AND

left

right

left

right

c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
S

i

100

50

0

0

5

10

Time (sec)

15

20

▲ FIGURE 21.23
Responses of a monkey IT neuron during binocular rivalry.  Preliminary testing 
showed that this neuron in inferotemporal cortex was excited by a photograph of 
a monkey face but not by a starburst pattern. The top row shows the visual stim-
ulus the monkey saw. First, the starburst was shown (blue shading) followed by 
an ambiguous stimulus (pink shading); both of these stimuli were ineffective in 
driving the neuron. Next shown was the critical rivalrous condition with the star-
burst to the left eye and the monkey face to the right eye (orange shading). 
Finally, the monkey face was shown alone (blue shading). The second row, below 
the dashed line, shows which lever the monkey pulled. When the starburst or 
monkey face was shown alone, the animal appropriately pulled the left or right 
lever, respectively. In the rivalrous condition, the animal first pulled the left lever, 
then the right, and finally the left again. The bottom row, below the solid horizon-
tal line, shows that with fixed visual input the IT neuron was much less active 
when the monkey pulled the left lever than when it pulled the right lever. The ver-
tical line segments show individual extracellularly recorded action potentials 
above a smoothed response histogram. (Source: Adapted from Sheinberg and 
Logothetis 1997, Fig. 3.)

 uncommon  in  early  areas  such  as  V1  and  V2  and  became  almost  uni-
versal in IT. For this reason it is speculated that the early areas are less 
likely to be part of an NCC than area IT. 

 Visual Awareness and Human Brain Activity.  Rivalry experiments have 
also been conducted with human subjects while brain activity is recorded 
using  fMRI.  An  example  is  shown  in  Figure  21.24.  Rather  than  using 
separate images presented to the left and right eye, a composite image 
was shown to both eyes; glasses with red and green ﬁ lters assured that 
one eye saw only the image of the face and the other eye only the house. 
Subjects indicated which percept they had at different times. Recordings 
were made from two areas in the temporal lobe. We discussed the fusi-
form face area (FFA) in Chapter 10 because it appears to respond pref-
erentially  to  pictures  of  faces.  The  parahippocampal  place  area  (PPA) 
responds to pictures of houses and other places but not to other classes 
of stimuli. As subjects reported alternations between the face and house 
percepts, FFA and PPA activity was averaged at each transition. In the 
rivalry condition, house-to-face perceptual transitions were accompanied 
by  decreases  in  PPA  activity  (red  lines)  and  increases  in  FFA  activity 
(blue lines) (see Figure 21.24a). At face-to-house transitions, FFA activity 
went down and PPA activity up. Similar alternations in FFA and PPA ac-
tivity were seen in non-rivalry conditions in which only the face or house 
was shown at a time to one eye (see Figure 21.24b). The alternating pat-
terns of brain activity in FFA and PPA seen in Figure 21.24a occur during 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   746
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   746

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

747

(a) Rivalry

Stimulus

Percept

(b) Non-rivalry

Stimulus

l

a
n
g
s
 
I

i

R
M
%

 

l

a
n
g
s
 
I

i

R
M
%

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

House

Face

FFA

PPA

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Face

House

PPA

FFA

–8

–4

4

12

0.0

4

8

0

8
Time from reported perceptual switch (s)

12

–8

–4

0

esuoH

Face

Face

esuoH

FFA

PPA

–8

–4

0

4

8

12

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

PPA

FFA

–8

–4

0

4

8

12

Time from reported stimulus switch (s)

▲ FIGURE 21.24
Human brain activity during binocular rivalry recorded with fMRI.  (a) In the ri-
valry condition a subject viewed the top visual stimulus through glasses with red 
and green lenses so that one eye saw a face and the other eye saw a house. The 
subject alternately perceived the face and house (“percept”). fMRI was used to 
measure brain activity in two temporal lobe areas: the fusiform face area (FFA) 
that responds more to faces than other stimuli, and the parahippocampal place 
area (PPA) that responds to houses and places but not to faces. The data are 
 averaged over many perceptual transitions from house to face and face to house. 
Even though the stimulus is fixed, the FFA is more active when the face is per-
ceived (blue line) and the PPA is more active when the house is seen (red line). 
(b) In the non-rivalry condition, the face and house stimuli were shown alternately 
to one eye. Responses from the FFA and PPA are consistent with the presenta-
tion of the face or house stimulus. (Source: Rees et al., 2002, Fig. 4.)

constant visual input, suggesting that activity in these areas may be an 
NCC for faces and houses. 

 A variety of approaches other than binocular rivalry have also been used 
to explore neural correlates of consciousness. An interesting  example is 
visual imagery in which a person is instructed to imagine a visual image 
in their “mind’s eye.” Give it a try: create an image of the house you live in 
and imagine walking around the house counting the windows as you go. 
There is evidence suggesting that imagery activates some of the same vi-
sual processes driven by external visual stimuli, so imagery seems a valid 
method for exploring visual consciousness. Gabriel Kreiman and Christof 
Koch at Caltech with Itzhak Fried at the University of California, Los 
Angeles,  conducted  an  imagery  experiment  that  included  recordings 
from human neurons. For the clinical assessment of epileptic foci, elec-
trodes were placed in a variety of brain structures. The neuron shown in 
Figure 21.25 was located in entorhinal cortex, an area in the medial tem-
poral lobe that provides input to the hippocampus. After trying a variety 
of visual stimuli, it was determined that the neuron responded vigorously 
to a photograph of dolphins, but little response was evoked by a picture of 
a girl’s face (see Figure 21.25a). The subject was then asked to close his 
eyes. His task was to imagine the photo of the dolphins when a high tone 
was presented and imagine the girl’s face with a low tone. Figure 21.25b 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   747
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   747

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

748

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 21.25
A human neuron active during visual 
 imagery.  (a) A neuron in a human subject’s 
entorhinal cortex is excited by presentations 
of a photograph of dolphins (green horizon-
tal lines) but not by a photograph of a girl’s 
face (red horizontal lines). (b) When the sub-
ject was asked to imagine the pictures in 
his “mind’s eye” in response to auditory 
cues, the neuron was much more active 
while the dolphins were imagined than the 
face. (Source: Adapted from Crick et al., 
2004, Fig. 5.)

(a)  

(b)  

Visual
presentation

1000 msec

Visual
imagery

1000 msec

shows  the  response  of  the  entorhinal  neuron  during  imagery.  The  re-
sponses  aren’t  identical  to  the  visually  evoked  responses,  but  there  is 
clearly more activity when the person imagines the dolphin photo than 
the face photo. In this case, might entorhinal cortex be part of an NCC? 

 Challenges in the Study of Consciousness.  Consciousness is a subject of 
great interest and discussion, but it is slippery to pin down. In an effort to 
be concrete, our discussion has focused on neural correlates of conscious-
ness  (the “easy”  problems). We  have  seen  several  brain  areas  in  which 
activity changes in a manner correlated with conscious awareness. These 
candidate NCC areas are joined by more that we have not discussed. In 
addition  to  the  fMRI  studies,  electrode  recordings  made  in  a  range  of 
cortical  areas  in  animals  and  humans  show  responses  correlated  with 
awareness even in single cells. Taken together, the experimental ﬁ ndings 
are encouraging that baby steps may take us closer to an understanding 
of consciousness, at least in a limited sense. 

 That  said,  challenges  abound  in  the  interpretation  of  consciousness 
studies. The goal in the search for neural correlates of consciousness is to 
ﬁ nd the minimal brain activity sufﬁ cient for some conscious experience. 
The word “minimal” poses some problems. When NCC areas are proposed, 
one must always consider the possibility of “contamination.” Might the 
neural activity under study be a prerequisite for the conscious experience 
or  a  consequence  of  the  experience  but  not  the  neural  substrate  of  the 
experience? Might the NCC actually be coordinated or correlated activity 
spread across multiple brain areas rather than the activity of any indi-
vidual area? As attention is usually linked to conscious awareness, might 
activity in a candidate NCC confound attention with awareness? 

 The connection between attention and consciousness is important and 
controversial. For many years, these words were taken to be nearly syn-
onymous. However, recent perceptual experiments have demonstrated 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   748
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   748

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER 21    THE RESTING BRAIN, ATTENTION, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

749

that it is possible to have your attention drawn to an object but still not 
perceive it. The implication is that attention is or can be independent of 
awareness.  There  are  also  studies  reporting  the  opposite,  that  aware-
ness  can  occur  without  attention,  although  that  conclusion  remains 
contentious. 

 Finally, there is uncertainty about where in the brain NCCs are ob-
served. We discussed several experiments that used binocular rivalry to 
locate NCCs. Unfortunately, the various studies do not ﬁ t neatly together. 
For example, it has been found using fMRI that brain activity stretching 
from early visual areas such as the LGN and V1 to later visual areas such 
as IT changes systematically when people and animals report switches 
in rivalrous percepts. Contrast this with animal experiments using elec-
trodes that show single cell response modulation in extrastriate cortex 
but much less in earlier structures. The difference may be a technical fac-
tor associated with the recording techniques or perhaps the spatial scale 
and magnitude of conscious modulation. Another conclusion reached in a 
recent fMRI study is that some investigations of NCCs do not adequately 
control  attention.  In  other  words,  awareness  may  be  reﬂ ected  only  in 
later areas; what looks like awareness correlations in earlier areas may 
actually reﬂ ect changes in attention rather than awareness. 

 Despite the concerns we’ve discussed, the neuroscientiﬁ c investigation 
of consciousness has made huge strides in the past 20 years. Examining 
situations in which a single sensory input, visual or otherwise, gives rise 
to more than one percept offers fascinating opportunities for identifying 
neural correlates of consciousness. This leaves open the “hard problem” of 
consciousness, but it is a start. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 In  this  chapter,  we  have  explored  the  dynamics  of  brain  activity  at  a 
broad  scale.  Consistent  changes  between  the  brain  at  rest  and  the  be-
haviorally active brain have been used to deﬁ ne a default mode network. 
Moving from a restful state to an active one appears to involve a global 
switch in brain function from the default pattern to processing tailored 
to behavioral needs. We cannot say with certainty what the resting state 
activities  are,  but  they  likely  include  monitoring  the  environment  and 
 daydreaming. 

 When we studied sensory and motor systems, we did so in isolation. 
The reality of behavior is obviously different: Sensory information comes 
in, we attend to a small portion of it that is momentarily important, and 
we  generate  motor  outputs.  Attention  is  a  crucial  link  in  this  process. 
Some animals can surely function without attention, having nervous sys-
tems that hardwire behavioral responses to speciﬁ c types of sensory input 
(e.g., threats). However, attention confers ﬂ exibility. In some situations, 
attention is “grabbed,” but in many others, we use attention as a tool to 
focus our mental resources. We have seen that this involves a network of 
brain areas that, based on thoughts and goals, constructs priority maps 
for the allocation of attention followed by selective enhanced processing 
in sensory cortex. 

 How we become consciously aware of the information we attend to re-
mains a mystery. We have sidestepped the “hard problem of conscious-
ness,” the reasons why experiences feel the way they do. On the other hand, 
progress is being made in the hunt for neural correlates of consciousness. 
As consciousness involves holding information in mind, it surely involves 
interactions with the memory systems we will explore in Chapter 24. 

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   749
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   749

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

750

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

K E Y   T E R M S

Introduction
attention (p. 720)
consciousness (p. 720)

Resting State Brain Activity
resting state activity (p. 720)
default mode network (p. 722)

Attention
exogenous attention (p. 725)
bottom–up attention (p. 725)
top–down attention (p. 725)

endogenous attention (p. 725)
spotlight of attention (p. 728)
pulvinar nucleus (p. 734)
frontal eye ﬁ elds (FEF) (p. 735)
salience map (p. 736)
priority map (p. 736)
lateral intraparietal cortex 

(area LIP) (p. 737)

neglect syndrome (p. 737)
frontoparietal attention 

network (p. 741)

Consciousness
easy problems of consciousness 

hard problem of consciousness 

(p. 742)

(p. 743)

neural correlates of 

consciousness (p. 743)
binocular rivalry (p. 743)

Box 21.1
attention-deﬁ cit hyperactivity 

disorder (ADHD) (p. 724)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What areas of the resting brain are active, and what might they be doing?
2.  What behavioral advantages are produced by attention?
3.  What neurophysiological data are consistent with the concept of a spotlight of attention?
4.  How are shifts in attention and eye movements related?
5.  How might a salience map guide bottom–up attention?
6.  In what ways is hemispatial neglect different from blindness in half of the visual ﬁ eld?
7.  Why  can’t  the  identiﬁ cation  of  neural  correlates  of  attention  answer  the  “hard  problem  of 

 consciousness”?

8.  How is binocular rivalry used to explore conscious awareness?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, inten-
tion, and priority in the parietal lobe. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience 33:1–21.

Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. 
2008. The brain’s default network: anatomy, 
function, and relevance to disease. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences 1124:1–38.

Cohen MA, Dennett DC. 2011. Consciousness 

cannot be separated from function. Trends in 
Cognitive Science 15:358–364.

Koch C, Greenﬁ eld S. 2007. How does conscious-
ness happen? Scientiﬁ c American 297:76–83.

Miller EK, Buschman TJ. 2013. Cortical circuits 
for the control of attention. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 23:216–222.

Noudoost B, Chang MH, Steimetz NA, Moore T. 

2010. Top-down control of visual attention. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 20:183–190.
Raichle ME, Snyder AZ. 2007. A default mode of 

brain function: a brief history of an evolving 
idea. Neuroimage 37:1083–1090.

Shipp S. 2004. The brain circuitry of attention. 

Trends in Cognitive Science 8:223–230.

719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   750
719-750_Bear_21_revised_final.indd   750

12/20/14   7:04 AM
12/20/14   7:04 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Mental Illness

INTRODUCTION
MENTAL ILLNESS AND THE BRAIN

Psychosocial Approaches to Mental Illness
Biological Approaches to Mental Illness

The Promise and Challenge of Molecular Medicine in Psychiatry

ANXIETY DISORDERS

A Description of Anxiety Disorders

Panic Disorder
Agoraphobia
 BOX 22.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks

Other Disorders Characterized by Increased Anxiety

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Biological Bases of Anxiety Disorders

The Stress Response
Regulation of the HPA Axis by the Amygdala and Hippocampus

Treatments for Anxiety Disorders

Psychotherapy
Anxiolytic Medications

AFFECTIVE DISORDERS

A Description of Affective Disorders

Major Depression
Bipolar Disorder
 BOX 22.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: A Magical Orange Grove in a Nightmare

Biological Bases of Affective Disorders

The Monoamine Hypothesis
The Diathesis–Stress Hypothesis
Anterior Cingulate Cortex Dysfunction

Treatments for Affective Disorders

Electroconvulsive Therapy
Psychotherapy
Antidepressants
Lithium
Deep Brain Stimulation
 BOX 22.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Tuning Depression Circuits, by Helen Mayberg

SCHIZOPHRENIA

A Description of Schizophrenia
Biological Bases of Schizophrenia

Genes and the Environment
The Dopamine Hypothesis
The Glutamate Hypothesis
Treatments for Schizophrenia
CONCLUDING REMARKS

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   751
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   751

751751
751751

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

752

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

Neurology  is a branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treat-
ment of nervous system disorders. We have discussed many neurological 
disorders in this book, ranging from multiple sclerosis to aphasia. While 
they are signiﬁ cant and fascinating in their own right, neurological dis-
orders also help illustrate the role of physiological processes in normal 
brain function, such as the importance of myelin for action potential con-
duction and the role of the frontal lobe in language. 

Psychiatry ,  on  the  other  hand,  has  a  different  focus.  This  branch  of 
medicine is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of disorders that 
affect  the   mind ,  or   psyche.   (In  Greek  mythology,  the  beautiful  young 
woman  Psyche  was  the  personiﬁ cation  of  the  human  soul.)  Aspects  of 
brain  function  that  are  disturbed  by  mental  illness—our  fears,  moods, 
and thoughts—were once considered beyond the reach of neuroscience. 
But, as we saw in the earlier chapters of Part III, many higher brain func-
tions have begun to yield their secrets. Today, there is hope that neurosci-
ence will also solve the riddle of mental illness. 

 In this chapter, we will discuss some of the most severe and prevalent 
psychiatric disorders: anxiety disorders, affective disorders, and schizo-
phrenia. Once again, we will see that a great deal can be learned about 
the nervous system by studying what happens when things go wrong. 

 MENTAL ILLNESS AND THE BRAIN 
MENTTAL ILLLNESS AND THE BBRAIN 

 Human  behavior  is  the  product  of  brain  activity,  and  the  brain  is  the 
product of two interacting factors: heredity and environment. Obviously, 
one important determinant of your individualism is your complement of 
DNA, which, unless you have an identical twin, is unique. This means 
that  physically  your  brain,  like  your  ﬁ ngerprints,  is  different  from  all 
others. A second factor that makes your brain unique is your history of 
personal experience. Experiences can include trauma and disease, but, 
as we saw in the case of somatosensory map plasticity (see Chapter 12), 
the sensory environment itself can leave a permanent mark on the brain. 
(We’ll return to this theme in Part IV of this book when we discuss de-
velopment, learning, and memory.) Thus, despite the gross physical simi-
larities you might share with a genetic twin, at a ﬁ ne scale, neither your 
brains nor your behaviors are identical. To complicate matters further, 
variations  in  genetic  makeup  and  past  experience  make  the  brain  dif-
ferentially susceptible to modiﬁ cation by subsequent experiences. These 
genetic and experiential variations, all ultimately expressed as physical 
changes in the brain, give rise to the full range of behaviors exhibited by 
the human population. 

 Health and illness are two points along a continuum of bodily function, 
and the same can be said for mental health and mental illness. While we 
all have our odd characteristics, an individual is said to be “mentally ill” 
at the point when the person has a diagnosable disorder of thought, mood, 
or behavior that causes distress or impaired functioning. An unfortunate 
legacy of our past ignorance about brain function is the common distinc-
tion  drawn  between  “physical”  and  “mental”  health.  The  philosophical 
roots  of  this  distinction  can  be  traced  to  Descartes’s  proposed  separa-
tion of body and mind (see Chapter 1). Disorders of the body (which, for 
Descartes, included the brain) had an organic basis and were the concern 
of  physicians  and  medicine.  Disorders  of  the  mind,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  considered  spiritual  or  moral  and  were  the  concern  of  clergymen 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   752
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   752

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

753

▲ FIGURE 22.1
Sigmund Freud.  Freud proposed psy-
choanalytic theories of mental illness.

and religion. The fact that most disorders of mood, thought, and behavior 
have, until very recently, remained resistant to biological explanations or 
treatments has reinforced this dichotomy. 

 Psychosocial Approaches to Mental Illness 
 An  important  advance  in  the  secularization  of  mental  illness  was  the 
emergence  of  the  medical  discipline  of  psychiatry,  devoted  to  treating 
disorders of human behavior. The Austrian neurologist and psychiatrist 
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) had an enormous impact on the new ﬁ eld, 
especially in the United States (Figure 22.1). Freud’s theory of  psycho-
analysis  is based on two major assumptions that (1) much of mental life 
is unconscious (beyond awareness), and (2) past experiences, particularly 
in childhood, shape how a person will feel and respond throughout life. 
According to Freud, mental illness results when the unconscious and con-
scious elements of the psyche come into conﬂ ict. The way to resolve the 
conﬂ ict, and to treat the illness, is to help the patient unearth the hid-
den secrets of the unconscious. Often, these dark secrets are related to 
incidents  (e.g.,  physical,  mental,  or  sexual  abuse)  that  occurred  during 
childhood and were suppressed from consciousness. 

 A different theory of personality, championed by Harvard University 
psychologist B. F. Skinner (1904–1990), is based on the assumption that 
many behaviors are learned responses to the environment.  Behaviorism  
rejects the notions of underlying conﬂ icts and the unconscious and focuses 
instead on observable behaviors and their control by the environment. In 
Chapter 16, we learned about some of the forces that motivate behavior. 
The probability of a type of behavior increases when it satisﬁ es a craving 
or produces a pleasurable sensation (positive reinforcement), and it de-
creases when the consequences are deemed unpleasant or unsatisfactory 
(negative reinforcement). According to this theory, mental disorders may 
represent maladaptive behaviors that are learned. Treatment consists of 
active attempts to “unlearn” through behavior modiﬁ cation, either by in-
troducing new types of behavioral reinforcement or by providing an oppor-
tunity to observe and recognize behavioral responses that are appropriate. 
 Such “psychosocial” approaches to treating mental illness have a sound 
neurobiological basis. The brain is structurally modiﬁ ed through learning 
and  early  experience,  and  these  modiﬁ cations  will  alter  behavioral  re-
sponses. Treatment relies on  psychotherapy , the use of verbal communi-
cation to help the patient. Of course, “talk therapy” is not appropriate for 
all mental disorders, any more than a particular antibiotic is appropriate 
for all infections. However, until the revolution in biological psychiatry, 
variations in psychotherapy were the only tools available to psychiatrists. 
Moreover, despite the shift in “blame” away from one’s moral character 
and  toward  early  childhood  experience,  psychotherapy  contributed  to 
the  stigmatizing  notion  that  mental  illness  (in  contrast  to  physical  ill-
ness) could be overcome by willpower alone. Freud himself recognized the 
shortcomings of psychotherapy, stating that the “deﬁ ciencies in our [the 
psychoanalytic] description would probably vanish if we were already in 
a position to replace the psychological terms by physiological or chemical 
ones”  (1920,  p.  54).  Now,  nearly  a  century  later,  neuroscience  has  ad-
vanced to a point where this goal seems attainable. 

 Biological Approaches to Mental Illness 
 A spectacular success in the early biological diagnosis and treatment of 
mental illness actually occurred during Freud’s time. A major  psychiatric 
disorder at the turn of the twentieth century was called  general paresis 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   753
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   753

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

754

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

of  the  insane ,  afﬂ icting  10–15%  of  all  institutionalized  psychiatric  pa-
tients.  The  disorder  had  a  progressive  course,  starting  with  symptoms 
of mania—excitement, euphoria, and grandiose delusions—and evolved 
to cognitive deterioration and, ultimately, paralysis and death. Initially 
blamed on psychological factors, the cause was eventually traced to in-
fection of the brain with  Treponema pallidum , the microorganism that 
causes syphilis. Once the cause was known, increasingly effective treat-
ments  quickly  followed.  By  1910,  German  microbiologist  Paul  Ehrlich 
had established that the drug arsphenamine could act as a “magic  bullet,” 
killing the  T.  pallidum  in the blood without damaging its human host. 
Eventually,  the  antibiotic  penicillin  (discovered  in  1928  by  British  mi-
crobiologist  Alexander  Fleming)  was  found  to  be  so  effective  in  killing 
the microorganism that established brain infections could be completely 
eradicated. Thus, when penicillin became widely available by the end of 
World War II, a major psychiatric disorder was virtually eliminated. 

 A number of other mental illnesses can be traced directly to biologi-
cal causes. For example, a dietary deﬁ ciency in niacin (a B vitamin) can 
cause  agitation,  impaired  reasoning,  and  depression.  The  penetration 
of HIV (the AIDS virus) into the brain causes progressive cognitive and 
behavioral  impairments.  A  form  of  obsessive-compulsive  disorder  (dis-
cussed later) has been linked to an autoimmune response triggered by 
streptococcal  pharyngitis  (strep  throat)  in  children.  Understanding  the 
causes of these diseases will lead to treatments and, ultimately, to cures 
of the associated mental disorders. 

 The  Promise  and  Challenge  of  Molecular  Medicine  in  Psychiatry.   Of 
course, serious mental disorders also occur in well-nourished and infec-
tion-free individuals. Although the causes in most cases remain to be de-
termined, it is safe to say that the roots of these disorders lie in altered 
brain  anatomy,  chemistry,  and  function. An  exciting  new  way  to  under-
stand brain malfunction has been unleashed by knowledge of the human 
genome. As in other complex diseases like cancer, gene mutations can cause 
or confer risk for psychiatric disease, and major efforts are now well un-
derway to identify these genes. The approach of using genetic information 
to develop a treatment is sometimes referred to as  molecular medicine . 
 A path from gene to treatment is illustrated in Figure 22.2. Searching 
the DNA of individuals with a psychiatric disease may reveal causative 
gene mutations that can be reproduced in genetically engineered mice. 
By comparing the neurobiology of these animals with normal, “wild type” 
mice, researchers can determine how the brain functions differently in 
association with these mutations. Discovery of an abnormal physiological 
condition,  or   pathophysiology ,  may  suggest  biological  processes  that 
can be targeted with drug therapy—for example, too much or too little of 
a neurotransmitter. If drug candidates succeed in human clinical trials, 
then new therapeutics can be introduced to treat the disease. 

 Despite the enormous promise of molecular medicine, brain diseases 
present some unique challenges. First, mental disorders are diagnosed by 
clinicians based on how they appear or are described by the patient (signs 
and symptoms), not by knowledge of their underlying cause (etiology). It 
is now understood that the same diagnosis may arise from many causes, 
so no single treatment approach is likely to succeed in all patients, thus 
complicating clinical trials. Second, not all mental illnesses have a clear 
genetic basis, and for those that do, a large number of genes have been 
implicated. In some cases, it appears that pathophysiology may be caused 
by inheritance of numerous small mutations in many different genes. In 
these cases, although no single mutation has much effect, together they 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   754
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   754

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

755

Human psychiatric

disease

Gene discovery

Mouse disease

model

Disease

pathophysiology

New medicines

Cl

NH

O

H3C

Target identification
and drug development

Human clinical

trials

▲  FIGURE 22.2
Molecular medicine.  A path from genes 
to treatments for psychiatric disorders.

greatly increase the risk for a mental illness (metaphorically, death by 
a thousand small knife cuts). In other cases, duplication or deletion of a 
gene or segment of genes, called  gene copy number variants , might be the 
single cause of the diagnosis. Although each speciﬁ c variant occurs rarely 
in the human population, variation in many different segments of DNA 
can result in the same diagnosis (by analogy, death by a gunshot wound; 
although the end result is the same, each fatal wound can uniquely  affect 
a  different  part  of  the  body).  This  genetic  complexity  interferes  with 
 development of broadly useful animal models. 

 A radical new approach to overcome these challenges is to study the 
pathophysiology  of  neurons  from  individual  patients.  Don’t  worry;  this 
does not entail a brain biopsy! Rather, the approach takes advantage of 
the  recent discovery that if skin cells scraped from a patient are treated 
with the correct mixture of chemicals, they can be transformed into what 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   755
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   755

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

756

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

are called  induced pluripotent stem cells , or simply iPSCs. Treatment 
with another mixture of chemicals can then cause these cells to differ-
entiate into neurons that can be kept alive in a culture dish. These neu-
rons can then be compared with those from healthy people to determine 
their pathophysiology. However, the major challenge with this approach 
is that the brain is far more complicated than a single neuron. The brain 
is  composed of myriad cell types that are richly interconnected, and gene 
mutations manifest differently in different types of neurons. Treatment 
for  pathophysiology  of  a  neuron  may  not  be  appropriate  for  the  patho-
physiology of a brain. 

 Despite these sobering reminders that brains and brain diseases are 
extraordinarily  complex,  there  is  much  optimism  in  the  ﬁ eld  that  the 
challenges  can  and  soon  will  be  overcome.  Now  let’s  explore  the  major 
psychiatric disorders and see how neuroscience has already both provided 
insight about their possible causes and contributed to their treatment. 

 ANXIETY DISORDERS 
ANXIETY DDISORDERS 

 Fear is an adaptive response to threatening situations. As we learned in 
Chapter 18, fear is expressed by the autonomic ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight response, 
mediated by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system 
(ANS)  (see  Chapter  15).  Many  fears  are  innate  and  species-speciﬁ c. 
A mouse does not need to be taught to fear a cat. But fear is also learned. 
One touch is usually all it takes to cause a horse to fear an electric fence. 
The  adaptive  value  of  fear  is  obvious.  As  the  old  aviation  saying  goes, 
“There are old pilots, and there are bold pilots, but there are no old bold 
pilots.”  But  fear  is  not  an  appropriate  or  adaptive  response  in  all  cir-
cumstances. An inappropriate expression of fear characterizes  anxiety 
 disorders , the most common of psychiatric disorders. 

 A Description of Anxiety Disorders 
 It has been estimated that in any given year, over 15% of Americans will 
suffer  from  one  of  the  recognized  anxiety  disorders  listed  in  Table  22.1. 
Although they differ in terms of the real or imagined stimuli that evoke the 
anxiety, and the behavioral responses the individual uses to attempt to re-
duce it, these disorders have in common the pathological expression of fear. 

TABLE 22.1  Anxiety Disorders
Name
NaNameme

Description
DeDescscririptptioionn

Panic disorder

Agoraphobia

Generalized 

anxiety disorder
Speciﬁ c phobias

Frequent panic attacks consisting of discrete periods with 

the sudden onset of intense apprehension, fearfulness, or 
terror, often associated with feelings of impending doom
Anxiety about, or the avoidance of, places or situations from 

which escape might be difﬁ cult or embarrassing, or in which 
help may not be available in the event of a panic attack
At least 6 months of persistent and excessive anxiety 

and worry

Clinically signiﬁ cant anxiety provoked by exposure to a 

speciﬁ c feared object or situation, often leading to avoid-
ance behavior

Social phobia

Clinically signiﬁ cant anxiety provoked by exposure to 

certain types of social or performance situations, often 
leading to avoidance behavior

Source: Adapted from American Psychiatric Association, 2013.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   756
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   756

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

757

 Panic Disorder.   Panic attacks  are sudden feelings of intense terror that 
occur  without  warning.  The  symptoms  include  palpitations,  sweating, 
trembling, shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, dizziness, tingling sen-
sations, and chills or blushing. Most people report an overwhelming fear 
that they are dying or “going crazy,” and ﬂ ee from the place where the 
 attack begins, often seeking emergency medical assistance. The  attacks 
are  short-lived,  however,  usually  lasting  less  than  30  minutes.  Panic 
 attacks can occur in response to speciﬁ c stimuli. They may be a feature 
of a number of anxiety disorders, but they can also occur spontaneously. 
 The condition that psychiatrists call  panic disorder  is characterized 
by recurring, seemingly unprovoked panic attacks and a persistent worry 
about  having  further  attacks.  About  2%  of  the  population  suffers  from 
panic disorder, which is twice as common in women as in men. The onset 
of the disorder is most common after adolescence but before the age of 50 
years. Half the individuals who have panic disorder will also suffer from 
major depression (see below), and 25% of them will become alcoholic or 
develop substance-abuse problems. 

 Agoraphobia.   Severe  anxiety  about  being  in  situations  where  escape 
might be difﬁ cult or embarrassing is characteristic of  agoraphobia  (from 
the Greek, for “fear of an open marketplace”). The anxiety leads to avoid-
ance  of  situations  irrationally  perceived  as  threatening,  such  as  being 
alone outside the home, in a crowd of people, in a car or airplane, or on a 
bridge or elevator. Agoraphobia is often an adverse outcome of panic dis-
order, as the situation in Box 22.1 describes. About 5% of the population 
is agoraphobic, with the incidence among women being twice that of men. 

 Other Disorders Characterized by Increased Anxiety 
 Several disorders that are no longer classiﬁ ed by the American Psychiatric 
Association as “anxiety disorders” are nevertheless characterized by in-
creased anxiety. Two of the most prevalent are post-traumatic stress dis-
order and obsessive-compulsive disorder. 

 Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder.   To  a  pathologist,  trauma  refers  to  a 
wound caused by sudden violence. In the realm of psychiatry, the term re-
fers to the psychological wounds of experiencing or witnessing a shocking 
event or events. A long-lasting consequence can be post-traumatic stress 
disorder, or PTSD. The symptoms of PTSD can include increased anxiety, 
intrusive memories, dreams or ﬂ ashbacks of the traumatic experiences, 
irritability, and emotional numbness. PTSD affects 3.5% of the adult pop-
ulation in the United States. 

 Obsessive-Compulsive  Disorder.   People  with   obsessive- compulsive 
disorder  (OCD)   have   obsessions ,  which  are  recurrent,  intrusive 
thoughts, images, ideas, or impulses that the person perceives as being 
inappropriate, grotesque, or forbidden. Common themes are thoughts of 
contamination with germs or body ﬂ uids, thoughts that the sufferer has 
unknowingly  caused  harm  to  someone,  and  violent  or  sexual  impulses. 
These  thoughts  are  recognized  by  the  affected  individual  as  being  for-
eign,  and  they  evoke  considerable  anxiety.  People  with  OCD  also  have 
  compulsions , which are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that are per-
formed to reduce the anxiety associated with obsessions. Examples are 
repeated hand-washing, counting, and checking to make sure that some-
thing is not out of place. OCD affects over 2% of the population, with an 
equal incidence among men and women. The disorder usually appears in 
young adult life, and the symptoms ﬂ uctuate in response to stress levels. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   757
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   757

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

758

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 22.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Agoraphobia with Panic Attacks
To appreciate the distress and disruption caused by anxiety 

disorders, consider the following case history from Nancy C. 
Andreasen’s book, The Broken Brain.

Greg Miller is a 27-year-old unmarried computer program-
mer.  When  asked  about  his  main  problem,  he  replied, 
“I am afraid to leave my house or drive my car.”

The patient’s problems began approximately one year 
ago. At that time he was driving across the bridge that he 
must traverse every day in order to go to work. While driv-
ing in the midst of the whizzing six-lane trafﬁ c, he began 
to think (as he often did) about how awful it would be to 
have an accident on that bridge. His small, vulnerable VW 
convertible could be crumpled like an aluminum beer can, 
and he could die a bloody, painful death or be crippled for 
life. His car could even hurtle over the side of the bridge 
and plunge into the river.

As he thought about these possibilities, he began to 
feel  increasingly  tense  and  anxious.  He  glanced  back 
and forth at the cars on either side of him and became 
frightened that he might run into one of them. Then he 
experienced an overwhelming rush of fear and panic. His 
heart started pounding and he felt as if he were going to 
suffocate. He began to take deeper and deeper breaths, 
but  this  only  increased  his  sense  of  suffocation.  His 
chest  felt  tight  and  he  wondered  if  he  might  be  about 
to die of a heart attack. He certainly felt that something 
dreadful  was  going  to  happen  to  him  quite  soon.  He 
stopped  his  car  in  the  far  right  lane  in  order  to  try  to 
regain control of his body and his feelings. Trafﬁ c piled 
up behind with many honking horns, and drivers pulled 
around him yelling obscenities. On top of his terror, he 
experienced  mortiﬁ cation.  After  about  three  minutes, 
the feeling of panic slowly subsided, and he was able to 

proceed across the bridge and go to work. During the 
remainder  of  the  day,  however,  he  worried  constantly 
about whether or not he would be able to make the re-
turn trip home across the bridge without a recurrence of 
the same crippling fear.

He  managed  to  do  so  that  day,  but  during  the  next 
several  weeks  he  would  begin  to  experience  anxiety  as 
he approached the bridge, and on three or four occasions 
he had a recurrence of the crippling attack of panic. The 
panic attacks began to occur more frequently so that he 
had them daily. By this time he was overwhelmed with fear 
and began to stay home from work, calling in sick each 
day.  He  knew  that  his  main  symptom  was  an  irrational 
fear of driving across the bridge, but he suspected that he 
might also have some type of heart problem. He saw his 
family doctor, who found no evidence of any serious medi-
cal illness, and who told him that his main problem was 
excessive anxiety. The physician prescribed a tranquilizer 
for him and told him to try to return to work.

For the next six months, Greg struggled with his fear 
of driving across the bridge. He was usually unsuccess-
ful  and  continued  to  miss  a  great  deal  of  work.  Finally, 
he was put on disability for a few months and told by the 
company doctor to seek psychiatric treatment. Greg was 
reluctant  and  embarrassed  to  do  this,  and  instead  he 
stayed home most of the time, reading books, listening to 
records, playing chess on his Apple computer, and doing 
various “handy-man” chores around the house. As long as 
he stayed home, he had few problems with anxiety or the 
dreadful attacks of panic. But when he tried to drive his 
car, even to the nearby shopping center, he would some-
times have panic attacks. Consequently, he found himself 
staying home nearly all the time and soon became essen-
tially housebound. (Andreasen, 1984, pp. 65–66)

 Biological Bases of Anxiety Disorders 
 A genetic predisposition has been established for many anxiety disorders. 
Other  anxiety  disorders  appear  to  be  rooted  more  in  the  occurrence  of 
stressful life events. 

 Fear is normally evoked by a threatening stimulus, called a stressor, 
and it is manifest by a response known as the stress response. As men-
tioned  previously,  the  stimulus–response  relationship  can  be  strength-
ened by experience (recall the horse and the electric fence), but it can also 
be weakened. Consider, for example, an expert skier who no longer views a 
precipitous drop as fearful. A healthy person regulates the stress response 
through learning. The hallmark of anxiety disorders is the occurrence of 
an inappropriate stress response either when a stressor is not present or 
when  it  is  not  immediately  threatening.  Thus,  a  key  to  understanding 
anxiety is to understand how the stress response is regulated by the brain. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   758
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   758

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

759

 The Stress Response.  The  stress response  is the coordinated reaction to 
threatening stimuli. It is characterized by the following: 
 •  Avoidance behavior 
 •  Increased vigilance and arousal 
 •  Activation of the sympathetic division of the ANS 
 •  Release of cortisol from the adrenal glands 

 It should come as no surprise that the hypothalamus is centrally in-
volved in orchestrating appropriate humoral, visceromotor, and somatic 
motor  responses  (see  Chapters  15  and  16).  To  get  an  idea  of  how  this 
 response is regulated, let’s focus on the humoral response, which is medi-
ated by the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis  (Figure 22.3). 
 As we learned in Chapter 15, the hormone cortisol (a glucocorticoid) is 
released from the adrenal cortex in response to an elevation in the blood 
level of  adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) . ACTH is released by 
the  anterior  pituitary  gland  in  response  to   corticotropin-releasing 
hormone (CRH) . CRH is released into the blood of the portal circulation 
by parvocellular neurosecretory neurons in the paraventricular nucleus 
of the hypothalamus. Thus, this arm of the stress response can be traced 
back to activation of the CRH-containing neurons of the hypothalamus. 
Much can be learned about anxiety disorders by understanding how the 
activity of these neurons is regulated. For example, when CRH is over-
expressed in genetically engineered mice, the animals display increased 
anxiety-like behaviors. When the receptors for CRH are genetically elimi-
nated from mice, they have less anxiety-like behavior than normal mice. 

Stress

CRH

Hypothalamus

Anterior 
pituitary
gland

Adrenal
gland

ACTH

Kidney

Cortisol

Physiological 
changes
supporting
fight-or-flight 
responses

▲ FIGURE 22.3
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.  The 
HPA axis regulates the secretion of cortisol from 
the adrenal gland in response to stress. CRH is 
the chemical messenger between the paraventricu-
lar nucleus of the hypothalamus and the anterior 
pituitary gland. ACTH released by the pituitary 
gland travels in the bloodstream to the adrenal 
gland lying atop the kidney, where it stimulates 
cortisol release. Cortisol contributes to the body’s 
physiological response to stress.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   759
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   759

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

760

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Bed nucleus
of the stria
terminalis

Amygdala
(beneath overlying
cortex)

Hippocampus
(beneath overlying cortex)

▲ FIGURE 22.4
The location of the amygdala and hippocampus.

 Regulation  of  the  HPA  Axis  by  the  Amygdala  and  Hippocampus.   The 
CRH neurons of the hypothalamus are regulated by two structures that 
were introduced in earlier chapters: the  amygdala  and the  hippocampus  
(Figure 22.4). As we learned in Chapter 18, the amygdala is critical to fear 
responses. Sensory information enters the basolateral amygdala, where it 
is processed and relayed to neurons in the central nucleus. When the cen-
tral nucleus of the amygdala becomes active, the stress response ensues 
(Figure  22.5).  Inappropriate  activation  of  the  amygdala,  as  measured 
using fMRI (see Box 7.3), has been associated with some anxiety disor-
ders. Downstream from the amygdala is a collection of neurons called the 
 bed nucleus of the stria terminalis . The bed nucleus neurons activate the 
HPA axis and the stress response. 

 The  HPA  axis  is  also  regulated  by  the  hippocampus.  However,  hip-
pocampal  activation  suppresses,  rather  than  stimulates,  CRH  release. 

Amygdala

Stress

response

HPA activation

Activation of
sympathetic

nervous system

Avoidance
behavior

Increased
vigilance

Hypothalamus

Periaqueductal

gray matter

Diffuse

modulatory

systems

Central
nucleus

Sensory
information

Amygdala

Basolateral
nuclei

▲ FIGURE 22.5
Control of the stress response by the amygdala.  The amygdala receives as-
cending sensory information from the thalamus as well as descending inputs 
from the neocortex. This information is integrated by the basolateral nuclei and 
is relayed to the central nucleus. Activation of the central nucleus leads to the 
stress response.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   760
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   760

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

761

The  hippocampus  contains  numerous   glucocorticoid  receptors   that 
respond  to  the  cortisol  released  from  the  adrenal  gland  in  response  to 
HPA system activation. Thus, the hippocampus normally participates in 
the feedback regulation of the HPA axis by inhibiting CRH release (and 
the subsequent release of ACTH and cortisol) when circulating cortisol 
levels get too high. Continuous exposure to cortisol, such as during peri-
ods of chronic stress, can cause hippocampal neurons to wither and die 
in experimental animals (see Box 15.1). This degeneration of the hippo-
campus may set off a vicious cycle, in which the stress response becomes 
more pronounced, leading to even greater cortisol release and more hip-
pocampal damage. Human brain imaging studies have shown a decrease 
in the volume of the hippocampus in some people suffering from PTSD. 

 To summarize, the amygdala and the hippocampus regulate the HPA axis 
and the stress response in a push–pull fashion (Figure 22.6). Anxiety disor-
ders have been related to both hyperactivity of the amygdala and diminished 
activity of the hippocampus. It is important to keep in mind, however, that 
the amygdala and hippocampus both receive highly processed  information 
from the neocortex. Indeed, another consistent ﬁ nding in humans with anxi-
ety disorders has been elevated activity of the prefrontal cortex. 

 Treatments for Anxiety Disorders 
 Several  treatments  are  available  for  anxiety  disorders.  In  many  cases, 
patients  respond  well  to  psychotherapy  and  counseling;  in  other  cases, 
speciﬁ c medications are more effective. 

 Psychotherapy.  We have seen that there is a strong learning component 
to fear, so it should not be surprising that psychotherapy can be an effec-
tive treatment for many of the anxiety disorders. The therapist gradually 
increases the exposure of the patient to the stimuli that produce anxiety, re-
inforcing the notion that the stimuli are not dangerous. At the neurobiologi-
cal level, the aim of the psychotherapy is to alter connections in the brain 
such that the real or imagined stimuli no longer evoke the stress response. 

 Anxiolytic  Medications.   Medications  that  reduce  anxiety,  described  as 
 anxiolytic drugs , act by altering chemical synaptic transmission in the 
brain. The major classes of drugs currently used in the treatment of anxiety 
disorders are benzodiazepines and serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors. 
 Recall that GABA is an important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the 
brain. GABA A  receptors are GABA-gated chloride channels that mediate 
fast inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (see Chapter 6). The proper action 
of GABA is critical to the proper functioning of the brain: Too much inhi-
bition results in coma, and too little results in seizures. In addition to its 
GABA-binding site, the GABA A  receptor contains sites where chemicals 
can act to powerfully modulate channel function.  Benzodiazepines  bind 
to one of these sites and act to make GABA much more effective in open-
ing the channel and producing inhibition (Figure 22.7). The site on the 
receptor that binds benzodiazepines is believed to be used normally by a 
naturally occurring brain chemical, although the identity of the endog-
enous molecule has not been established. 

 Benzodiazepines, of which Valium (diazepam) is perhaps the most well 
known, are highly effective treatments for acute anxiety. Indeed, virtu-
ally all drugs that stimulate GABA actions are anxiolytic, including the 
active ingredient in alcoholic beverages, ethanol. A reduction in anxiety 
is likely to explain, at least in part, the widespread social use of alcohol. 
The anxiolytic effects of alcohol are also an obvious reason that anxiety 
disorders and alcohol abuse often go hand-in-hand. 

Amygdala

Hippocampus

+

HPA

–

+

Cortisol

▲ FIGURE 22.6
Push–pull regulation of the HPA axis 
by the amygdala and hippocampus. 
 Amygdala activation stimulates the HPA 
system and the stress response (green 
lines). Hippocampal activation, on the 
other hand, suppresses the HPA system 
(red line). Because the hippocampus has 
glucocorticoid receptors that are sensitive 
to circulating cortisol, it is important in 
the feedback regulation of the HPA axis 
in preventing excessive cortisol  release.

GABA

Benzodiazepine

Ethanol

GABA-gated Cl– channel

(GABAA receptor)

▲ FIGURE 22.7
The action of benzodiazepine.  Benzo-
diazepines bind to a site on the GABAA 
receptor that makes it much more re-
sponsive to GABA, the major inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the forebrain. A dif-
ferent site can bind ethanol and also 
make the receptor more responsive to 
GABA.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   761
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   761

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

762

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 22.8
Diminished binding of radioactive benzodiazepine in a patient with panic dis-
order.  PET scans in the horizontal plane of the brain of a healthy person (left) and 
the brain of a person suffering from panic disorder (right). The color-coding indi-
cates the number of benzodiazepine binding sites in the brain (hot colors indicate 
more; cool colors indicate fewer). The frontal cortex, at the top of the scan, 
shows many fewer binding sites in the individual with panic disorder. (Source: 
Malizia et al., 1998, Fig. 1.)

 We  may  infer  that  the  calming  actions  of  benzodiazepines  are  due 
to the suppression of activity in the brain circuits used in the stress re-
sponse. Benzodiazepine treatment might be required to restore normal 
function to these circuits. Indeed, a study of patients with panic disorder 
using positron emission tomography (PET) imaging (see Box 7.3) demon-
strated that the number of benzodiazepine binding sites was reduced in 
regions of the frontal cortex that show hyperactive responsiveness dur-
ing anxiety (Figure 22.8). These results are promising not only because 
they might reveal the sites of benzodiazepine action in the brain but also 
because they suggest that an alteration in the endogenous regulation of 
GABA receptors is a cause of the anxiety disorder. 

  Serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)  are widely used 
in  the  treatment  of  mood  disorders,  as  we  will  discuss  in  a  moment. 
However,  SSRIs  are  also  highly  effective  for  treating  other  psychiat-
ric  disorders,  notably  including  OCD.  Recall  that  serotonin  is  released 
throughout the brain by a diffuse modulatory system originating in the 
raphe nuclei of the brain stem (see Figure 15.13). The actions of serotonin 
are mediated by G-protein-coupled receptors and are terminated by reup-
take, via serotonin transporter proteins, into the axon terminal. Thus, as 
the name implies, SSRIs act to prolong the actions of released serotonin 
at their receptors by inhibiting reuptake. In a recent study, the presence 
in some families of a rare mutation in the serotonin transporter gene was 
associated with a high incidence of OCD, further implicating serotonin in 
the origins of this disease. 

 Unlike  the  benzodiazepines,  however,  the  anxiolytic  actions  of  the 
SSRIs are not immediate. Therapeutic effects develop slowly, over a pe-
riod of weeks, in response to regular daily dosing. This ﬁ nding indicates 
that the immediate rise in extracellular serotonin caused by the SSRI is 
 not  responsible for the anxiolytic effect. Rather, the effect appears to be 
due to an adaptation of the nervous system to chronically elevated brain 
serotonin, via some structural or functional change that is not  understood. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   762
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   762

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

763

We will return to a discussion of the actions of SSRIs when we discuss 
depression. However, it is very interesting in the context of anxiety disor-
ders that one adaptive response to SSRIs is an increase in the glucocorti-
coid receptors in the hippocampus. SSRIs might act to dampen anxiety by 
enhancing the feedback regulation of the CRH neurons in the hypothala-
mus (see Figure 22.6). 

 Although  benzodiazepines  and  SSRIs  have  proven  to  be  effective  in 
treating a wide variety of anxiety disorders, novel drugs are now being 
developed based on our new understanding of the stress response. One 
promising drug target is the receptors for CRH. Not only is CRH used by 
hypothalamic neurons to control ACTH release from the pituitary but it 
is also used as a neurotransmitter in some of the central circuits involved 
in the stress response. For example, some neurons of the central nucleus 
of the amygdala contain CRH, and injections of CRH into the brain can 
produce the full-blown stress response and signs of anxiety. Thus, there 
is hope that antagonists of CRH receptors will be useful for the treatment 
of some anxiety disorders. 

AFFECTIVE DISORDERS 
AFFEECTIVEE DISORDERS 

Affect   is  the  medical  term  for  emotional  state  or  mood;   affective 
 disorders  are disorders of mood. In a given year, over 9% of the popula-
tion will suffer from one of the mood disorders. 

 A Description of Affective Disorders 
 An occasional, brief feeling of low mood—getting “the blues”—is a common 
response to life’s events, such as suffering a loss or disappointment, and we 
would not call this a disorder. However, the affective disorder that psychia-
trists and psychologists call  depression  is something more prolonged and 
much more severe, characterized by a feeling that one’s emotional state is 
no longer under one’s control. It can occur suddenly, often without obvious 
external cause, and if left untreated, it usually lasts 4–12 months. 

 Depression is a serious disease. It is a main precipitating cause of sui-
cide, which claims more than 38,000 lives each year in the United States. 
Depression is also widespread. Perhaps as many as 20% of the popula-
tion will suffer a major, incapacitating episode of depression during their 
lifetime. In a subset of patients with bipolar disorder, bouts of depression 
are punctuated with emotional highs that can also be highly disruptive. 

 Major Depression.  The mental illness known as  major depression  is 
the  most  common  mood  disorder,  affecting  6%  of  the  population  every 
year. The cardinal symptoms are lowered mood and decreased interest or 
pleasure in all activities. For a diagnosis of major depression, these symp-
toms must be present every day for a period of at least 2 weeks and not be 
obviously related to bereavement. Other symptoms also occur, including: 
 •  Loss of appetite (or increased appetite) 
 •  Insomnia (or hypersomnia) 
 •  Fatigue 
 •  Feelings of worthlessness and guilt 
 •  A diminished ability to concentrate 
 •  Recurrent thoughts of death 

 Episodes  of  major  depression  usually  don’t  last  longer  than  2  years, 
although the disease has a chronic, unremitting course in about 17% of 
patients.  Without  treatment,  however,  depression  will  recur  in  50%  of 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   763
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   763

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

764

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

cases, and after three or more episodes, the odds of recurrence increase 
to over 90%. Another expression of depression, afﬂ icting 2% of the adult 
population, is called  dysthymia . Although milder than major depression, 
dysthymia has a chronic, “smoldering” course, and it seldom disappears 
spontaneously. Major depression and dysthymia are twice as common in 
women as men. 

 Bipolar Disorder.  Like major depression,  bipolar disorder  is a recur-
rent mood disorder. It consists of repeated episodes of mania, or mixed 
episodes  of  mania  and  depression,  and  therefore  is  also  called   manic- 
depressive disorder .  Mania  (derived from a French word meaning “crazed” 
or “frenzied”) is a distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, 
 expansive,  or  irritable  mood.  During  the  manic  phase,  other  common 
symptoms include: 
 •  Inﬂ ated self-esteem or grandiosity 
 •  A decreased need for sleep 
 •  Increased talkativeness or feelings of pressure to keep talking 
 •  Flight of ideas, or a subjective experience that thoughts are racing 
 •  Distractibility 
 •  Increased goal-directed activity 

 Another  symptom  is  impaired  judgment.  Spending  sprees,  offensive 
or  disinhibited  behavior,  promiscuity,  or  other  reckless  behaviors  are 
 common. 

 According to current diagnostic criteria, there are two types of bipolar 
disorder. Type I bipolar disorder is characterized by the manic episodes 
just described (with or without incidents of major depression), and occurs 
in about 1% of the population, equally among men and women. Type II 
bipolar disorder, affecting about 0.6% of the population, is characterized 
by  hypomania , a milder form of mania that is not associated with marked 
impairments  in  judgment  or  performance.  Indeed,  hypomania  in  some 
may take the form of a marked increase in efﬁ ciency, accomplishment, 
or creativity (Box 22.2). However, type II bipolar disorder is also always 
 associated  with  episodes  of  major  depression.  When  hypomania  alter-
nates with periods of depression that are not severe enough to warrant 
the description “major” (i.e., fewer symptoms and shorter duration), the 
disorder is called  cyclothymia . 

 Biological Bases of Affective Disorders 
 Like most other mental illnesses, affective disorders reﬂ ect the altered 
functioning of many parts of the brain at the same time. How else can we 
explain  the  coexistence  of  symptoms  ranging  from  eating  and  sleeping 
disorders to a loss of the ability to concentrate? For this reason, research 
has focused on the role of the diffuse modulatory systems, with their wide 
reach and diverse effects. However, in the last few years, disruption of 
the HPA system and related cortical areas has also been implicated as 
playing an important role in depression. Let’s take a closer look at the 
neurobiology of mood disorders. 

 The  Monoamine  Hypothesis.   The  ﬁ rst  real  indication  that  depression 
might result from a problem with the central diffuse modulatory systems 
came  in  the  1960s. A  drug  called  reserpine,  introduced  to  control  high 
blood pressure, caused severe depression in about 20% of cases. Reserpine 
depletes central catecholamines and serotonin by interfering with their 
loading into synaptic vesicles. Another class of drugs that were introduced 
to treat tuberculosis caused a marked mood elevation. These drugs inhibit 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   764
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   764

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

765

BOX 22.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

A Magical Orange Grove in a Nightmare

Winston Churchill called it his “black dog.”1 The writer F. 

Scott Fitzgerald often found himself “hating the night when 
I couldn’t sleep and hating the day because it went toward 
night.”2 It was the most “terrible of all the evils of existence” 
for the composer Hector Berlioz.3 They were speaking of their 
lifelong bouts with depression. From the Scottish poet Robert 
Burns to the American grunge rocker Kurt Cobain, extraor-
dinarily creative people have suffered inordinately from affec-
tive  disorders.  Biographical  studies  of  accomplished  artists 
have been consistent and alarming; their estimated rates of 
major depression are about 10 times higher than in the gen-
eral population, and their rates of bipolar disorder may be up 
to 30 times higher.

Many artists have eloquently described their misfortunes. 
But  can  mood  disorders  actually  reinforce  great  talent  and 
creative productivity? Certainly, most people with mood dis-
orders are not artistic or unusually imaginative, and most art-
ists are not manic-depressive. However, artists with bipolar 
disorders  can  sometimes  draw  vigor  and  inspiration  from 
their  condition.  Edgar  Allan  Poe  wrote  of  his  cycles  of  de-
pression and mania, “I am excessively slothful, and wonder-
fully industrious—by ﬁ ts.”4 The poet Michael Drayton mused 
about “that ﬁ ne madness . . . which rightly should possess a 
poet’s brain.”5 Studies have suggested that hypomania can 
heighten certain cognitive processes, increase original and id-
iosyncratic thought, and even enhance linguistic skills. Manic 
states can also reduce the need for sleep, foster intense and 
obsessive concentration, create unmitigated self-conﬁ dence, 
and eliminate concern for social norms—just what you need, 
perhaps, to push the envelope of artistic creativity.

The poet’s madness is much more often a scourge than 
an inspiration. For Robert Lowell, manic experiences were “a 
magical orange grove in a nightmare.”6 Virginia Woolf’s hus-

1  Quoted in Ludwig AM. 1995. The Price of Greatness: Resolving the 
Creativity and Madness Controversy. New York: Guilford Press, p. 
174.

2  F.  Scott  Fitzgerald.  1956.  The  Crack-Up.  In  The  Crack-Up  and 

Other Stories. New York: New Directions, pp. 69–75.

3  Hector Berlioz. 1970. The Memoirs of Hector Berlioz, trans. David 

Cairns. St. Albans, England: Granada, p. 142.

4  Edgar  Allan  Poe.  1948.  Letter  to  James  Russell  Lowell,  June  2, 
1844.  In  The  Letters  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe,  Vol.  1,  ed.  John  Wand 
Ostrom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, p. 256.

5  Michael  Drayton.  1753.  “To  my  dearly  beloved  Friend,  Henry 
Reynolds, Esq.; of Poets and Poesy,” lines 109–110, The Works of 
Michael Drayton, Esq., vol. 4, London: W. Reeve.

6  Ian  Hamilton.  1982.  Robert  Lowell:  A  Biography.  New  York: 

Random House, p. 228.

27 compositions

9 comps.

s
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

1829 1831

1833 1835 1837 1839 1841 1843 1845 1847 1849 1851 1853 1855

Severe
depression

Severe depression
Hypom anic
throughout 1844
throughout 1840

Hypom anic
throughout 1849

Died in asylum
Suicide attem pt
(self-starvation)

Figure A
 Schumann’s output of musical composition. (Source: Adapted from 
Slater and Meyer, 1959).

band described how “she talked almost without stopping for 
two or three days, paying no attention to anyone in the room 
or anything said to her.”7 It is hard to overstate the depths of 
 melancholy that can accompany major depression. The sui-
cide rate among accomplished poets is said to be 5 to 18 
times higher than in the general population. Poet John Keats 
once  wrote  desperately,  “I  am  in  that  temper  that  if  I  were 
under water I would scarcely kick to come to the top.”8 But 
when Keats’s mood pitched the other way, he wrote most 
of his best poetry during a 9-month period in 1819, before 
dying of tuberculosis at age 25. Figure A shows how Robert 
Schumann’s  wildly  ﬂ uctuating  output  of  musical  composi-
tions coincided with the oscillations of his manic-depressive 
episodes.

The psychiatrist Kay Redﬁ eld Jamison has suggested that 
“depression is a view of the world through a dark glass, and 
mania is that seen through a kaleidoscope—often brilliant but 
fractured.”9 Today, we are lucky to have effective treatments 
for both conditions, for the dark glass and the kaleidoscope 
carry a heavy price.

7  Leonard  Woolf.  1964.  Beginning  Again:  An  Autobiography  of  the 

Years 1911 to 1918. New York: Harcourt Brace, pp. 172–173.

8  Quoted  by  Kay  Jamison  in  a  presentation  at  the  Depression 
and  Related  Affective  Disorders  Association/Johns  Hopkins 
Symposium, Baltimore, Maryland, April 1997.

9  Jamison  KR.  Manic-depressive  illness  and  creativity.  Scientiﬁ c 

American 272: 62–67.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   765
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   765

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

766

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 monoamine oxidase (MAO) , the enzyme that destroys catecholamines and 
serotonin. Another piece of the puzzle fell into place when neuroscientists 
recognized that the drug imipramine, introduced some years earlier as 
an antidepressant, inhibits the reuptake of released serotonin and nor-
epinephrine, thus promoting their action in the synaptic cleft. As a result 
of these observations, researchers developed the hypothesis that mood is 
closely  tied  to  the  levels  of  released “monoamine”  neurotransmitters—
norepinephrine  and/or  serotonin—in  the  brain.  According  to  this  idea, 
called  the   monoamine  hypothesis  of  mood  disorders ,  depression 
is a consequence of a deﬁ cit in one of these diffuse modulatory systems 
(Figure 22.9). Indeed, as we will see in a moment, many of the modern 
drug  treatments  for  depression  have  in  common  enhanced  neurotrans-
mission at central serotonergic and/or noradrenergic synapses. 

 A direct correlation between mood and modulator, however, is too sim-
plistic. Perhaps the most striking problem is the clinical ﬁ nding that the 
antidepressant action of all of these drugs takes several weeks to develop, 
even though they have almost immediate effects on transmission at the 
modulatory  synapses.  Another  concern  is  that  other  drugs  that  raise 
NE levels in the synaptic cleft, like cocaine, are not effective as antide-
pressants. A new hypothesis is that the effective drugs promote long-term 
adaptive changes in the brain, involving alterations in gene expression, 
which alleviate the depression. One adaptation occurs in the HPA axis, 
which, as we’ll discuss next, has also been implicated in mood disorders. 

 The  Diathesis–Stress  Hypothesis.   Evidence  clearly  indicates  that  mood 
disorders run in families and that our genes predispose us to this type of 
mental illness. The medical term for a predisposition for a certain disease is 
 diathesis . However, researchers have also established that early childhood 
abuse or neglect and other stresses of life are important risk factors in the 
development of mood disorders in adults. According to the  diathesis–stress 
hypothesis of affective disorders , the HPA axis is the main site where 
genetic and environmental inﬂ uences converge to cause mood disorders. 

Serotonin system

Basal ganglia

Neocortex

Thalamus

Norepinephrine system

Neocortex

Hypothalamus

Temporal lobe

Raphe nuclei

Cerebellum

Hypothalamus

Temporal lobe

Locus coeruleus

Thalamus

Cerebellum

To spinal cord
▲ FIGURE 22.9
The diffuse modulatory systems implicated in affective disorders.  The norepi-
nephrine and serotonin systems, introduced in Chapter 15, are characterized by 
the broad reach of their axonal projections.

To spinal cord

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   766
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   766

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

767

 As we have seen, exaggerated activity of the HPA system is associated 
with anxiety disorders. However, anxiety and depression often coexist (in 
fact, this “comorbidity” is the rule rather than the exception). Indeed, one of 
the most robust ﬁ ndings in all of biological psychiatry is hyperactivity of the 
HPA axis in severely depressed patients: Blood cortisol levels are elevated, 
as is the concentration of CRH in the cerebrospinal ﬂ uid. Could this hyper-
active HPA system, and the resulting deleterious effects on brain function, 
be the  cause  of depression? Animal studies are highly suggestive. Injected 
CRH into the brains of animals produces behavioral effects that are similar 
to those of major depression: insomnia, decreased appetite, decreased inter-
est in sex, and, of course, an increased behavioral expression of anxiety. 

 Recall that the activation of the hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors 
by  cortisol  normally  leads  to  feedback  inhibition  of  the  HPA  axis  (see 
Figure 22.6). In depressed patients, this feedback is disrupted, explaining 
why HPA function is hyperactive. A molecular basis for the diminished 
hippocampal response to cortisol is a decreased number of glucocorticoid 
receptors. What regulates glucocorticoid receptor number? In a fascinat-
ing parallel with the factors implicated in mood disorders, the answer is 
genes, monoamines, and early childhood experience. 

 Glucocorticoid  receptors,  like  all  proteins,  are  a  product  of  gene  ex-
pression.  In  rats,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  amount  of  glucocorticoid 
receptor gene expression is regulated by early sensory experience. Rats 
that received a lot of maternal care as pups express more glucocorticoid 
receptors  in  their  hippocampus,  less  CRH  in  their  hypothalamus,  and 
reduced anxiety as adults. The maternal inﬂ uence can be replaced by in-
creasing the tactile stimulation of the pups. Tactile stimulation activates 
the ascending serotonergic inputs to the hippocampus, and the serotonin 
triggers  a  long-lasting  increase  in  the  expression  of  the  glucocorticoid 
 receptor gene. More glucocorticoid receptors equip the animal to respond 
to stressors as adults. However, the beneﬁ cial effect of experience is re-
stricted to a critical period of early postnatal life; stimulation of the rats 
as adults does not have the same effect. Childhood abuse and neglect, in 
addition to genetic factors, are known to put people at risk for develop-
ing mood and anxiety disorders, and these animal ﬁ ndings suggest one 
cause. Elevations in brain CRH, and decreased feedback inhibition of the 
HPA system, may make the brain especially vulnerable to depression. 

 Anterior Cingulate Cortex Dysfunction.  Functional brain imaging stud-
ies have consistently found increased resting-state metabolic activity in 
the  anterior cingulate cortex  of depressed patients (Figure 22.10). This 
region of the brain is considered to be a “node” in an extensive network of 
interconnected structures that include other regions of the frontal cortex, 
hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, and brain stem. The hypothesis 
that anterior cingulate cortex dysfunction contributes to the symptoms of 
major depression is supported by a number of ﬁ ndings, including studies 
that have shown that activity here is increased by autobiographical recall 
of a sad event and is decreased following successful medical treatment 
for depression. Based on these ﬁ ndings, the anterior cingulate cortex is 
considered to be an important link between an internally generated emo-
tional state and the HPA. 

 Treatments for Affective Disorders 
 Mood disorders are very common, and the burden they impose on human 
health, happiness, and productivity is enormous. Fortunately, a number 
of helpful treatments are available. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   767
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   767

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

768

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲FIGURE 22.10
The anterior cingulate cortex.  Activity in this region 
 assessed by PET or fMRI imaging is increased in patients 
suffering from major depression and reduced by successful 
treatments.

Anterior cingulate
cortex

 Electroconvulsive  Therapy.   It  might  surprise  you  to  learn  that  one  of 
the most effective treatments for depression and mania involves inducing 
seizure  activity  in  the  temporal  lobes.  In   electroconvulsive  therapy 
(ECT) , electrical currents are passed between two electrodes placed on 
the scalp. Localized electrical stimulation triggers seizure discharges in 
the  brain,  but  the  patient  is  given  anesthesia  and  muscle  relaxants  to 
prevent  violent  movements  during  treatment. An  advantage  of  ECT  is 
that relief can occur quickly, sometimes after the ﬁ rst treatment session. 
This attribute of ECT is especially important in cases where suicide risk 
is high. An adverse effect of ECT, however, is memory loss. As we will see 
in Chapter 24, temporal lobe structures (including the hippocampus) play 
a vital role in memory. ECT usually disrupts memories for events that 
occurred before treatment, and this can extend back as far as 6 months. 
In addition, ECT can temporarily impair the storage of new information. 
 The  mechanism  by  which  ECT  relieves  depression  is  unknown. 
However, as mentioned earlier, one temporal lobe structure affected by 
ECT is the hippocampus, which we have seen is involved in regulating 
CRH and the HPA axis. 

 Psychotherapy.  Psychotherapy can be effective in treating mild to mod-
erate cases of depression. The main goal of psychotherapy is to help de-
pressed patients overcome negative views of themselves and their future. 
The  neurobiological  basis  of  the  treatment  has  not  been  established, 
 although we can infer that it relates to establishing cognitive, neocortical 
control over the activity patterns in disturbed circuits. 

 Antidepressants.   A  number  of  highly  effective  pharmacological  treat-
ments are available for mood disorders.  Antidepressant drugs  include 
(1) tricyclic compounds (named for their chemical structure), such as imip-
ramine, which among other actions, block the reuptake of both norepineph-
rine and serotonin by transporters; (2) SSRIs, such as ﬂ uoxetine, which 
act only on serotonin terminals; (3) NE- and 5-HT-selective reuptake in-
hibitors, such as venlafaxine; and (4) MAO inhibitors, such as phenelzine, 
which reduce the enzymatic degradation of serotonin and norepinephrine 
(Figure  22.11). All  of  these  drugs  elevate  the  levels  of  monoamine  neu-
rotransmitters in the brain; however, as mentioned, their therapeutic ac-
tions take weeks to develop. 

 The adaptive response in the brain for the clinical effectiveness of these 
drugs has not been established with certainty. Nonetheless, an intriguing 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   768
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   768

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

769

Norepinephrine

 (NE)

NE

NE

NE

Activates presynaptic 

and postsynaptic receptors

Serotonin (5-HT)

5-HT

NE

5-HT

5-HT

Activates presynaptic 

and postsynaptic receptors

–

–

Tricyclics

–

Transporter

Fluoxetine

MAO

inhibitor

–

MAO

Breakdown

products

▲ FIGURE 22.11
Antidepressant drugs and the biochemical life cycles of norepinephrine and 
serotonin.  MAO inhibitors, tricyclics, and SSRIs are used as antidepressants. 
MAO inhibitors enhance the actions of NE and 5-HT by preventing their enzy-
matic destruction. Tricyclics enhance NE and 5-HT action by blocking uptake. 
SSRIs act the same way but are selective for serotonin.

ﬁ nding is that clinically effective treatment with antidepressants damp-
ens the hyperactivity of the HPA system and the anterior cingulate cortex 
in humans. Animal studies suggest that this effect may be due, in part, to 
increased glucocorticoid receptor expression in the hippocampus, which 
occurs in response to a long-term elevation in serotonin. Recall that CRH 
plays a crucial role in the stress response of the HPA axis. New drugs 
that act as CRH receptor antagonists are currently under development 
and  testing.  Recent  research  has  also  shown  that  prolonged  treatment 
with SSRIs increases  neurogenesis , the proliferation of new neurons, in 
the  hippocampus.  (Neurogenesis  is  discussed  further  in  Chapter  23.) 
Remarkably,  this  proliferation  may  be  important  for  the  beneﬁ cial  be-
havioral effects of SSRIs, presumably in part by boosting the control of 
the HPA by the hippocampus. 

 The long delay between treatment onset and antidepressant effect pres-
ents not only a scientiﬁ c mystery but also a clinical challenge. Patients 
can  feel  discouraged  when  their  expectations  for  improvement  are  not 
met, and this can temporarily exacerbate the depression. This is a serious 
limitation, particularly in cases where there is a high risk of suicide. Thus, 
the search is on for rapidly acting antidepressant medications that do not 
require weeks of treatment to become effective. The hope for attaining 
this goal has been fueled by recent ﬁ ndings that a single intravenous dose 
of the anesthetic drug  ketamine  can rapidly alleviate symptoms of depres-
sion for several days. Although these ﬁ ndings support the concept of a 
rapidly acting antidepressant, ketamine itself is not a practical treatment 
for depression. As we will discuss later in the context of schizophrenia, 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   769
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   769

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

770

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

ketamine  can  cause  severe  psychotic  episodes  that  require  hospitaliza-
tion. It is only after the drug is eliminated from the body, and psychotic 
symptoms diminish, that antidepressant effects are observed. Thus, as 
with  other  medical  treatments  for  depression,  the  therapeutic  effect  is 
 apparently caused by some adaptive response to the drug. However, in 
the case of ketamine, this adaptation occurs much more rapidly than with 
the other antidepressants used in clinical practice today. 

 Lithium.  By now, you probably have formed the (correct) impression that, 
until recently, most treatments for psychiatric disorders were  discovered 
virtually  by  chance.  For  example,  ECT  was  introduced  initially  in  the 
1930s  as  a  treatment  of  last  resort  for  psychotic  behavior  based  on 
the mistaken belief that epilepsy and schizophrenia could not coexist in 
the same person. Only later was it shown to be an effective treatment for 
major depression for reasons that still remain unknown. 

 “Enlightened serendipity” was again at work in the discovery of a highly 
effective treatment for bipolar disorder. Working in the 1940s, Australian 
psychiatrist John Cade was searching for psychoactive substances in the 
urine of manic patients. He injected guinea pigs with urine or urinary con-
stituents and observed their behavioral effects. Cade wanted to test the 
effect  of  uric  acid,  but  he  had  difﬁ culty  getting  it  into  solution.  Instead, 
he used lithium urate because it dissolved easily and was readily avail-
able in the pharmacy. He observed, quite unexpectedly, that this treatment 
calmed the guinea pigs (he had predicted the opposite effect). Because other 
lithium salts also produced this behavioral effect, he concluded that it was 
the lithium, not a constituent of urine, that was responsible. He went on to 
test lithium treatment on patients with mania, and, amazingly, it worked. 
Subsequent studies showed that lithium is highly effective in stabilizing 
the mood of patients with bipolar disorder, by preventing not only the re-
currence of mania but also the episodes of depression (Figure 22.12). 

  Lithium  affects neurons in many ways. In solution, it is a monova-
lent cation that passes freely through neuronal sodium channels. Inside 
the  neuron,  lithium  prevents  the  normal  turnover  of  phosphatidyl  ino-
sitol (PIP 2 ), a precursor for important second messenger molecules that 
are generated in response to activation of some G-protein-coupled neu-
rotransmitter receptors (see Chapter 6). Lithium also interferes with the 
actions of adenylyl cyclase, essential for the generation of the second mes-
senger cyclic-AMP, and glycogen synthase kinase, a critical enzyme in cel-
lular energy metabolism. Why lithium is such an effective treatment for 

1960

1961

1962

1963

1964

1965

Mania

Depression

Lithium administration

▲ FIGURE 22.12
The mood-stabilizing effect of lithium treatment in five patients. (Source: 
Adapted from Barondes, 1993, p. 139.)

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   770
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   770

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

 bipolar disorder, however, remains completely unknown. Like other anti-
depressants, the therapeutic effects of lithium require long-term use. The 
answer, again, appears to lie in an adaptive change in the central nervous 
system (CNS), but the nature of this change remains to be  determined. 

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

771

 Deep Brain Stimulation.  In a substantial fraction of patients, severe de-
pression fails to respond to ECT, medicine, or talk therapy. In such cases, 
more drastic measures are called for, and one entails undergoing a surgical 
procedure in which an electrode is implanted deep in the brain. This ap-
proach to treat depression was pioneered by Helen Mayberg, a neurologist 
at Emory University (Box 22.3). Recall that activity in the anterior cingu-
late cortex is increased by sadness and decreased by successful treatment 
with standard antidepressant medications. The observation that activity 
in this region fails to decrease in patients with unrelenting, treatment-
resistant depression inspired Mayberg to contemplate using direct brain 
stimulation to modulate activity here. Although it seems counterintuitive, 
electrical stimulation can actually  decrease  activity in brain circuits that 
are chronically overactive (the reasons remain unclear but likely include 
recruitment of inhibitory neurons). Indeed, Mayberg and a team of neu-
rosurgeons at the University of Toronto found that electrical stimulation 
of  a  circumscribed  region  of  the  anterior  cingulate  cortex,  comprising 
Brodmann’s area 25, could produce immediate relief from depression. 

 Recall that during most neurosurgical procedures, the patient remains 
awake, which is possible because there are no pain receptors in the brain. 
Thus, the patients in Mayberg’s study could report the effect of stimula-
tion during the operation. They described a “sudden calmness” or “light-
ness” and “disappearance of the void” when the stimulator was turned 
on. These patients were discharged from the hospital with the implanted 
electrodes connected to a battery-operated stimulator that continuously 
applied  electric  pulses.  The  majority  of  patients  experienced  continued 
relief from their depression. 

 These ﬁ ndings have generated considerable excitement in the ﬁ eld but 
are still considered to be preliminary. Additional studies are underway to 
conﬁ rm these initial results. Obviously, brain surgery is always consid-
ered a treatment of last resort. 

SCHIZOPHRENIA 
SCHIIZOPHHRENIA 

 Although their severity might be hard to fully comprehend, we all have 
some idea of what mood and anxiety disorders are like because they are 
extremes in the spectrum of brain states that are part of normal experi-
ence. The same cannot be said for schizophrenia. This severe mental dis-
order distorts thoughts and perceptions in ways that healthy people ﬁ nd 
difﬁ cult to understand. Schizophrenia is a major public health problem, 
affecting 1% of the adult population. Over 2 million people suffer from the 
disorder in the United States alone. 

 A Description of Schizophrenia 
Schizophrenia  is characterized by a loss of contact with reality and a dis-
ruption  of  thought,  perception,  mood,  and  movement.  The  disorder  typi-
cally becomes apparent during adolescence or early adulthood and usually 
persists for life. The name, introduced in 1911 by Swiss psychiatrist Eugen 
Bleuler,  roughly  means  “divided  mind,”  because  of  his  observation  that 
many patients seemed to oscillate between normal and abnormal states. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   771
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   771

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

772

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

BOX 22.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Tuning Depression Circuits
by Helen Mayberg

It was never my plan to study depression. I am a neurolo-

gist, and depression was generally considered to be beyond 
the  purview  of  my  medical  discipline.  While  many  patients 
with neurological disorders develop depression, it was often 
seen  as  a  nonspeciﬁ c  response  to  a  distressing  diagnosis 
(stroke,  Parkinson’s  disease,  Alzheimer’s  disease,  and  the 
like).  Furthermore,  the  notion  that  a  global  change  like  de-
pression could be localized to speciﬁ c brain regions, the way 
a  language  deﬁ cit  might  be  traced  to  disruption  of  speciﬁ c 
parts of the frontal or temporal lobes, was not intuitive. For 
the  most  part,  strategies  to  study  and  treat  depression  in 
neurological patients mirrored those in patients with depres-
sion  without  identiﬁ ed  neurological  disease—focusing  on 
brain  chemistry—that is, until the early 1990s when advances 
in neuroimaging changed the playing ﬁ eld.

By 2001, we had learned a lot about the functional neuro-
anatomy of depression. Using positron emission tomography 
and functional magnetic resonance imaging, we had identi-
ﬁ ed activity patterns that subdivided depressed patients by 
their  symptom  clusters.  We  also  studied  changes  that  dis-
tinguished  the  response  to  antidepressant  drugs  from  that 
of psychotherapy and identiﬁ ed baseline patterns that might 
guide treatment selection for each treatment. A brain wiring 
diagram of depression was emerging.

It  was  around  this  time  that  we  had  the  opportunity  to 
directly examine the role of the subcallosal cingulate region 
(Brodmann’s  area  25)  in  our  evolving  depression  circuit 
(Figure A). We had converging evidence of common changes 
in this region across a wide variety of effective antidepres-
sant treatments. We also knew that failure to  effect changes 
in this region were associated with treatment nonresponse. 
We hypothesized that relief from major depression could be 
achieved with focal brain stimulation using a well-established 
neurosurgical technique used to treat Parkinson’s disease—

deep  brain  stimulation  (DBS).  Inserting  electrodes  into  our 
intended target, the subcallosal cingulate white matter, was 
not technically more difﬁ cult or of higher risk than the basal 
ganglia  implantations  used  for  Parkinson’s  disease,  or  so 
said  the  surgeon.  We  became  convinced  it  should  be  at-
tempted, but what patient would be appropriate for such a 
procedure?

Treatment-resistant depression is a dire condition deﬁ ned 
by  failure  to  respond  to  multiple  available  antidepressant 
treatments  including  electroconvulsive  therapy.  What  I  had 
not appreciated in my years of studying depression was the 
banality of our deﬁ nitions and rating scales, as they failed to 
capture  the  degree  of  suffering  experienced  by  patients  in 
what can only be described as a malignant condition, a per-
vasive state of sustained mental pain and physical immobility 
with no “off switch.”

I  can  still  remember  that  ﬁ rst  case  on  the  morning  of 
May  23,  2003.  We  were  prepared  technically:  where  to 
implant,  what  side  effects  to  watch  for.  But  otherwise,  we 
had  no  expectations.  How  could  there  be  when  what  you 
are  doing  is  something  that  has  never  been  done  before? 
Our patient was awake (DBS electrodes are implanted using 
local  anesthesia),  and  it  was  easy  enough  to  monitor  the 
obvious— discomfort,  pain,  general  distress.  The  primary 
goal was to get the electrodes implanted and then turn them 
on and make sure nothing bad happened. Our mindset going 
in was that the real work would come later as we tested vari-
ous stimulation parameters to achieve clinical effects—a pro-
cess we thought would take weeks, like other antidepressant 
treatments.

The  plan  was  to  observe,  keep  the  patient  safe,  and  if 
something  didn’t  seem  right,  turn  it  off.  So  we  weren’t  ex-
pecting it when the patient’s mood abruptly lifted during test-
ing of the second contact on the left electrode. As the current 

However, there are many variations in the manifestations of schizophrenia, 
including those that show a steadily deteriorating course. Indeed, it is still 
not clear whether what is called schizophrenia is a single disease or several. 
 The symptoms of schizophrenia fall into two categories: positive and 
negative.   Positive  symptoms   reﬂ ect  the  presence  of  abnormal  thoughts 
and behaviors, such as: 
 •  Delusions 
 •  Hallucinations 
 •  Disorganized speech 
 •  Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   772
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   772

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

773

                      

Figure A
 Abnormal activity in the anterior cingulate cortex and the use of DBS to correct it. Upper left: PET scan of a depressed patient demonstrat-
ing increased blood ﬂ ow—indicating hyperactivity—in the subcallosal cingulate cortex (red). DBS quiets this region. Upper right: Diffusion-
weighted MRI scan used prior to surgery to identify the intersection of three white matter bundles passing through the subcallosal cingulate 
region thus deﬁ ning the optimal location to implant the DBS electrode. Lower left: Structural MRI scan used in the operating room to plan and 
verify the targeted location of the implanted DBS electrode. Lower right: Postsurgical skull X-ray showing the actual implanted DBS electrodes. 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Helen Mayberg.)

was turned up, the patient suddenly asked if we had done 
something  different. She felt calm, with a lightness and se-
renity she hadn’t felt in a long time. I was looking right at her 
on  the  nonsterile  side  of  the  surgical  table.  Her  eyes  were 
wider, looking around; her speech was noticeably louder and 
less halting; and she was more engaged with the room and 

with  me.  It  was  as  if  we  had  hit  a  spot  and  literally  turned 
her “negative” feeling off, releasing the rest of her brain to go 
about doing whatever it wanted to do. And then we turned 
down the current back to zero; the relief faded and the void 
returned. That moment changed  everything I knew about de-
pression and how to study it.

Negative symptoms  reﬂ ect the absence of responses that are normally 

present. These symptoms include: 

 •  Reduced expression of emotion 
 •  Poverty of speech 
 •  Difﬁ culty in initiating goal-directed behavior 
 •  Memory impairment 

 Individuals affected by schizophrenia often have delusions organized 
around  a  theme;  for  example,  they  may  believe  that  powerful  adver-
saries  are  out  to  get  them.  These  are  often  accompanied  by  auditory 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   773
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   773

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

774

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

 hallucinations (such as hearing imaginary voices) related to the same de-
lusional theme. There can also be a lack of emotional expression (called a 
“ﬂ at affect”), coupled with disorganized behavior and incoherent speech. 
Speech  may  be  accompanied  by  silliness  and  laughter  that  appear  to 
have no relation to what is being said. In some cases, schizophrenia is 
accompanied by peculiarities of voluntary movement, such as immobility 
and stupor (catatonia), bizarre posturing and grimacing, and senseless, 
 parrot-like repetition of words or phrases. 

 Biological Bases of Schizophrenia 
 Understanding  the  neurobiological  basis  for  schizophrenia  represents 
one of the greatest challenges of neuroscience because the disorder affects 
many  of  the  characteristics  that  make  us  human:  thought,  perception, 
self-awareness. Although considerable progress has been made, we still 
have much more to learn. 

 Genes and the Environment.  Schizophrenia runs in families. As shown 
in Figure 22.13, the likelihood of having the disorder varies in relation to 
the number of genes that are shared with an affected family member. If 
your identical twin has schizophrenia, the probability is about 50% that 
you will also have it. The chances you will have the disease decline as the 
number  of  genes  you  share  with  an  affected  family  member  decreases. 
These ﬁ ndings argue that schizophrenia is primarily a genetic disorder. 
Recently, researchers have identiﬁ ed several speciﬁ c genes that seem to 
increase susceptibility to schizophrenia. Nearly all of these genes have 
important roles in synaptic transmission, its plasticity, or the growth of 
synapses. 

 Remember,  however,  that  identical  twins  have  exactly  the  same 
genes. So why, in 50% of cases, is one sibling spared when the other has 

Genes shared

17.5%

(third-degree

relatives)

25%

(second-degree

relatives)

50%

(first-degree

relatives)

General population

1%

First cousins

Uncles, aunts

2%

2%

Nephews, nieces

Grandchildren

Half-siblings

Parents

Siblings

Children

4%

5%

6%

6%

9%

Fraternal twins

100%

Identical twins

0

13%

17%

48%

10

50
Lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia (%)

20

30

40

▲ FIGURE 22.13
The familial nature of schizophrenia.  The risk of developing schizophrenia in-
creases with the number of shared genes, suggesting a genetic basis for the 
 disease. (Source: Adapted from Gottesman, 1991, p. 96.)

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   774
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   774

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

775

 schizophrenia? The answer must lie in the environment. In other words, 
faulty genes seem to make some people vulnerable to environmental fac-
tors that cause schizophrenia. Although the symptoms may not appear 
until  a  person  reaches  his  or  her  twenties,  considerable  evidence  indi-
cates that the biological changes causing the condition begin early in de-
velopment, perhaps prenatally. Viral infections during fetal and infant 
development  have  been  implicated  as  contributing  causes,  as  has  poor 
maternal nutrition. In addition, environmental stresses throughout life 
are known to exacerbate the course of the disorder. A number of studies 
have suggested that use of marijuana increases the risk for developing 
schizophrenia in genetically vulnerable adolescents. 

 Schizophrenia  is  associated  with  physical  changes  in  the  brain.  An 
interesting  example  appears  in  Figure  22.14.  The  ﬁ gure  shows  brain 
scans  of  identical  twins,  one  with  schizophrenia  and  one  without. 
Normally, the structures of the brains of identical twins are nearly iden-
tical. However, in this case, the brain of the schizophrenic sibling shows 
enlarged lateral ventricles, which reﬂ ects the shrinkage of brain tissue 
around them. This difference is consistent when large numbers of people 
are  sampled;  the  brains  of  schizophrenics  have,  on  average,  a  signiﬁ -
cantly larger ventricle-to-brain-size ratio than people who do not have 
the disorder. 

 Such pronounced structural changes are not always apparent in the 
brains of schizophrenics, however. Important physical changes in their 
brains also occur in the microscopic structure and function of cortical con-
nections.  For  example,  schizophrenics  often  have  defects  in  the   myelin 
sheaths  surrounding  axons  in  their  cerebral  cortex,  although  it  is  not 
clear whether this is a cause or consequence of the disease. Another com-
mon  ﬁ nding  in  schizophrenia  is  reduced  cortical  thickness  and  abnor-
mal neuronal lamination (Figure 22.15). Changes in synapses and sev-
eral  neurotransmitter  systems  have  also  been  implicated.  As  we’ll  see 
next, particular attention has focused on alterations in chemical synaptic 
transmission  mediated by dopamine and glutamate. 

 The Dopamine Hypothesis.  Recall that dopamine is the neurotransmit-
ter used by another of the diffuse modulatory systems (Figure 22.16). A 
link between the  mesocorticolimbic dopamine system  and schizophrenia 
has been made on the basis of two main observations. The ﬁ rst relates 
to  the  effects  of  amphetamine  in  otherwise  healthy  people.  Remember 
from  our  discussion  in  Chapter  15  that  amphetamine  enhances  neuro-
transmission at catecholamine-utilizing synapses and causes the release 
of dopamine. Amphetamine’s normal stimulant action bears little resem-
blance  to  schizophrenia.  However,  because  of  its  addictive  properties, 
users of  amphetamines often risk taking more and more to satisfy their 
cravings. The resulting overdose can lead to a psychotic episode with posi-
tive symptoms that are virtually indistinguishable from those of schizo-
phrenia. This  suggests  that  psychosis  is  somehow  related  to  too  much 
catecholamine in the brain. 

 A second reason to associate dopamine with schizophrenia relates to 
the CNS effects of drugs that are effective in reducing the positive symp-
toms of the disorder. In the 1950s, researchers discovered that the drug 
  chlorpromazine ,  initially  developed  as  an  antihistamine,  could  prevent 
the  positive  symptoms  in  schizophrenia.  Chlorpromazine  and  other  re-
lated  antipsychotic  drugs,  collectively  called   neuroleptic  drugs ,  were 
later found to be potent blockers of dopamine receptors, speciﬁ cally the D 2  
receptor. When a large number of neuroleptics are examined, the correla-
tion between the dosage effective for controlling schizophrenia and their 

▲ FIGURE 22.14
Enlarged lateral ventricles in schizo-
phrenia.  These MRI scans are from the 
brains of identical twins. The sibling on 
the top was normal; the one on the bot-
tom was diagnosed with schizophrenia. 
Notice the enlarged lateral ventricles in 
the schizophrenic sibling, indicating a 
loss of brain tissue. (Source: Barondes, 
1993, p. 153.)

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   775
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   775

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

776

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

Frontal
lobe

Striatum

Substantia
nigra

▲ FIGURE 22.15
Loss of cortical gray matter in schizo-
phrenics during adolescence..  The 
brains of 12 patients with early-onset 
schizophrenia were imaged repeatedly 
over the course of 5 years, between the 
ages of 13 to 18. This image shows the 
average annual change in the thickness 
of their cortical gray matter, with red col-
ors indicating regions of greatest loss 
and blue indicating no change. Severe 
loss (up to 5% annually) is observed in 
parietal, motor and anterior temporal 
cortex. (Source: Thompson et al., 2001, 
Figure 1, with permission.)

Ventral tegmental area

▲ FIGURE 22.16
The dopaminergic diffuse modulatory systems of the brain.  The mesocorticolim-
bic dopamine system, which arises in the ventral tegmental area, has been impli-
cated in the cause of schizophrenia. A second dopaminergic system arising from the 
substantia nigra is involved in the control of voluntary movement by the striatum.

ability to bind to D 2  receptors is impressive (Figure 22.17). Indeed, these 
same drugs are effective in the treatment of amphetamine and cocaine 
psychoses. According to the  dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia , 
psychotic episodes in schizophrenia are triggered speciﬁ cally by the acti-
vation of dopamine receptors. 

10 –7

w
o
L

y
t
i

n

i
f
f

a

10 –8

y
t
i

n

i
f
f

 

a
g
n
d
n
b
 
r
o

i

i

10 –9

t

p
e
c
e
r
 
2
D

Perazine

Clomacran
Trazodone

Lenperone
Metiapine

Sulpiride

Promazine

Chlorpromazine

Clozapine

Thioridazine

Prochlorperazine

Molindone

Moperone

Trifluoperazine

Thiothixene

Droperidol

Haloperidol

Fluphenazine
Pimozide

Trifluperidol

Benperidol

10 –10

h
g
H

i

y
t
i

n

i
f
f

a

Spiperone

0.1

1.0

10

100

1000

Average clinical dose (mg/day)

▲ FIGURE 22.17
Neuroleptics and D2 receptors.  The neuroleptic dosages effective in controlling 
schizophrenia correlate well with the binding affinities of the drugs for D2 receptors. 
The units on the Y axis are the molar concentrations of drug that inhibit half of the 
D2 receptors in the brain. Higher affinity drugs block the receptors at lower concen-
trations. (Source: Adapted from  Seeman, 1980.)

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   776
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   776

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

777

 Despite the tantalizing link between the positive symptoms of schizo-
phrenia and dopamine, there seems to be more to the disorder than an 
overactive dopamine system. One indication is that newly developed an-
tipsychotic drugs, like  clozapine , have little effect on D 2  receptors. These 
drugs are called  atypical neuroleptics , indicating that they act in a novel 
way. The mechanism by which these compounds exert their neuroleptic 
effect  has  not  been  established  with  certainty,  but  an  interaction  with 
serotonin receptors is suspected. 

 The  Glutamate  Hypothesis.   Another  indication  that  there  is  more  to 
schizophrenia than dopamine comes from the behavioral effects of  phen-
cyclidine (PCP)  and  ketamine . These drugs were introduced in the 1950s 
as anesthetics. However, many patients experienced adverse side effects, 
sometimes lasting for days, which included hallucinations and paranoia. 
Although it is no longer used clinically, PCP is now a common illegal drug 
of abuse, known by users as “angel dust” or “hog.” Ketamine, which is still 
used  in  veterinary  medicine,  has  also  made  it  to  the  street  where  it  is 
referred to as “special K” or “vitamin K.” PCP and ketamine intoxication 
cause many of the symptoms of schizophrenia, both positive and negative. 
However, neither drug has an effect on dopaminergic transmission; they 
affect synapses that use glutamate as a neurotransmitter. 

 Recall from Chapter 6 that glutamate is the main fast excitatory neu-
rotransmitter in the brain, and that NMDA receptors are one subtype of 
glutamate receptor. PCP and ketamine act by inhibiting NMDA receptors 
(Figure 22.18). Thus, according to the  glutamate hypothesis of schizo-
phrenia , the disorder reﬂ ects diminished activation of NMDA receptors 
in the brain. 

 In  order  to  study  the  neurobiology  of  schizophrenia,  neuroscientists 
have attempted to establish animal models of the disorder. Low doses of 
PCP administered chronically to rats produce changes in brain biochem-
istry  and  behavior  that  resemble  those  in  schizophrenic  patients.  Mice 
that  have  been  genetically  engineered  to  express  fewer  NMDA  recep-
tors also display some schizophrenia-like behaviors, including  repetitive 

Glutamate

binding

sites

Glutamate

PCP binding

sites

PCP

Na+
Ca2+

(a) 

(b)

(c)

▲ FIGURE 22.18
Blocking of the NMDA receptor by PCP.  NMDA receptors are glutamate-gated 
ion channels. (a) In the absence of glutamate, the channel is closed. (b) In the 
presence of glutamate, the channel is open, exposing PCP binding sites. (c) The 
channel is blocked when PCP enters and binds. The blockade of brain NMDA 
 receptors by PCP produces effects on behavior that resemble the symptoms of 
schizophrenia.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   777
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   777

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

778

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

▲ FIGURE 22.19
Social withdrawal in mutant mice with reduced numbers of NMDA receptors. 
 The mice on the left have a normal number of NMDA receptors. The photographs 
were taken 30 minutes apart over 2 hours to monitor social behavior. These mice 
tended to nest together. The mice on the right have been genetically altered to 
express fewer NMDA receptors. Notice that these mice tended to avoid social 
contact with one another. (Source: Mohn et al., 1999, p. 432.)

movements,  agitation,  and  altered  social  interactions  with  other  mice 
(Figure 22.19). Of course, we don’t know whether the mutant mice feel 
paranoid or hear imaginary voices. But it is signiﬁ cant that the observ-
able behavioral abnormalities can be lessened by treating the mice with 
either conventional or atypical neuroleptic drugs. 

 While all drugs that inhibit NMDA receptors will impair memory and 
cognition,  not  all  reproduce  the  positive  symptoms  of  schizophrenia  in 
humans.  The  key  difference  lies  in  the  mechanism  of  action.  PCP  and 
ketamine do not interfere with the binding of glutamate to the receptor 
like other NMDA receptor inhibitors. Instead, they act by entering the 
 channel and clogging the pore. Consequently, blockade by PCP and ket-
amine is possible only when the receptors are active and the channels are 
open.  This  feature  has  led  researchers  to  wonder  if  the  psychomimetic 
effects of these drugs are mediated by a select population of neurons with 
high  ongoing  activity  and  tonic  NMDA  receptor  activation.  One  such 
population  is  comprised  of  cortical  GABAergic  neurons  in  the  cerebral 
cortex. Inhibition of the NMDA receptors on these neurons might distort 
thinking and the processing of sensory information. Notably, postmortem 
examination of the brains of individuals with schizophrenia has found the 
cortex to be deﬁ cient in many interneurons. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   778
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   778

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

CHAPTER 22    MENTAL ILLNESS

779

 Treatments for Schizophrenia 
 The treatment of schizophrenia consists of drug therapy combined with 
psychosocial  support.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  conventional  neurolep-
tics, such as chlorpromazine and haloperidol, act at D 2  receptors. These 
drugs reduce the positive symptoms of schizophrenia in the majority of 
patients. Unfortunately, the drugs also have numerous side effects related 
to  their  actions  on  the  dopaminergic  input  to  the  striatum  that  arises 
from the substantia nigra (see Chapter 14). Not surprisingly, the effects 
of blocking dopamine receptors in the striatum resemble the symptoms 
of Parkinson’s disease, including rigidity, tremor, and difﬁ culty initiat-
ing movements. Chronic treatment with conventional neuroleptics also 
can result in the emergence of  tardive dyskinesia , which is characterized 
by involuntary movements of the lips and jaw. Many of these side effects 
are avoided by using atypical neuroleptics, such as clozapine and risperi-
done, because they do not act directly on the dopamine receptors in the 
striatum. These medications are also more effective against the negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia. 

 The newest focus of drug research is the NMDA receptor. Investigators 
hope  that  increasing  NMDA  receptor  responsiveness  in  the  brain,  per-
haps in combination with decreasing D 2  receptor activation, will further 
alleviate the symptoms of schizophrenia. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Neuroscience has had a huge impact on psychiatry. Mental illness is now 
recognized  as  the  consequence  of  pathologic  modiﬁ cations  of  the  brain, 
and psychiatric treatments today are focused on correcting these changes. 
Just as importantly, neuroscience has changed how society views people 
who  suffer  from  mental  illness.  Suspicion  about  mentally  ill  people  is 
slowly giving way to compassion. Mental illnesses today are recognized 
as diseases of the body, just like hypertension or diabetes. 

 Despite remarkable progress in treating psychiatric disorders, we have 
a very incomplete understanding of how current treatments work their 
magic on the brain. In the case of drug therapy, we know with great preci-
sion about how chemical synaptic transmission is affected. But we do not 
know why, in many cases, the therapeutic effect of a drug takes weeks to 
emerge. Even less is known about how psychosocial treatments act on the 
brain. In general, the answer seems to lie in adaptive changes that occur 
in the brain in response to treatment. 

 We also do not know the causes of most mental disorders. It is clear 
that our genes either put us at risk or protect us. However, the environ-
ment also plays an important role. Environmental stresses before birth 
may contribute to schizophrenia, and those after birth may precipitate 
depression. Not all environmental effects are bad, however. Appropriate 
sensory  stimulation,  especially  in  early  childhood,  can  apparently  pro-
duce adaptive changes that help protect us from developing mental ill-
nesses later in life. 

 Psychiatric  disorders  and  their  treatment  illustrate  that  our  brains 
and behaviors are inﬂ uenced by past experience, whether it is exposure 
to inescapable stress or to pharmacologically elevated levels of serotonin. 
Of course, much more subtle sensory experiences also leave their mark on 
the brain. In Part IV, we will explore how sensory experiences modify the 
brain during development and during learning. 

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   779
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   779

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

780

PART THREE    THE BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR

K E Y   T E R M S

Mental Illness and the Brain
molecular medicine (p. 754)
pathophysiology (p. 754)
induced pluripotent stem cell 

(iPSC) (p. 756)

Anxiety Disorders
anxiety disorder (p. 756)
panic disorder (p.757)
obsessive-compulsive disorder 

(OCD) (p. 757)

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 

(HPA) axis (p. 759)

adrenocorticotropic hormone 

(ACTH) (p. 759)

corticotropin-releasing hormone 

diathesis–stress hypothesis of 

affective disorders (p. 766)

anterior cingulate cortex (p. 767)
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 

(CRH) (p. 759)

glucocorticoid receptor (p. 761)
anxiolytic drug (p. 761)
benzodiazepine (p. 761)
serotonin-selective reuptake 

inhibitor (SSRI) (p. 762)

(p. 768)

antidepressant drug (p. 768)
lithium (p. 770)

Affective Disorders
affective disorder (p. 763)
major depression (p. 763)
bipolar disorder (p. 764)
mania (p. 764)
monoamine hypothesis of 

 affective disorders (p. 766)

Schizophrenia
schizophrenia (p. 771)
neuroleptic drug (p. 775)
dopamine hypothesis of 
schizophrenia (p. 776)
glutamate hypothesis of 
schizophrenia (p. 777)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  How and where in the brain do benzodiazepines act to reduce anxiety?
2.  Depression is often accompanied by bulimia nervosa, which is characterized by frequent eating 
binges followed by purging. Where does the regulation of mood and appetite converge in the brain?

3.  Snuggling with your mom as a baby might help you cope with stress better as an adult. Why?
4.  What three types of drugs are used to treat depression? What do they have in common?
5.  Psychiatrists often refer to the dopamine theory of schizophrenia. Why do they believe dopa-
mine is linked to schizophrenia? Why must we be cautious about accepting a simple correlation 
 between schizophrenia and too much dopamine?

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

American Psychiatric Association. 2013. 

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Association.

Andreasen NC. 2004. Brave New Brain: 

Conquering Mental Illness in the Era of the 
Genome. New York: Oxford University Press.

Harrison PJ, Weinberger DR. 2005. 

Schizophrenia genes, gene expression, and 
neuropathology: on the matter of their conver-
gence. Molecular Psychiatry 10:40–68.

Holtzheimer PE, Mayberg HS. 2011. Deep brain 
stimulation for psychiatric disorders. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience 34:289–307.

Charney DS, Nestler EJ, eds. 2004. Neurobiology 

of Mental Illness, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

Insel TR. 2012. Next generation treatments for 
psychiatric disorders. Science Translational 
Medicine 4:1–9.

751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   780
751-780_Bear_22_revised_final.indd   780

12/20/14   6:38 AM
12/20/14   6:38 AM

PART FOUR

The Changing 
Brain

C H A P T E R   2 3
Wiring the Brain      783

C H A P T E R   2 4
Memory Systems      823

C H A P T E R   2 5
Molecular Mechanisms of Learning and Memory      865

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   781
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   781

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   782
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   782

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Wiring the Brain

INTRODUCTION
THE GENESIS OF NEURONS

Cell Proliferation

 BOX 23.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Neurogenesis in Adult Humans

Cell Migration
Cell Differentiation
Differentiation of Cortical Areas

 BOX 23.2   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Making a Map of the Mind, by Pasko Rakic

THE GENESIS OF CONNECTIONS

The Growing Axon
Axon Guidance

Guidance Cues
Establishing Topographic Maps
 BOX 23.3   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Why Our CNS Axons Don’t Regenerate

Synapse Formation

THE ELIMINATION OF CELLS AND SYNAPSES

 BOX 23.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: The Mystery of Autism

Cell Death
Changes in Synaptic Capacity

ACTIVITY-DEPENDENT SYNAPTIC REARRANGEMENT

Synaptic Segregation

Segregation of Retinal Inputs to the LGN
Segregation of LGN Inputs in the Striate Cortex
 BOX 23.5   BRAIN FOOD: Three-Eyed Frogs, Ocular Dominance Columns, 
and Other Oddities
 BOX 23.6   BRAIN FOOD: The Critical Period Concept

Synaptic Convergence
Synaptic Competition
Modulatory Inﬂ uences

ELEMENTARY MECHANISMS OF CORTICAL SYNAPTIC 
PLASTICITY

Excitatory Synaptic Transmission in the Immature Visual System
Long-Term Synaptic Potentiation
Long-Term Synaptic Depression

WHY CRITICAL PERIODS END
CONCLUDING REMARKS

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   783
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   783

783783
783

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

784

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 We have seen that most of the operations of the brain depend on remark-
ably precise interconnections among its 85 billion neurons. As an exam-
ple, consider the precision in the wiring of the visual system, from retina 
to lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) to cortex, shown in Figure 23.1. All 
retinal ganglion cells extend axons into the optic nerve, but only ganglion 
cell axons from the nasal retinas cross at the optic chiasm. Axons from the 
two eyes are mixed in the optic tract, but in the LGN, they are sorted out 
again (1) by ganglion cell type, (2) by eye of origin (ipsilateral or contralat-
eral), and (3) by retinotopic position. LGN neurons project axons into the 
optic radiations that travel via the internal capsule to the primary visual 
(striate) cortex. Here, they terminate (1) only in cortical area 17, (2) only 
in speciﬁ c cortical layers (mainly layer IV), and (3) again according to cell 
type and retinotopic position. Finally, the neurons in layer IV make very 
speciﬁ c connections with cells in other cortical layers that are appropriate 
for binocular vision and are specialized to enable the detection of contrast 
borders. How did such precise wiring arise? 

 Back in Chapter 7, we looked at the embryological and fetal develop-
ment of the nervous system to understand how it changed from a simple 
tube in the early embryo into the structures we recognize in the adult 

Striate
cortex

Layer IV

 III, II

Area 17

Dorsal thalamus

Anterior

(a)  

Posterior

(b)  

Right
retina

Left
retina

Optic
chiasm

Optic
nerves

Optic
disks

(c)  

Optic radiation

LGN

Optic tract

▲ FIGURE 23.1
Components of the mature mammalian retinogeniculocortical pathway.  
(a) A midsagittal view of a cat brain, showing the location of primary visual cortex 
(striate cortex, area 17). (b) Components of the ascending visual pathway. Notice 
that the right eye’s temporal retina and the left eye’s nasal retina project axons via 
the optic nerve and optic tract to the LGN of the right dorsal thalamus. Inputs 
from the eyes remain segregated in separate layers at the level of this synaptic 
relay. LGN neurons project to striate cortex via the optic radiations. These axons 
terminate mainly in layer IV, where inputs serving the eyes continue to be segre-
gated. (c) The first site of major convergence of inputs from both eyes is in the 
projection of layer IV cells onto cells in layer III.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   784
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   784

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

785

as the brain and spinal cord. Here, we’ll take another look at brain de-
velopment, this time to see how connections are formed and modiﬁ ed as 
the brain matures. We will discover that most of the wiring in the brain 
is  speciﬁ ed  by  genetic  programs  that  allow  axons  to  detect  the  correct 
pathways and the correct targets. However, a small but important compo-
nent of the ﬁ nal wiring depends on sensory information about the world 
around us during early childhood. In this way, “nurture and nature” both 
contribute to the ﬁ nal structure and function of the nervous system. We 
will be using the central visual system as an example whenever possible, 
so you may want to quickly review Chapter 10 before continuing. 

THE GENESIS OF NEURONS 
THE GGENESSIS OF NEURONS 

 The ﬁ rst step in wiring the nervous system together is the generation of 
neurons. Consider as an example the striate cortex. In the adult, there 
are six cortical layers, and the neurons in each of these layers have char-
acteristic  appearances  and  connections  that  distinguish  striate  cortex 
from other areas. Neuronal structure develops in three major stages: cell 
proliferation, cell migration, and cell differentiation. 

 Cell Proliferation 
 Recall from Chapter 7 that the brain develops from the walls of the ﬁ ve 
ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled vesicles. These ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled spaces remain in the adult and con-
stitute the ventricular system. Very early in development, the walls of the 
vesicles consist of only two layers: the ventricular zone and the marginal 
zone. The  ventricular zone  lines the inside of each vesicle, and the  marginal 
zone  faces the overlying pia. Within these layers of the telencephalic vesicle, 
a cellular ballet is performed that gives rise to all the neurons and glia of 
the visual cortex. The choreography of cell proliferation is described later, 
and the ﬁ ve “positions” correspond to the circled numbers in Figure 23.2a: 
 1.  First  position:   A  cell  in  the  ventricular  zone  extends  a  process  that 

reaches upward toward the pia. 

 2.  Second position:  The nucleus of the cell migrates upward from the ven-

tricular surface toward the pial surface; the cell’s DNA is copied. 

 3.  Third position:  The nucleus, containing two complete copies of the ge-

netic instructions, settles back to the ventricular surface. 

 4.  Fourth position:  The cell retracts its arm from the pial surface. 
 5.  Fifth position:  The cell divides in two. 

 These  dividing  cells—the   neural  progenitors   that  give  rise  to  all  the 
neurons  and  astrocytes  of  the  cerebral  cortex—are  called   radial  glial 
cells . For many years it was believed these cells served only as a tempo-
rary scaffold to guide newly formed neurons to their ﬁ nal destinations. 
We now understand that the radial glial cells also give rise to most of the 
neurons of the central nervous system. 

 Early in embryonic development, the radial glial cells number in the 
hundreds. To give rise to the billions of neurons in the adult brain, these 
multipotent  stem  cells—meaning  they  can  assume  several  different 
 destinies—divide  to  expand  the  population  of  neural  progenitors  via  a 
process called  symmetrical cell division  (Figure 23.2b). Later in develop-
ment,  asymmetrical cell division  is the rule. In this case, one “daughter” 
cell migrates away to take up its position in the cortex, where it will never 
divide again. The other daughter remains in the ventricular zone to un-
dergo more divisions (Figure 23.2c). Radial glial cells repeat this pattern 
until all the neurons and glia of the cortex have been generated. 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   785
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   785

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

786

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Pial surface

▲ FIGURE 23.2
The choreography of cell proliferation. 
 (a) The wall of the brain vesicles initially 
consists of only two layers, the marginal 
zone and the ventricular zone. Each cell 
performs a characteristic “dance” as it 
divides, shown here from left to right. 
The circled numbers correspond to the 
five “positions” described in the text. 
The fate of the daughter cells depends 
on the plane of cleavage during division. 
(b) After symmetrical cell division, both 
daughters remain in the ventricular zone 
to divide again. (c) After asymmetrical 
cell division, the daughter farthest away 
from the ventricle ceases further division 
and migrates away.

Marginal
zone

Ventricular
zone

2

1

3

Radial
glial cells

(a)

Ventricular surface

4

5

(b)

Symmetrical cell division

Neural
precursor

Radial
glial cell

(c)

Asymmetrical cell division

 In humans, the vast majority of neocortical neurons are born between 
the ﬁ fth week and the ﬁ fth month of gestation (pregnancy), peaking at 
the astonishing rate of 250,000 new neurons per minute. Although most 
of the action is over well before birth, some restricted regions of the adult 
brain retain some capacity to generate new neurons (Box 23.1). However, 
it is important to realize that once a daughter cell commits to a neuronal 
fate, it will never divide again. Furthermore, in most parts of the brain, 
the neurons you are born with are all you will have in your lifetime. 

 How is a cell’s fate determined? Remember that all of our cells contain 
the same complement of DNA we inherited from our parents, so every 
daughter cell has the same genes. The factor that makes one cell different 
from another is the speciﬁ c genes that generate mRNA and, ultimately, 
protein. Thus, cell fate is regulated by differences in gene expression dur-
ing development. Recall from Chapter 2 that gene expression is regulated 
by cellular proteins called  transcription factors . If transcription factors, 
or the “upstream” molecules that regulate them, are unevenly distributed 
within a cell, then the cleavage plane during asymmetrical cell division 
can determine which factors are passed on to the daughter cells and this 
can determine their fate (Figure 23.3). 

 Mature cortical cells can be classiﬁ ed as glia or neurons, and the neu-
rons can be further classiﬁ ed according to the layer in which they reside, 
their dendritic morphology and axonal connections, and the neurotrans-
mitter  they  use.  Conceivably,  this  diversity  could  arise  from  different 
types of precursor cell in the ventricular zone. In other words, there could 
be one class of precursor cell that gives rise only to layer VI pyramidal 
cells, another which gives rise to layer V cells, and so on. However, this 
is not the case. Multiple cell types, including neurons and glia, can arise 
from the same precursor cell depending on what genes are transcribed 
during early development. 

 The  ultimate  fate  of  the  migrating  daughter  cell  is  determined  by  a 
combination of factors, including the age of the precursor cell, its posi-
tion within the ventricular zone, and its environment at the time of divi-
sion. Cortical pyramidal neurons and astrocytes derive from the dorsal 

Notch-1

Numb

▲ FIGURE 23.3
The distribution of cell constituents in 
precursor cells.  The proteins notch-1 
and numb are differentially distributed in 
the precursor cells of the developing 
neocortex. Symmetrical cleavage parti-
tions these proteins equally in the 
daughters, but asymmetrical cleavage 
does not. Differences in the distribution 
of proteins in the daughters causes them 
to have different fates.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   786
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   786

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

787

BOX 23.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Neurogenesis in Adult Humans 
(or How Neuroscientists Learned to Love the Bomb)

United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union,  unwittingly  performed 
on  the  world  population  during  the  Cold  War.  In  the  years 
between 1955 and 1963, hundreds of nuclear bombs were 
detonated in atmospheric tests (Figure A), causing the wide-
spread  dissemination  of  radioactive  fallout.  There  was  a 
spike  in  the  environmental  levels  of  the  radioactive  isotope 
of  carbon,  14C,  which  was  incorporated  into  the  biological 
molecules  of  all  living  things,  including  the  replicating  DNA 
of  human  neurons.  This  radioactivity  put  a  time  stamp  on 
every cell born during the “bomb pulse.” Inspired by Gage’s 
ﬁ ndings in rodents, Kirsty Spalding, Jonas Frisén, and their 
colleagues working at the Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm, 
Sweden developed methods to detect this carbon dating in 
the neurons of human postmortem brains. They discovered 
that  the  neurons  of  the  neocortex  were  as  old  as  the  indi-
vidual, meaning no new cells had been generated as adults, 
consistent with dogma. However, the data showed that hip-
pocampal neurons were continuously generated across the 
lifespan. According to their calculations, in the adult human 
brain, 700 new neurons are added to the hippocampus every 
day. About as many are also lost, keeping the total number of 
hippocampal cells roughly constant. The annual turnover rate 
is almost 2%. Your hippocampus is not the same hippocam-
pus you had a year ago.

Neurogenesis in the adult brain appears to be a peculiarity 
of the hippocampus and is still far too limited to repair CNS 
damage. However, understanding how adult neurogenesis is 
regulated—for example, by the quality of the environment—
might suggest ways it can be harnessed to promote regen-
eration of the hippocampus after brain injury or disease.

Change in atmospheric [14C]

For many years, neuroscientists believed that neurogenesis—

the generation of new neurons—was restricted to early brain 
development.  But  new  ﬁ ndings  have  challenged  this  view.  It 
now appears that new neurons are continuously generated by 
neural progenitors in the adult brain.

Cell division requires the synthesis of DNA, which can be 
detected by feeding the cells chemically labeled DNA  precursor 
molecules. Cells undergoing division at the time the precursor 
is available incorporate the chemical label into their DNA. In the 
mid-1980s,  Fernando  Nottebohm  of  Rockefeller  University 
used this approach to prove that new neurons are generated 
in the brains of adult canaries, particularly in regions associ-
ated  with  song  learning.  This  ﬁ nding  resurrected  interest  in 
adult neurogenesis in mammals, which had actually ﬁ rst been 
described  in  1965  by  Joseph  Altman  and  Gopal  Das  of  the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Research in the past 
few years by Fred Gage at the Salk Institute has established 
deﬁ nitively that new neurons are generated in the adult rat hip-
pocampus, a structure that is important for learning and mem-
ory (as we will see in Chapter 24). Interestingly, the number of 
new neurons goes up in this region if the animal is exposed 
to  an  enriched  environment,  ﬁ lled  with  toys  and  playmates. 
In  addition,  rats  given  the  chance  to  have  a  daily  run  on  an 
exercise wheel show enhanced neurogenesis. In both cases, 
the  increased  number  of  neurons  correlates  with  enhanced 
performance on memory tasks that require the hippocampus.
Until very recently, however, it has been unclear if neuro-
genesis also continues in the adult human brain. A deﬁ nitive 
answer was ﬁ nally obtained by the analysis of an experiment 
that  several  governments,  most  prominently  those  of  the 

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

)
d
o

l

f
(
 
]

C
4
1
[
 

n

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
C

Figure A

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   787
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   787

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

788

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Dorsal

Future
neocortex

Proliferative
zone

Origin of pyramidal neurons
and cortical astrocytes

Origin of GABAergic
interneurons

Origin of
oligodendrocytes

Future
basal ganglia

Ventral

▲ FIGURE 23.4
The sources of cortical cells.  Proliferation of cortical pyramidal neurons and as-
trocytes occurs in the ventricular zone of the dorsal telencephalon. However, in-
hibitory interneurons and oligodendroglia are generated in the ventricular zone of 
the ventral telencephalon; consequently, these cells must migrate laterally over 
some distance to arrive at their final destination in the cortex. (Source: Adapted 
from Ross, et al., 2003.)

 ventricular  zone,  whereas  inhibitory  interneurons  and  oligodendroglia 
derive from the ventral telencephalon (Figure 23.4). The ﬁ rst cells to mi-
grate away from the dorsal ventricular zone are destined to reside in a 
layer called the  subplate , which eventually disappears as development 
proceeds. The next cells to divide become layer VI neurons, followed by 
the neurons of layers V, IV, III, and II. 

 It  is  worth  noting  that  most  of  what  we  understand  about  cortical 
development  has  come  from  studies  on  rodents.  The  general  principles 
 appear to apply to primates such as ourselves, but there are some differ-
ences that account for the complexity of the primate neocortex. One of 
these is the elaboration of a second proliferative layer of cells, called the 
 subventricular zone . The neurons deriving from the subventricular zone 
are destined for the upper layers of the cortex (layers II–III), which, in 
the adult brain, are the source of corticocortical connections that connect 
cytoarchitecturally distinct areas. It is reasonable to speculate that the 
increased computational powers of the primate brain are, in part, a prod-
uct of this difference in brain development. 

 Cell Migration 
 Many daughter cells migrate by slithering along the thin ﬁ bers emitted 
by radial glial cells that span the distance between the ventricular zone 
and the pia. The immature neurons, called  neural precursor cells , fol-
low this radial path from the ventricular zone toward the surface of the 
brain (Figure 23.5). When cortical assembly is complete, the radial glia 
withdraw their radial processes. Not all migrating cells follow the path 
provided by the radial glial cells, however. About one-third of the neural 
precursor cells wander horizontally on their way to the cortex. 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   788
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   788

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

Marginal zone

Cortical plate

Intermediate
zone

Subventricular
zone
Ventricular
zone

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

789

Leading process of
neural precursor
cell

Migrating neural
precursor cell

Trailing process of
neural precursor
cell

Process of radial
glial cell

Radial 
glial cell

▲ FIGURE 23.5
The migration of neural precursor 
cells to the cortical plate.  This is a 
schematic section through the dorsal 
telencephalon early in development. The 
expanded view shows a neural precursor 
cell crawling along the thin processes of 
the radial glia en route to the cortical 
plate, which forms just under the mar-
ginal zone.

 The neural precursor cells destined to become subplate cells are among 
the  ﬁ rst  to  migrate  away  from  the  ventricular  zone.  Neural  precursor 
cells  destined  to  become  the  adult  cortex  migrate  next.  They  cross  the 
subplate and form another cell layer called the  cortical plate . The ﬁ rst 
cells  to  arrive  in  the  cortical  plate  are  those  that  will  become  layer  VI 
neurons. Next come the layer V cells, followed by layer IV cells, and so on. 
Notice that each new wave of neural precursor cells migrates right past 
those in the existing cortical plate. In this way, the cortex is said to be 
assembled  inside out  (Figure 23.6). This orderly process can be disrupted 
by a number of gene mutations. For example, in a mutant mouse called 
reeler (describing the mouse’s wobbly appearance), the neurons of the cor-
tical plate are unable to pass through the subplate and pile up below it. 
Subsequent discovery of the affected gene revealed one of the factors, a 
protein called reelin that regulates the assembly of the cortex. 

 Cell Differentiation 
 The process by which a cell takes on the appearance and characteristics of 
a neuron is called  cell differentiation . Differentiation is the consequence 
of a speciﬁ c spatiotemporal pattern of gene expression. As we have seen, 
neural precursor cell differentiation begins as soon as the precursor cells 
divide with the uneven distribution of cell constituents. Further neuronal 
differentiation occurs when the neural precursor cell arrives in the corti-
cal plate. Thus, layer V and VI neurons have differentiated into recog-
nizable pyramidal cells even before layer II cells have migrated into the 
cortical plate. Neuronal differentiation occurs ﬁ rst, followed by astrocyte 
differentiation that peaks at about the time of birth. Oligodendrocytes are 
the last cells to differentiate. 

 Differentiation of the neural precursor cell into a neuron begins with 
the appearance of neurites sprouting off the cell body. At ﬁ rst, these neu-
rites  all  appear  about  the  same,  but  soon  one  becomes  recognizable  as 
the axon and the others as dendrites. Differentiation will occur even if 
the neural precursor cell is removed from the brain and placed in a tissue 
culture. For example, cells destined to become neocortical pyramidal cells 
will  often  assume  the  same  characteristic  dendritic  architecture  in  the 
tissue culture. This means that differentiation is programmed well before 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   789
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   789

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

790

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Marginal 
zone
Cortical 
plate

Subplate

Marginal 
zone
Cortical 
plate

Layer VI

Subplate

Marginal 
zone
Cortical 
plate

Layer V

Layer VI

Subplate

Layer I

Layer II

Layer III

Layer IV

Layer V

Layer VI

Intermediate
zone

Intermediate
zone

Intermediate
zone

White matter

Ventricular
zone

Ventricular
zone

Development

Ventricular
zone

▲ FIGURE 23.6
Inside out development of the cortex. 
 The first cells to migrate to the cortical 
plate are those that form the subplate. 
As these differentiate into neurons, the 
neural precursor cells destined to be-
come layer VI cells migrate past and col-
lect in the cortical plate. This process re-
peats again and again until all layers of 
the cortex have differentiated. The sub-
plate neurons then disappear.

the neural precursor cell arrives at its ﬁ nal resting place. However, the 
stereotypical architecture of cortical dendrites and axons also depends on 
intercellular signals. As we have learned, pyramidal neurons are charac-
terized by a large apical dendrite that extends radially, toward the pia, 
and an axon that projects in the opposite direction. Research has shown 
that a protein called  semaphorin 3A  is secreted by cells in the marginal 
zone. The protein acts ﬁ rst to repel growing pyramidal cell axons, caus-
ing them to stream away from the pial surface, and second to attract the 
growing apical dendrites, causing them to stream toward the brain sur-
face (Figure 23.7). We will see that the oriented growth of neurites in re-
sponse to diffusible molecules is a recurring theme in neural development. 

High semaphorin 3A

Attraction by semaphorin 3A
of apical dendrite

Neuroblast

Differentiated
neuron

▲ FIGURE 23.7
The differentiation of a neural precursor cell into a pyrami-
dal neuron.  Semaphorin 3A, a protein secreted by cells in the 
marginal zone, repels the growing axon and attracts the 
 growing apical dendrite, giving the pyramidal neuron its 
 characteristic polarity.

Repulsion by semaphorin 3A
of efferent axon

Low semaphorin 3A

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   790
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   790

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

791

 Differentiation of Cortical Areas 
 The neocortex is often described as a sheet of tissue. In reality, however, 
cortex is much more like a patchwork quilt, with many structurally dis-
tinct areas stitched together. One of the consequences of human evolution 
was the creation of new neocortical areas that are specialized for increas-
ingly sophisticated analysis. It is natural to wonder exactly how all these 
areas arise during development. 

 As we have seen, most cortical neurons are born in the ventricular zone 
and then migrate along radial glia to take up their ﬁ nal position in one 
of the cortical layers. Thus, it seems reasonable to conclude that cortical 
areas  in  the  adult  brain  simply  reﬂ ect  an  organization  that  is  already 
present in the ventricular zone of the fetal telencephalon. According to 
this idea, the ventricular zone contains something like a ﬁ lm record of 
the future cortex, which is projected onto the wall of the telencephalon as 
development proceeds. 

 The idea of such a cortical “protomap,” proposed by Yale University 
neuroscientist Pasko Rakic (Box 23.2), is based on the assumption that 
migrating  neural  precursor  cells  are  precisely  guided  to  the  cortical 
plate by the network of radial glial ﬁ bers. If migration is strictly ra-
dial, we might expect that all the offspring of a single neural progeni-
tor  cell  would  migrate  to  exactly  the  same  neighborhood  of  the  cor-
tex. Indeed, this has proven to be the case for the majority of cortical 
neurons. The concept that an entire radial column of cortical neurons 
originates from the same birthplace in the ventricular zone, called  the 
radial unit hypothesis , suggests a basis for the dramatic expansion of 
the human neocortex over the course of evolution. The surface area of 
the human cerebral cortex is 1000  ⫻  greater than that of the mouse and 
10  ⫻  greater than a macaque monkey, but differs in thickness by less 
than a factor of two. These differences in surface area arise from the 
size of the proliferative ventricular zone, which in turn can arise from 
differences  in  the  duration  of  the  period  of  symmetrical  cell  division 
early in gestation. An appealing hypothesis is that one happy accident 
of human evolution was the chance mutation of genes that regulate the 
kinetics of cell proliferation, allowing for an increase in the number of 
proliferative radial glial cells and consequently an enlarged surface of 
the neocortex. 

 As mentioned earlier, however, one-third of all neural precursor cells 
stray considerable distances as they migrate toward the cortical plate. 
How do they ﬁ nd their ﬁ nal resting place? One solution to this puzzle 
is suggested by the ﬁ nding that neurons in different regions of the cor-
tex  have  distinct  molecular  identities.  For  example,  two  complemen-
tary gradients of transcription factors, called Emx2 and Pax6, have been 
 discovered along the anterior–posterior axis of the ventricular zone of 
the  developing  neocortex  (Figure  23.8).  Neurons  destined  for  the  an-
terior  region  of  neocortex  express  higher  levels  of  Pax6,  and  neurons 
destined for posterior cortex express higher levels of Emx2. Recall that 
differences in transcription factors lead to differences in gene expres-
sion and protein production; these can be used as signals to attract neu-
ral precursor cells to the appropriate destinations. Indeed, if mice are 
genetically engineered to produce less Emx2, there is an expansion of 
the anterior cortical areas, such as the motor cortex, and a shrinkage of 
posterior cortical areas, such as the visual cortex. Conversely, if Pax6 is 
knocked out, there is an expansion of visual cortex and a shrinkage of 
frontal cortex. 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   791
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   791

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

792

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 23.2

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Making a Map of the Mind
by Pasko Rakic

My interest in the development of a cerebral cortical map 

began in the mid-1960s while I was a resident in neurosurgery 
at the Belgrade University. My professors repeatedly warned 
me  to  be  extremely  conservative  when  cutting  the  cerebral 
cortex “because unlike other organs, it is a map of the different 
areas that are precisely wired for speciﬁ c functions, and once 
removed,  cannot  be  replaced  or  regenerated.”  When  I  in-
quired how the map was formed, I was referred to nineteenth 
century literature since little had been learned since then. This 
is when I decided to abandon neurosurgery until I found an an-
swer to my question. I was fortunate to receive a U.S. Fogarty 
International  Fellowship,  which  took  me  to  Harvard  where  I 
met Paul Yakovlev, a giant ﬁ gure in developmental neuropa-
thology. I learned from him about the old Wilhelm His hypothe-
sis that cortical neurons in humans originate near the cerebral 
cavity. Experimental proof, however, was lacking.

Upon  returning  to  Belgrade  from  the  fellowship,  I  made 
slices of fresh human embryonic forebrain tissue at various 
prenatal ages and placed them into a dish of culture medium 
containing radioactive thymidine, one of the building blocks 
of DNA. This speciﬁ c DNA replication marker was impossible 
to get in Eastern Europe, but I succeeded in bringing it in from 
the United States unnoticed. To my knowledge, this experi-
ment was the ﬁ rst use of a slice preparation to study cortical 
development. Since cells continue to divide and synthesize 
DNA  supravitally  (after  death),  I  was  able  to  localize  them 
close  to  the  ventricular  cavity  and  in  the  layer  just  above, 
which I named the ventricular (VZ) and subventricular (SVZ) 
zones,  terms  later  adopted  by  the  Boulder  Nomenclature 
Committee for the neurogenic zones in all vertebrates. Most 
importantly,  I  did  not  ﬁ nd  incorporation  of  radioactivity  into 
cells in the cortical plate, providing the ﬁ rst experimental evi-
dence that, indeed, newly generated neurons are programed 
to migrate outward to the developing cortex situated below 
the  cerebral  surface.  This  ﬁ nding  was  part  of  my  doctoral 
thesis on the development of the human brain that not only 
opened a new ﬁ eld of inquiry but also prompted an offer from 
Professor  Raymond  Adams  to  join  the  faculty  at  Harvard 
Medical School in 1969.

After  establishing  my  laboratory  at  Harvard,  I  initiated  a 
comprehensive analysis of when neurons are born, migrate, 
and differentiated in the cerebral cortex of the macaque mon-
key,  chosen  because  of  its  slowly  developing  brain  similar 
to  the  human  brain.  I  learned  that,  even  in  this  large,  con-
voluted cerebrum, neurons migrate and settle in columns in 
which each new generation of neurons bypasses the previ-
ous one. Furthermore, since at mid-gestation in this species 

postmitotic neurons require more than 2 weeks to migrate to 
their ﬁ nal destination, I was able to explore the mechanism 
of how they ﬁ nd their ﬁ nal position in the increasingly distant 
and convoluted cortex. For example, reconstruction of elec-
tron microscopic images of serially sectioned tissue revealed 
selective attachment of migrating neurons to radial glial cells. 
In  primates,  these  transient  cells  are  distinct  and  more  dif-
ferentiated than in other mammals, and their elongated shaft 
spans the entire thickness of the fetal cerebral wall (see the 
animated  Figure  A  at  http://rakiclab.med.yale.edu/research
/CorticalNeuronMigration.aspx). Since this is a huge distance 
for a small migrating neuron, we performed a full reconstruc-
tion of monkey fetal cerebral wall at various ages, each re-
quiring thousands of serial electron micrographs. To create 
an automated 3D reconstruction in the era before microcom-
puters, we were given free access to the NASA computers 
used for the Apollo Project.

These  discoveries  inspired  a  new  research  ﬁ eld  and  led 
me  to  postulate  the  radial  unit  and  protomap  hypotheses 
of  how  the  complex  three-dimensional  organization  of  the 
 cortex is built from a two-dimensional layer of dividing neural 
stem  cells  in  the  proliferative  ventricular  and  subventricular 
zones (see the animated Figure B at http://rakiclab.med.yale
.edu/research/RadialMigration.aspx). These hypotheses sug-
gested  a  mechanism  for  the  evolutionary  expansion  of  the 
surface, rather than the thickness, of the cerebral cortex. The 
protomap hypothesis also explained how genetic modiﬁ ca-
tions could induce arrays of different radial units, giving rise 
to different cortical areas. Experiments with transgenic mice 
have provided further supporting evidence for both models.
The realization that the largest structure of our brain re-
ceives  all  its  neurons  by  orderly,  long-distance  migration 
fascinated me so much that after moving to Yale University 
in  1979,  I  decided  to  focus  on  the  molecular  mechanisms 
underlying the coordination of these complex processes. My 
strategy has been to perform comparative studies of cortical 
development  in  rodents,  nonhuman  primates,  and  humans 
using  a  variety  of  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  assays,  including  ge-
netic manipulations in animals together with mRNA proﬁ ling 
in embryonic human brain slices following laser microdissec-
tion.  I  began  with  the  idea  of  differential  cell  adhesion  and 
searched for molecules that would enable a migrating neuron 
to recognize the surface of the radial glial cell shaft, similar to 
an antigen–antibody interaction. We have identiﬁ ed a number 
of genes and signaling molecules involved in the regulation 
of the proliferation and migration of cortical neurons to their 
proper areal laminar and columnar positions. By manipulating 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   792
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   792

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

793

neuronal migration using genetic and environmental factors, 
we discovered hidden abnormalities of neuronal positioning 
that  cannot  be  discerned  by  routine  postmortem  examina-
tion,  opening  new  insights  into  the  pathogenesis  of  brain 
disorders (see Box 23.4).

Over  the  years,  I  have  come  to  recognize  that  the 
development of the cortex is a complex, multipronged process 

involving many genes, regulatory elements, and signaling mol-
ecules.  Thus,  even  after  ﬁ ve  decades  of  effort,  I  am  still  as 
committed as ever to my quest to ﬁ nd out how the cortical 
map is formed, not only because it is the organ that holds the 
secret to what distinguishes us from all other species but also 
because it is also the site of devastating mental disorders yet 
to be fully understood.

100

77

65

90

55

47

39

31

21

11

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

MZ

CP

SP

IZ

SV Z

VZ

RG

MN

N

CC

TR

NB  
MA

Figure A 
This drawing is based on a 3D re-
construction of thousands of electron 
microscopic images, showing a neural 
precursor cell (labeled N) migrating 
along a radial glial ﬁ ber. (Source: 
Courtesy of Dr. Pasko Rakic.)

Figure B 
This drawing shows how the protomap in the ventricular (VZ) and subventricular zones (SVZ) 
is related to the mature cerebral cortex. (Abbreviations: IZ, intermediate zone; SP, subplate; 
CP, cortical plate; MZ, marginal zone; CC, corpus callosum; TR, thalamic radiations; MA, 
monoamine input; NB, nucleus basalis input; RG, radial glia; MN, migrating neural precursor 
cell. (Source: Courtesy of Dr. Pasko Rakic.)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   793
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   793

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

794

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Pax6

Emx2

Rostral

Caudal

▲ FIGURE 23.8
Gradients of transcription factors 
 control the size of cortical areas. 
 (a) In the fetal telencephalon, Pax6 and 
Emx2 are expressed by neural precursor 
cells in complementary gradients, with 
Pax6 highest in anterior cortex and 
Emx2 highest in posterior cortex. (b) The 
sizes of different cortical areas change if 
these gradients are changed. In mice 
genetically engineered to produce less 
Emx2, there is an expansion in the size 
of anterior areas. In mice with reduced 
Pax6, there is an expansion of posterior 
areas. Abbreviations: M, motor cortex; S, 
somatosensory cortex; A, auditory cor-
tex; V, visual cortex. (Source: Adapted 
from Hamasaki et al., 2004.)

(a)  

Wild type

Emx2 mutant

Pax6 mutant

M

M

S

S

A

V

V

A

M

M

S

S

A

V

V

A

M

M

S

A

S

A

V

V

(b)  

 Cortical areas differ not only in terms of cytoarchitecture but also in 
terms of connections, particularly with the dorsal thalamus. Area 17 re-
ceives input from the LGN, area 3 receives input from the ventral  posterior 
(VP) nucleus, and so on. What is the contribution of the thalamic input to 
the cytoarchitectural differentiation of cortical areas? A clear answer has 
been provided by experiments in which the LGN input to monkey striate 
cortex area 17 was eliminated early in fetal life. In these animals, area 17 
was greatly reduced in size, with a concomitant increase in the size of the 
extrastriate cortex (Figure 23.9). 

 Thalamic input is clearly necessary, but is it sufﬁ cient to induce cytoar-
chitectural differentiation in a cortical area? Researchers Brad Schlaggar 
and  Dennis  O’Leary  of  the  Salk  Institute  addressed  this  question  in  a 
clever way. In rats, the thalamic ﬁ bers wait in the cortical white mat-
ter  and  do  not  enter  the  cortex  until  a  few  days  after  birth.  Schlaggar 
and O’Leary peeled off the parietal cortex in newborn rats and replaced 
it with a piece of occipital cortex. This created a situation in which the 
thalamic ﬁ bers from the VP nucleus were waiting under what would have 
been visual cortex. Remarkably, the ﬁ bers invaded the new piece of cortex 
and it assumed the cytoarchitecture that is characteristic of the rodent 
somatosensory  cortex  (the  “barrels”;  see  Figure  12.21).  Together,  these 
results suggest that the thalamus is important for specifying the pattern 
of cortical areas. 

 But how did the appropriate thalamic axons come to lie in wait under 
the parietal cortex in the ﬁ rst place? The answer, apparently, lies in the 
subplate.  Subplate  neurons,  which  have  a  more  strictly  radial  migra-

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   794
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   794

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

A

B

Dorsal

Rostral

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

795

Normal

No LGN input

▲ FIGURE 23.9
Differentiation of monkey striate cortex requires LGN input during fetal de-
velopment.  The arrowheads indicate the borders between areas 17 and 18 in 
(a) a normal monkey, and (b) a monkey in which the LGN input degenerated early 
in fetal development. (Source: Dehay and Kennedy, 2007.)

tion pattern, attract the appropriate thalamic axons to different parts of 
the developing cortex: LGN axons to occipital cortex, VP nucleus axons 
to parietal cortex, and so on. The area-speciﬁ c thalamic axons initially 
 innervate distinct populations of subplate cells. When the overlying cor-
tical  plate  grows  to  a  sufﬁ cient  size,  the  axons  invade  the  cortex.  The 
arrival of the thalamic axons causes the cytoarchitectural differentiation 
we recognize in the adult brain. Thus, the subplate layer of earliest born 
neurons seems to contain the instructions for the assembly of the corti-
cal quilt. 

THE GENESIS OF CONNECTIONS 
THE GGENESSIS OF CONNECTIOONS 

 As neurons differentiate, they extend axons that must ﬁ nd their appro-
priate targets. Think of this development of long-range connections, or 
pathway formation, in the central nervous system (CNS) as occurring in 
three phases: pathway selection, target selection, and address selection. 
Let’s understand the meaning of these terms in the context of the devel-
opment of the visual pathway from the retina to the LGN, as shown in 
Figure 23.10. 

 Imagine for a moment that you must lead a growing retinal ganglion 
cell axon to the correct location in the LGN. First you travel down the 
optic stalk toward the brain. But soon you reach the optic chiasm at the 
base of the brain and must decide which fork in the road to take. You have 
three  choices:  You  can  enter  the  optic  tract  on  the  same  side,  you  can 
enter the optic tract on the opposite side, or you can dive into the other 
optic nerve. The correct path depends on the location in the retina of your 
ganglion cell and on the cell type. If you came from the nasal retina, you 
would cross over at the chiasm into the contralateral optic tract, but if 
you came from the temporal retina, you would stay in the tract on the 
same side. And in no case would you enter the other optic nerve. These 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   795
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   795

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

796

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

LGN

Optic tract

Optic chiasm

LGN layers

Lateral
geniculate
nucleus 

Medial
geniculate
nucleus

Contralateral
optic tract

3

2

▲ FIGURE 23.10
The three phases of pathway forma-
tion.  The growing retinal axon must 
make several “decisions” to find its cor-
rect target in the LGN. ① During path-
way selection, the axon must choose the 
correct path. ② During target selection, 
the axon must choose the correct struc-
ture to innervate. ③ During address se-
lection, the axon must choose the cor-
rect cells to synapse with in the target 
structure.

Ipsilateral
optic tract

1

Contralateral
optic nerve

Trajectory of
growing axon

are examples of the “decisions” that must be made by the growing axon 
during  pathway selection . 

 Having  forged  your  way  into  the  dorsal  thalamus,  you  are  now 
 confronted with the choice of which thalamic nucleus to innervate. The 
correct choice, of course, is the lateral geniculate nucleus. This decision is 
called  target selection . 

 But ﬁ nding the correct target still isn’t enough. You must now ﬁ nd the 
correct layer of the LGN. You also must make sure that you sort yourself 
out with respect to other invading retinal axons so that retinotopy in the 
LGN  is  established.  These  are  examples  of  the  decisions  that  must  be 
made by the growing axon during  address selection . 

 We  will  see  that  each  of  the  three  phases  of  pathway  formation  de-
pends critically on communication between cells. This communication oc-
curs in several ways: direct cell–cell contact, contact between cells and 
the  extracellular  secretions  of  other  cells,  and  communication  between 
cells over a distance via diffusible chemicals. As the pathways develop, 
the neurons also begin to communicate via action potentials and synaptic 
transmission. 

Neurite

Mitochondrion

Microtubules

Actin filaments

Lamellipodia

Filopodia

▲ FIGURE 23.11
The growth cone.  The filopodia probe 
the environment and direct the growth of 
the neurite towards attractive cues.

 The Growing Axon 
 Once the neural precursor cell has migrated to take up its appropriate 
position in the nervous system, the neuron differentiates and extends the 
processes  that  will  ultimately  become  the  axon  and  dendrites.  At  this 
early  stage,  however,  the  axonal  and  dendritic  processes  appear  quite 
similar and collectively are still called neurites. The growing tip of a neu-
rite is called a  growth cone  (Figure 23.11). 

 The growth cone is specialized to identify an appropriate path for neu-
rite elongation. The leading edge of the growth cone consists of ﬂ at sheets 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   796
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   796

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

797

of membrane called  lamellipodia  that undulate in rhythmic waves like 
the  wings  of  a  stingray  swimming  along  the  ocean  bottom.  Extending 
from the lamellipodia are thin spikes called  ﬁ lopodia , which constantly 
probe the environment, moving in and out of the lamellipodia. Growth of 
the neurite occurs when a ﬁ lopodium, instead of retracting, takes hold of 
the substrate (the surface on which it is growing) and pulls the advancing 
growth cone forward. 

 Obviously,  axonal  growth  cannot  occur  unless  the  growth  cone  is 
able  to  advance  along  the  substrate.  An  important  substrate  consists 
of ﬁ brous proteins that are deposited in the spaces between cells, the 
 extracellular matrix . Growth occurs only if the extracellular matrix 
contains the appropriate proteins. An example of a permissive substrate 
is the glycoprotein  laminin . The growing axons express special surface 
molecules called  integrins  that bind laminin, and this interaction pro-
motes axonal elongation. Permissive substrates, bordered by repulsive 
ones,  can  provide  corridors  that  channel  axon  growth  along  speciﬁ c 
pathways. 

 Travel down such molecular highways is also aided by   fasciculation , 
a  mechanism  that  causes  axons  growing  together  to  stick  together 
(Figure 23.12). Fasciculation is due to the expression of speciﬁ c surface 
molecules called  cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) . The CAMs in the 
membrane of neighboring axons bind tightly to one another, causing the 
axons to grow in unison. 

Axon

Axon

Axon

CAMs

Integrin
molecules

Laminin 
molecules

Extracellular matrix

▲ FIGURE 23.12
Fasciculation.  The bottom axon grows 
along the molecular “highway” of the ex-
tracellular matrix. The other axons ride 
piggyback, sticking to one another by 
the interaction of cell-adhesion mole-
cules (CAMs) on their surfaces.

 Axon Guidance 
 Wiring  the  brain  appears  to  be  a  formidable  challenge,  particularly  in 
view of the long distances that many axons traverse in the mature ner-
vous system. Remember, though, that distances are not nearly as great 
early in development, when the entire nervous system is no more than a 
few centimeters long. A common mode of pathway formation is the initial 
establishment of connections by  pioneer axons . These axons “stretch” as 
the  nervous  system  expands  and  guide  their  later  developing  neighbor 
axons to the same targets. Still, the question remains of how the pioneer 
axons grow in the correct direction, along the correct paths, to the cor-
rect  targets.  The  answer  appears  to  be  that  the  trajectory  of  the  axon 
is broken into short segments that may only be a few hundred microns 
long. The axon concludes a segment when it arrives at an intermediate 
target. The interaction of the axon and the intermediate target throws 
a molecular switch that sends the axon onward to another intermediate 
target. Thus, by “connecting the dots,” the axon eventually arrives at its 
ﬁ nal destination. 

 Guidance Cues. Growth cones differ in terms of the molecules they ex-
press  on  their  membranes.  Interactions  of  these  cell  surface  molecules 
with   guidance  cues   in  the  environment  determine  the  direction  and 
amount of growth. Guidance cues can be attractive or repulsive, depend-
ing on the receptors expressed by the axons. 

 A  chemoattractant  is a diffusible molecule that acts over a distance 
to attract growing axons toward their targets, like the aroma of freshly 
brewed java might attract a coffee lover. Although the existence of such 
chemoattractants  was  proposed  over  a  century  ago  by  Cajal  and  was 
inferred  by  many  experimental  studies  since  then,  only  very  recently 
have  attractant  molecules  been  identiﬁ ed  in  mammals.  The  ﬁ rst  to  be 
 discovered is a protein called  netrin . Netrin is secreted by neurons in the 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   797
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   797

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

798

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Midline

Netrin
receptors

Netrin
Slit

Growth
cone

(a)

Ventral surface
of spinal cord

Midline

Robo 
(slit receptor)

Ventral surface
of spinal cord

(b)
▲ FIGURE 23.13
Chemoattraction and chemorepulsion.  Axons grow across the midline in two 
stages. First they are attracted to the midline, and then they are repelled from the 
midline. (a) The protein called netrin is secreted by cells in the ventral midline of 
the spinal cord. Axons with the appropriate netrin receptors are attracted to the 
region of highest netrin concentration. (b) The protein called slit is also secreted 
by midline cells. Axons that express the protein called robo, the slit receptor, grow 
away from the region of highest slit concentration. Up-regulation of robo by axons 
that cross the midline ensures that they keep growing away from the midline.

ventral midline of the spinal cord (Figure 23.13). The gradient of netrin at-
tracts the axons of dorsal horn neurons that will cross the midline to form 
the  spinothalamic  tract.  These  axons  possess  netrin  receptors,  and  the 
binding of netrin to the receptor spurs growth toward the source of netrin. 
 But  that’s  only  half  the  story.  Once  the  decussating  axons  cross  the 
midline, they need to escape the powerful siren song of netrin. This es-
cape is enabled by the action of  slit , another protein secreted by midline 
cells. Slit is an example of a  chemorepellent , a diffusible molecule that 
chases axons away. For slit to exert this action, however, the axon must 
express on its surface the slit receptor, a protein called  robo . The growth 
cones that are attracted to the midline by netrin express little robo and 
are therefore insensitive to repulsion by slit. However, once they cross the 
midline, they encounter a signal that causes robo to be up-regulated. Now 
slit repels the axons so they grow away from the midline. 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   798
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   798

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

799

 This example shows how axons can be “pulled” and “pushed” by the 
coordinated  actions  of  chemoattractants  and  chemorepellents.  The  tra-
jectory of the axons to and from the midline is also constrained by the 
permissive substrates that are available for growth. In this example, the 
cells of the midline are an intermediate target—one of the “dots”—along 
the molecular highway that spans the midline. These cells serve to alter-
nately attract and then repel the growing axon as it crosses from one side 
of the CNS to the other. 

 Establishing Topographic Maps. Let’s return to the example of the grow-
ing retinogeniculate axon (see Figure 23.10). These axons grow along the 
substrate provided by the extracellular matrix of the ventral wall of the 
optic stalk. An important “choice point” occurs at the optic chiasm. Axons 
from the nasal retina cross and ascend in the contralateral optic tract, 
while axons from the temporal retina remain in the ipsilateral optic tract. 
From our discussion so far, we can infer that nasal and temporal retinal 
axons express different receptors to cues secreted at the midline. 

 Once the axons from the retinas are sorted out at the midline, they con-
tinue on to innervate targets such as the LGN and the superior colliculus. 
Sorting of the axons occurs again, this time to establish a retinotopic map in 
the target structure. If we accept the notion that axons differ depending on 
their position in the retina (as they must, to account for the partial decus-
sation at the optic chiasm), then we have a potential molecular basis for the 
establishment of retinotopy. This idea, that chemical markers on growing 
axons are matched with complementary chemical markers on their targets 
to establish precise connections, is called the  chemoafﬁ nity hypothesis . 
 This hypothesis was ﬁ rst tested in the 1940s by Roger Sperry, at the 
California Institute of Technology, in an important series of experiments 
using the retinotectal projection in frogs. The tectum is the amphibian 
homologue of the mammalian superior colliculus. The tectum receives 
retinotopically ordered input from the contralateral eye and uses this in-
formation to organize movements in response to visual stimulation, such 
as lunging after a ﬂ y passing overhead. Thus, this system can be used 
to investigate the mechanisms that generate orderly maps in the CNS. 
 Another advantage of amphibians is that their CNS axons will regen-
erate after being cut, which is not true for mammals (Box 23.3). Sperry 
took advantage of this property to investigate how the retinotopic map was 
established in the tectum. In one experiment, Sperry cut the optic nerve, 
rotated the eye 180° in the orbit, and then allowed the upside-down nerve 
to regenerate. Despite the fact that the axons in the optic nerve were now 
scrambled from where they would occur naturally, the axons grew into the 
tectum to exactly the same sites that they occupied originally. Now, when 
a ﬂ y passed overhead, these frogs lunged down instead of up because their 
eyes were providing the brain a mirror image of the world. 

 What factors control the guidance of retinal axons to the correct part of 
the tectum? When the axons arrive at the tectum, they must grow along 
the membranes of tectal cells. The axons from the nasal retina cross the 
anterior part of the tectum and innervate the neurons in the posterior part. 
The axons of the temporal retina, in contrast, grow into the anterior tec-
tum and stop there (Figure 23.14a). Why? Experiments have shown that 
the cell membranes of anterior and posterior tectal neurons differentially 
express factors that allow the growth of nasal and temporal retinal axons. 
Nasal axons grow well on the substrate provided by both anterior and pos-
terior tectal membranes (Figure 23.14b). However, temporal axons grow 
only on anterior tectal membranes; the posterior membranes are repul-
sive (Figure 23.14c). Research has led to the discovery that proteins called 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   799
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   799

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

800

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 23.3

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Why Our CNS Axons Don’t Regenerate

Compared with other vertebrates, mammals are fortunate 

in  many  ways.  We  have  computing  power  and  behavioral 
ﬂ exibility that our distant aquatic cousins, ﬁ sh and amphib-
ians,  utterly  lack.  However,  in  one  interesting  respect,  ﬁ sh 
and frogs have a distinct advantage—the growth of axons in 
the adult CNS after injury. Cut the optic nerve in a frog, and 
it grows back. Do the same thing in a human, and the per-
son is blind forever. Of course, our CNS axons do grow over 
long distances early in development. But something happens 
shortly after birth that makes the CNS, especially the white 
matter, a hostile environment for axon growth.

When an axon is cut, the distal segment degenerates be-
cause it is isolated from the soma. However, the severed tip 
of the proximal segment initially responds by emitting growth 
cones.  In  the  adult  mammalian  CNS,  sadly,  this  growth  is 
aborted. Not in the mammalian PNS, though; if you’ve ever 
had  a  deep  cut  that  severed  a  peripheral  nerve,  you  know 
that eventually sensations can come back in the denervated 
skin. This happens because PNS axons are capable of re-
generation over long distances.

Surprisingly, the critical difference between the mamma-
lian PNS and CNS is not the neurons. A PNS dorsal root gan-
glion cell axon regenerates in the peripheral nerve, but when 
it hits the environment of the CNS, in the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord, growth ceases. Conversely, if a CNS alpha motor 
neuron axon is cut in the periphery, it grows back to its target. 
If it is cut in the CNS, no regeneration occurs. Thus, the criti-
cal difference seems to be the different environments of the 
CNS and PNS. This idea was tested in a very important series 
of experiments, beginning in the early 1980s, performed on 
adult rodents by Albert Aguayo and his colleagues at Montreal 
General  Hospital.  They  showed  that  crushed  optic  nerve 
axons can grow long distances if they are given a peripheral 
nerve graft to grow along (Figure A). However, as soon as the 
axon hit the CNS target of the nerve graft, growth ceased.

What  is  different  about  peripheral  nerves?  The  type  of 
myelinating glial cell varies: oligodendroglia in the CNS and 
Schwann cells in the PNS (see Chapter 2). Experiments per-
formed by Martin Schwab of the University of Zurich showed 
that CNS neurons grown in tissue culture will extend axons 
along substrates prepared from Schwann cells but not along 
CNS oligodendroglia and myelin. This ﬁ nding led to the search 
for glial factors that inhibit axon growth, and a molecule called 
nogo was ﬁ nally identiﬁ ed early in 2000. Nogo is apparently 
released when oligodendroglia are damaged.

Antibodies raised against nogo neutralize the molecule’s 
growth-suppressing activity. Schwab and his colleagues have 

injected  the  anti-nogo  antibody  (called  IN-1)  into  adult  rats 
after spinal cord injury. This treatment enabled about 5% of 
the severed axons to regenerate—a modest effect, perhaps, 
but sufﬁ cient for the animals to show a remarkable functional 
recovery. The same antibodies have also been used to local-
ize nogo in the nervous system. The protein is made by oli-
godendroglia in mammals, but not in ﬁ sh, and it is not found 
in Schwann cells.

One of the last steps in wiring the mammalian brain is wrap-
ping the young axons in myelin. This has the beneﬁ cial effect 
of speeding action potential conduction, but it comes with a 
heavy cost—the inhibition of axon growth after injury. The lack 
of axon regeneration in the adult CNS was accepted by neu-
rologists in the last century as a dismal fact of life. However, 
our recent understanding of molecules with the power to stim-
ulate or inhibit CNS axon growth offers hope for the twenty-
ﬁ rst century that treatments can be devised to promote axon 
regeneration in the damaged human brain and spinal cord.

Right eye

Optic nerve
crush

Optic chiasm

Optic tract

Superior
colliculus

Figure A

Graft of
sciatic nerve

Growing tip of 
retinal ganglion
cell

Oligodendroglia
containing nogo
Schwann cells
lacking nogo

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   800
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   800

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

801

Neurons from nasal retina

Membranes from
anterior tectum

Membranes from
posterior tectum

Membranes from
anterior tectum

Membranes from
posterior tectum

Neurons from temporal retina

(b)

(c)

Nasal

Temporal

Anterior

Posterior

(a)

Retina

Tectum

▲ FIGURE 23.14
Establishing retinotopy in the frog retinotectal projection.  (a) Retinotopy is es-
tablished when the nasal retina projects to the posterior tectum and the temporal 
retina projects to the anterior tectum. (b) To reveal how this retinotopy is estab-
lished, membranes of cells from anterior and posterior tectum are removed from 
the frog and deposited in a striped pattern at the bottom of a Petri dish. Experi-
ments show that nasal retinal axons in vitro grow equally well on anterior and 
posterior membranes. (c) Temporal axons, in contrast, are repelled by membranes 
from posterior tectum and grow only on anterior tectal membranes.

 ephrins  are one repulsive signal for temporal retinal axons. Speciﬁ c eph-
rin molecules are secreted in a gradient across the surface of the tectum, 
with the highest levels found on posterior tectal cells. An ephrin interacts 
with a receptor, called  eph , on the growing axon. The interaction of ephrin 
with its receptor inhibits further axonal growth, similar to the slit–robo 
interaction discussed earlier. 

 Such  gradients  in  the  expression  of  guidance  cues  and  their  axonal 
receptors can impose considerable topographic order on the wiring of the 
retina to its targets in the brain. However, as we will see in a moment, the 
ﬁ nal reﬁ nement of connections often requires neural activity. 

 Synapse Formation 
 When  the  growth  cone  comes  in  contact  with  its  target,  a  synapse  is 
formed. Most of what is known about this process comes from studies of 
the neuromuscular junction. The ﬁ rst step appears to be the induction of 
a cluster of postsynaptic receptors under the site of nerve–muscle contact. 
This clustering is triggered by an interaction between proteins secreted 
by the growth cone and the target membrane. At the neuromuscular junc-
tion,  one  of  these  proteins,  called   agrin ,  is  deposited  in  the  extracellu-
lar  space  at  the  site  of  contact  (Figure  23.15).  The  layer  of  proteins  in 
this space is called the  basal lamina . Agrin in the basal lamina binds to 
a receptor in the muscle cell membrane called  muscle-speciﬁ c kinase  or 
 MuSK . MuSK communicates with another molecule, called  rapsyn , which 
appears to act like a shepherd to gather the postsynaptic acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs) at the synapse. The size of the “ﬂ ock” of receptors is 
regulated by another molecule released by the axon, called  neuregulin , 
which stimulates the receptor gene expression in the muscle cell. 

 The  interaction  between  axon  and  target  occurs  in  both  directions, 
and the induction of a presynaptic terminal also appears to involve pro-
teins in the basal lamina. Basal lamina factors provided by the target cell 
evidently can stimulate Ca 2  ⫹  entry into the growth cone, which triggers 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   801
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   801

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

802

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Motor neuron growth cone/

axon terminal

Basal
lamina

1

Agrin
molecules

2

3

Muscle cell
membrane

Rapsyn

Agrin
receptor
(MuSK)

Migrating
ACh
receptors

ACh
receptor

▲ FIGURE 23.15
Steps in the formation of a neuromuscular synapse.   ① The growing motor 
neuron secretes the protein agrin into the basal lamina. ② Agrin interacts with 
MuSK in the muscle cell membrane. This interaction leads to ③ the clustering of 
ACh receptors in the postsynaptic membrane via the actions of rapsyn.

 neurotransmitter release. Thus, although the ﬁ nal maturation of synaptic 
structure may take a matter of weeks, rudimentary synaptic transmission 
appears very rapidly after contact is made. Besides mobilizing transmit-
ter, Ca 2  ⫹  entry into the axon also triggers changes in the cytoskeleton that 
cause it to assume the appearance of a presynaptic terminal and to adhere 
tightly to its postsynaptic partner. 

 Similar steps are involved in synapse formation in the CNS, but these 
may occur in a different order and they deﬁ nitely use distinct molecules 
(Figure 23.16). Microscopic imaging of neurons in tissue culture reveals 
that ﬁ lopodia are continually being formed and retracted from neuronal 
dendrites  seeking  innervation.  Synapse  formation  begins  when  such  a 
dendritic protrusion reaches out and touches an axon that might be pass-
ing by. This interaction appears to cause a preassembled presynaptic ac-
tive zone to be deposited at the site of contact followed by the recruitment 
of neurotransmitter receptors to the postsynaptic membrane. In addition, 
speciﬁ c adhesion molecules are expressed by both presynaptic and post-
synaptic membranes that serve to glue the partners together. 

Growing axon

1

Filopodium

Dendrite

Synaptic vesicle

Presynaptic active zone

2

3

Postsynaptic receptor
cluster

THE ELIMINATION OF CELLS AND SYNAPSES 
THE EELIMINNATION OF CELLS AND SYNAPSES

▲ FIGURE 23.16
Steps in the formation of a CNS 
 synapse.  ① A dendritic filopodium con-
tacts an axon. ② Contact leads to the 
recruitment of synaptic vesicles and ac-
tive zone proteins to the presynaptic 
membrane. ③ Neurotransmitter receptors 
accumulate postsynaptically.

 The  mechanisms  of  pathway  formation  we’ve  discussed  are  sufﬁ cient 
to establish considerable order in the connections of the fetal brain. For 
example,  in  the  visual  system,  these  mechanisms  ensure  that  (1)  reti-
nal axons reach the LGN, (2) geniculate axons reach layer IV of striate 
cortex, and (3) both of these sets of axons form synapses in their target 
structures in proper retinotopic order. But the job of wiring together the 
nervous system isn’t ﬁ nished yet. A prolonged period of development fol-
lows, from before birth all the way through adolescence, in which these 
connections are reﬁ ned. It may come as a surprise that one of the most 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   802
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   802

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

803

BOX 23.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

The Mystery of Autism

Autism is a developmental disorder in humans character-

ized by repetitive or stereotyped patterns of behavior and im-
pairments in communication and social interactions. Although 
affected  children  appear  to  be  normal  at  birth,  symptoms 
gradually appear over the course of the ﬁ rst 3 years. Among 
the signs ﬁ rst noticed by the parents of autistic children are 
a failure to speak by 16 months of age, poor eye contact, an 
inability to play with toys, an obsessive attachment to a toy 
or object, and a failure to smile. Although all individuals with 
an autism diagnosis will show these traits, the severity varies 
considerably from one person to the next, as does the associ-
ation or “comorbidity” with other diagnosable disorders such 
as  intellectual  disability  and  seizures.  In  recognition  of  this 
diversity,  clinicians  typically  use  the  term  “autism  spectrum 
disorder” or ASD to describe this condition. Individuals at one 
end of the spectrum may never develop language and exhibit 
severe cognitive impairment. At the other end, individuals may 
grow up to be socially awkward but intellectually gifted.

ASD  is  a  highly  heritable  disorder,  but  the  genetics  are 
complex. In some cases, the gene mutations conferring risk 
for autism occur de novo, meaning that they occur sporadi-
cally either in the sperm or egg cells of the parents. One risk 
factor for such sporadic mutations is advanced parental age, 
especially of fathers. In other cases, the cause seems to be 
many small mutations passed on from the parents that only 
manifest as ASD in offspring that get a “double hit.” Advances 
in  DNA  sequencing  technology  have  enabled  the  discovery 
of many of the inherited and sporadic mutations in ASD. The 
affected  genes  number  in  the  hundreds,  suggesting  that 
 disruption  of  many  different  cellular  processes  during  brain 
development can manifest as ASD. Thus, as for the other psy-
chiatric disorders discussed in Chapter 22, a diagnosis of ASD 
alone does not identify the cause, or etiology, of the underlying 
disease. The diversity of genetic etiologies partly explains why 
the symptoms vary so much from one person to the next.

Although abnormal behaviors emerge gradually after birth, 
there is evidence that in some cases, the stage may be set for 

ASD during fetal development. For example, researchers re-
cently discovered in postmortem brain samples from autistic 
children that small patches of frontal cortex had disorganized 
cortical  layers  which,  as  we  have  learned  in  this  chapter, 
are formed early in development. Furthermore, many genes 
 implicated in ASD are also known to be important for mid-
gestational cortical development.

Imaging  studies  have  shown  that  autistic  children  also 
tend to have accelerated growth of the brain, both gray and 
white matter, after birth. This ﬁ nding suggests the brains of 
autistic infants have too many neurons and too many axons, 
although  changes  in  glia  are  also  possible.  Brain  growth  is 
controlled by balancing the genesis and destruction of cells, 
axons, and synapses and the proteins that comprise them. 
Mutations that bring this process out of balance, by excessive 
genesis or reduced destruction, could lead to the  abnormal 
brain growth that is ultimately expressed as the impairments 
in  behavior,  communication,  and  social  interactions  that 
characterize autism.

Neuroscientists  hope  that  understanding  how  the  brain 
normally  becomes  wired  together  will  suggest  therapies 
to  correct  the  altered  trajectory  of  brain  growth  in  children 
at risk for autism. Studies of a disease called fragile X syn-
drome (FXS) provide a case in point. FXS, characterized by 
intellectual disability and ASD, is caused by disruption of the 
FMR1 gene that encodes a protein called FMRP (introduced 
in  Chapter  2).  By  knocking  this  gene  out  in  mice  and  fruit 
ﬂ ies, researchers have been able to identify how brains func-
tion differently with this mutation. These studies have shown 
that FMRP normally serves as a brake on protein synthesis in 
neurons. In the absence of FMRP, too many proteins are pro-
duced. Remarkably, treatments designed to dampen down 
this excessive protein synthesis have been shown to correct 
many of the deﬁ cits caused by deletion of FMRP in the animal 
models. These studies have raised the tantalizing possibility 
that the veil of autism and intellectual disability might be lifted 
in some cases with appropriate drug therapy.

signiﬁ cant  reﬁ nements  is  a  large-scale   reduction   in  the  numbers  of  all 
those  newly  formed  neurons  and  synapses.  The  development  of  proper 
brain function requires a careful balance between the genesis and elimi-
nation of cells and synapses (Box 23.4). 

 Cell Death 
 Entire populations of neurons are eliminated during pathway formation 
by a process known as  programmed cell death . After axons have reached 
their targets and synapse formation has begun, there is a progressive de-
cline in the number of presynaptic axons and neurons. Cell death  reﬂ ects 
competition  for   trophic  factors ,  life-sustaining  substances  that  are 
 provided in limited quantities by the target cells. This process is believed 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   803
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   803

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

804

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Initial state

Following
competition
for trophic
factors

Selective 
cell death

Input 
neurons

Target
neurons

Input 
neurons

Target
neurons

▲ FIGURE 23.17
Matching inputs with targets by selec-
tive cell death.  The input neurons are 
believed to compete with one another for 
limited quantities of trophic factors pro-
duced by the target neurons.

to produce the proper match in the number of presynaptic and postsynap-
tic neurons (Figure 23.17). 

 A peptide called  nerve growth factor (NGF)  was the ﬁ rst trophic fac-
tor to be identiﬁ ed in the 1940s by Italian biologist Rita Levi-Montalcini. 
NGF is produced by the targets of axons in the sympathetic division of the 
ANS. Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen found that the injection of anti-
bodies to NGF into newborn mice resulted in total degeneration of the sym-
pathetic ganglia. NGF, produced and released by the target  tissue, is taken 
up by the sympathetic axons and transported retrogradely, where it acts 
to promote neuronal survival. Indeed, if axoplasmic transport is disrupted, 
the neurons will die despite the release of NGF by the target tissue. Their 
pioneering work earned Levi-Montalcini and Cohen the 1986 Nobel Prize. 
 NGF  is  one  of  a  family  of  related  trophic  proteins  collectively  called 
the  neurotrophins . Family members include the proteins  NT-3 ,  NT-4 , 
and   brain-derived  neurotrophic  factor  (BDNF) ,  which  is  important  for 
the survival of visual cortical neurons. Neurotrophins act at speciﬁ c cell 
surface receptors. Most of the receptors are neurotrophin-activated pro-
tein  kinases,  called   trk  receptors ,  that  phosphorylate  tyrosine  residues 
on their substrate proteins (recall phosphorylation from Chapter 6). This 
phosphorylation  reaction  stimulates  a  second  messenger  cascade  that 
 ultimately alters gene expression in the cell’s nucleus. 

 The  description  of  cell  death  during  development  as  “programmed” 
 reﬂ ects the fact that it is actually a consequence of genetic instructions to 
self-destruct. The important discovery of cell death genes by Robert Horvitz 
at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  was  recognized  with  the 
2004 Nobel Prize. It is now understood that neurotrophins save neurons 
by switching off this genetic program. The expression of cell death genes 
causes neurons to die by a process called  apoptosis , the systematic disas-
sembly of the neuron. Apoptosis differs from  necrosis , which is the acciden-
tal cell death resulting from injury to cells. Research on neuronal cell death 
is proceeding at a rapid pace, fueled by the hope that it might be possible to 
rescue dying neurons in neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s 
disease (see Box 2.4) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (see Box 13.1). 

 Changes in Synaptic Capacity 
 Each neuron can receive on its dendrites and soma a ﬁ nite number of syn-
apses. This number is the  synaptic capacity  of the neuron. Throughout 
the  nervous  system,  synaptic  capacity  peaks  early  in  development  and 
then declines as the neurons mature. For example, in the striate cortex 
of all species examined so far, the synaptic capacity of immature neurons 
exceeds that of adult cells by about 50%. In other words, visual cortical 
neurons  in  the  infant  brain  receive  one-and-a-half  times  as  many  syn-
apses as do the neurons in adults. 

 When  do  cortical  neurons  lose  all  those  synapses?  Yale  University 
scientists Jean-Pierre Bourgeois and Pasko Rakic conducted a detailed 
study to address this question in the striate cortex of the macaque mon-
key. They discovered that synaptic capacity was remarkably constant in 
the striate cortex from infancy until the time of puberty. However, during 
the subsequent adolescent period, synaptic capacity declined sharply—by 
almost 50% in just over 2 years. A quick calculation revealed the  following 
startling fact: The loss of synapses in the primary visual cortex  during 
adolescence  occurs  at  an  average  rate  of   5000  per  second .  (No  wonder 
adolescence is such a trying time!) 

 Once again, the neuromuscular junction has provided a useful model 
for  studying  synaptic  elimination.  Initially,  a  muscle  ﬁ ber  may  receive 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   804
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   804

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

805

Alpha motor neuron

Polyneuronal
innervation of
immature muscle

AChR blockade
in small area of
neuromuscular
junction

Maturation

One alpha motor
axon innervates
one muscle fiber

Postsynaptic AChRs

Loss of AChRs 
at site of
AChR blockade

Withdrawal of axon
branch at site of
AChR blockade

(a)

(b)

input  from  several  different  motor  neurons.  Eventually,  however,  this 
polyneuronal innervation is lost, and each muscle ﬁ ber receives synaptic 
input from a single alpha motor neuron (Figure 23.18a). This process is 
regulated  by  electrical  activity  in  the  muscle.  Silencing  the  activity  of 
the muscle ﬁ ber leads to a retention of polyneuronal innervation, while 
stimulation of the muscle accelerates the elimination of all but one input. 
 Careful observations have revealed that the ﬁ rst change during syn-
apse elimination is the loss of postsynaptic AChRs, followed by the dis-
assembly of the presynaptic terminal and retraction of the axon branch. 
What causes the receptors to disappear? The answer appears to be insuf-
ﬁ cient receptor activation in an otherwise active muscle. If receptors are 
partially blocked with  ␣ -bungarotoxin (see Box 5.5), they are internalized 
and the overlying axon terminal withdraws (Figure 23.18b). However, if 
all  the AChRs are blocked, the synapses remain because the muscle is 
also silent. As we will see in a moment, a similar process appears to occur 
during the reﬁ nement of connections in the CNS. 

ACTIVITY-DEPENDENT SYNAPTIC 
ACTIVVITY-DDEPENDENT SYNAAPTIC 
REARRRANGGEMENT 
REARRANGEMENT 

 Imagine a neuron that has a synaptic capacity of six synapses and re-
ceives  inputs  from  two  presynaptic  neurons,  A  and  B  (Figure  23.19). 
One  arrangement  is  that  each  of  the  presynaptic  neurons  provides 
three   synapses.  Another  arrangement  is  that  neuron  A  provides  one 
synapse and neuron B provides ﬁ ve. A change from one such pattern of 

▲ FIGURE 23.18
Synapse elimination.  (a) Initially, each 
muscle fiber receives inputs from several 
alpha motor neurons. Over the course of 
development, all inputs but one are lost. 
(b) Normally, postsynaptic AChR loss 
precedes the withdrawal of the axon 
branch. Simply blocking a subset of re-
ceptors with ␣-bungarotoxin can also 
 stimulate synapse elimination.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   805
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   805

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

806

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

A

B

Presynaptic
neurons

A

B

Synaptic

rearrangement

Target

cell

Target

cell

▲ FIGURE 23.19
Synaptic rearrangement.  The target cell receives the same number of synapses 
in both cases, but the innervation pattern has changed.

synapses  to  another  is  called   synaptic  rearrangement.   There  is  abun-
dant evidence for widespread synaptic rearrangement in the immature 
brain. 

 Synaptic rearrangement is the ﬁ nal step in the process of address se-
lection. Unlike most of the earlier steps of pathway formation,  synaptic 
rearrangement  occurs  as  a  consequence  of  neural  activity  and  synaptic 
transmission . In the visual system, some of this activity-dependent shap-
ing of connections occurs prior to birth in response to spontaneous neu-
ronal  discharges.  However,  signiﬁ cant  activity-dependent  development 
occurs after birth and is inﬂ uenced profoundly by sensory experience dur-
ing  childhood.  Thus,  we  will  ﬁ nd  that  the  ultimate  performance  of  the 
adult visual system is determined to a signiﬁ cant extent by the quality of 
the visual environment during the early postnatal period. In a very real 
sense,  we learn to see during a critical period of postnatal development . 

 The  neuroscientists  who  pioneered  this  ﬁ eld  were  none  other  than 
David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel who, you’ll recall from Chapter 10, also 
laid the foundation for our current understanding of the central visual 
system  in  the  adult  brain.  In  1981,  they  shared  the  Nobel  Prize  with 
Roger Sperry. Macaque monkeys and cats were used by Hubel and Wiesel 
as  models  for  studies  of  activity-dependent  visual  system  development 
because, like humans, both of these species have good binocular vision. 
Recent studies have used rodents because they are better suited for inves-
tigation of the underlying molecular mechanisms. 

 Synaptic Segregation 
 The precision of wiring achieved by chemical attractants and repellents 
can be impressive. In some circuits, however, the ﬁ nal reﬁ nement of syn-
aptic connections appears to require neural activity. A classic example is 
the segregation of eye-speciﬁ c inputs in the cat LGN. 

 Segregation of Retinal Inputs to the LGN. The ﬁ rst axons to reach the LGN 
are usually those from the contralateral retina, and they spread out to occupy 
the entire nucleus. Somewhat later, the ipsilateral projection arrives and in-
termingles with the axons of the contralateral eye. Then the axons from the 
two eyes segregate into the eye-speciﬁ c domains that are characteristic of 
the adult nucleus. Silencing retinal activity with TTX (tetrodotoxin) prevents 
this process of segregation (recall that TTX blocks action potentials). What is 
the source of the activity, and how does it orchestrate segregation? 

 Since segregation occurs in the womb, prior to the development of pho-
toreceptors,  the  activity  cannot  be  driven  by  light  stimulation.  Rather, 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   806
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   806

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

807

it appears that ganglion cells are spontaneously active during this period 
of  fetal  development.  This  activity  is  not  random,  however.  Studies  by 
Carla Shatz and her colleagues at Stanford University indicate that gan-
glion cells ﬁ re in quasisynchronous “waves” that spread across the retina. 
The origin of the wave and its direction of propagation may be random, 
but during each wave, the activity in a ganglion cell is highly correlated 
with the activity of its nearest neighbors. And because these waves are 
generated independently in the two retinas, the activity patterns arising 
in the two eyes are not correlated with respect to each other. 

 Segregation is thought to depend on a process of synaptic stabiliza-
tion whereby only retinal terminals that are active at the same time as 
their  postsynaptic  LGN  target  neuron  are  retained.  This  hypothetical 
mechanism of synaptic plasticity was ﬁ rst articulated by Canadian psy-
chologist Donald Hebb in the 1940s. Consequently, synapses that can be 
modiﬁ ed in this way are called  Hebb synapses , and synaptic rearrange-
ments of this sort are called  Hebbian modiﬁ cations . According to this 
hypothesis,  whenever  a  wave  of  retinal  activity  drives  a  postsynaptic 
LGN  neuron  to  ﬁ re  action  potentials,  the  synapses  between  them  are 
stabilized  (Figure  23.20).  Because  the  activity  from  the  two  eyes  does 
not occur at the same time, the inputs will compete on a “winner-takes-
all” basis until one input is retained and the other is eliminated. Stray 
retinal  inputs  in  the  inappropriate  LGN  layer  are  the  losers  because 
their activity does not consistently correlate with the strongest postsyn-
aptic  response  (which  is  evoked  by  the  activity  of  the  other  eye).  In  a 
moment, we’ll explore some potential mechanisms for such correlation-
based  synaptic modiﬁ cation. 

Synapses undergoing
Hebbian modification

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

Synapses undergoing
Hebbian modification

▲ FIGURE 23.20
Plasticity at Hebb synapses.  Two tar-
get neurons in the LGN have inputs from 
different eyes. Inputs from the two eyes 
initially overlap and then segregate un-
der the influence of activity. (a) The two 
input neurons in one eye (top) fire at the 
same time. This is sufficient to cause the 
top LGN target neuron to fire but not 
the bottom one. The active inputs onto 
the active target undergo Hebbian modi-
fication and become more effective. 
(b) This is the same situation as in part 
a, except that now the two input neu-
rons in the other eye (bottom) are active 
simultaneously, causing the bottom tar-
get neuron to fire. (c) Over time, neurons 
that fire together wire together. Notice 
also that input cells that fire out of sync 
with the target lose their link.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   807
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   807

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

808

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 Segregation of LGN Inputs in the Striate Cortex. In visual cortex of mon-
keys and cats (but not in most other species), the inputs from LGN neu-
rons serving the two eyes are segregated into ocular dominance columns. 
This segregation occurs before birth and appears to be due to a combina-
tion of molecular guidance cues and retinal activity differences (Box 23.5). 

BOX 23.5

B R A I N   F O O D

Three-Eyed Frogs, Ocular Dominance Columns, 
and Other Oddities

Ocular dominance columns (stripes, or bands, depending 

on how they are viewed) are a peculiar feature of some pri-
mates,  most  notably  humans  and  macaque  monkeys,  and 
some carnivores, notably cats and ferrets. For many years, 
researchers  believed  that  inputs  from  the  two  eyes  initially 
overlapped in layer IV of visual cortex of these species and 
that segregation into alternating columns was based on the 
comparison of activity generated in the retinas. However, this 
notion  was  challenged  by  the  observation  that  eye-speciﬁ c 
inputs  to  the  visual  cortex  of  ferrets  can  be  detected  even 
when development proceeds without any retinal activity at all. 
This ﬁ nding suggests that molecular guidance mechanisms, 
rather  than  activity  patterns,  cause  segregation  into  ocular 
dominance stripes.

It  is  important  to  recognize,  however,  that  some  prob-
lems in development can have more than one solution. The 
branches  of  the  mammalian  family  tree  leading  to  modern 
carnivores  and  primates  diverged  very  early  in  evolution-
ary  history,  about  95  million  years  ago.  Since  most  other 

 mammals  lack  ocular  dominance  columns,  evolutionary  bi-
ologists believe that the columns in carnivores and primates 
evolved independently, so we must be cautious when gener-
alizing about the mechanisms of ocular dominance formation.
This point is nicely illustrated by studies of three-eyed frogs 
conducted  in  the  1980s  by  Martha  Constantine-Paton  and 
her  students,  then  at  Princeton  University.  Frogs  don’t  have 
three eyes, of course. Normally they have two eyes, and each 
retina projects axons exclusively to the contralateral optic tec-
tum. However, by transplanting the eye bud from one embryo 
into the forebrain area of another, the researchers were able to 
create a situation where two retinal projections were forced to 
grow into the same tectum (Figure A, part a). Amazingly, the 
input segregated into stripes that look very much like the ocular 
dominance patterns in monkey striate cortex (Figure A, part b). 
If activity in the retinas was blocked, however, the axons from 
the  two  eyes  rapidly  became  intermingled.  This  experiment 
proves that differences in activity can indeed be used to segre-
gate inputs, as suggested by Hebbian models of development.

(a)
Figure A
 (a) This frog’s third eye formed from a transplanted embryonic eye bud. (b) Tangential sections through the tectum 
of a three-eyed frog, illuminated to show the distribution of radioactive axon terminals serving one eye. 
(Source: Courtesy of Dr. Martha Constantine-Paton.)

(b)

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   808
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   808

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

809

 Regardless of how ocular dominance columns form, however, the ap-
pearance of segregation does not mean that the axons lose their abil-
ity  to  grow  and  retract.  “Plasticity”  of  ocular  dominance  columns  in 
macaques after birth can be dramatically demonstrated by an experi-
mental  manipulation  used  by  Wiesel  and  Hubel,  called    monocular 
deprivation , in which one eyelid of a young monkey is sealed closed. 
If monocular deprivation is begun shortly after birth, the striking re-
sult is that the “open-eye” columns expand in width while the “closed-
eye” columns shrink (Figure 23.21). Moreover, these effects of monocu-
lar deprivation can be reversed simply by closing the previously open 
eye and opening the previously closed eye. The result of this “reversed-
occlusion”  manipulation  is  that  the  shrunken  ocular  dominance  col-
umns  of  the  formerly  closed  eye  expand,  and  the  expanded  columns 
of the formerly open eye shrink. Thus, LGN axons and their synapses 
in layer IV are highly dynamic, even after birth. Notice that this type 
of  synaptic  rearrangement  is  not  just  activity  dependent  but  is  also 
 experience  dependent   because  it  relies  on  the  quality  of  the  sensory 
environment. 

 The plasticity of ocular dominance columns does not occur throughout 
life,  however.  Hubel  and  Wiesel  found  that  if  the  deprivation  is  begun 
later in life, these anatomical effects are not observed in layer IV. Thus, 
a  critical period  exists for this type of structural modiﬁ cation. In the 
macaque monkey, the critical period for anatomical plasticity in layer IV 
lasts until about 6 weeks of age. After this critical period, the LGN af-
ferents apparently lose their capacity for growth and retraction and, in a 
sense, are cemented in place. 

 It is important to appreciate that there are many “critical periods” dur-
ing development—speciﬁ c times when developmental fate is inﬂ uenced 
by the environment (Box 23.6). In the visual cortex, the end of the critical 
period for anatomical plasticity in layer IV does not spell the end of the 
inﬂ uence  of  visual  experience  on  cortical  development.  As  we  will  now 
see, the synapses in striate cortex remain modiﬁ able by experience until 
adolescence and beyond. 

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 23.21
Modification of ocular dominance 
stripes after monocular deprivation.  
Tangential sections through layer IV of 
macaque monkey striate cortex illumi-
nated to show the distribution of radio-
active LGN terminals serving one eye. 
(a) A normal monkey. (b) A monkey that 
had been monocularly deprived for 
22 months, starting at 2 weeks of age. 
The nondeprived eye had been injected, 
revealing expanded ocular dominance 
columns in layer IV. (Source: Wiesel, 
1982, p. 585.)

 Synaptic Convergence 
 Although the streams of information from the two eyes are initially seg-
regated, eventually they must be combined to make binocular vision pos-
sible.  The  anatomical  basis  for  binocular  vision  in  species  with  ocular 
 dominance columns is the convergence of inputs from layer IV cells serv-
ing the right and left eyes onto cells in layer III. These are among the last 
connections to be speciﬁ ed during the development of the retinogeniculo-
cortical pathway. Again, experience-dependent synaptic rearrangement 
plays a major role in this process. 

 Binocular  connections  are  formed  and  modiﬁ ed  under  the  inﬂ u-
ence  of  the  visual  environment  during  infancy  and  early  childhood. 
Unlike segregation of eye-speciﬁ c domains, which evidently depends on 
  asynchronous   patterns  of  activity  spontaneously  generated  in  the  two 
eyes,  the    establishment  of  binocular  receptive  ﬁ elds  depends  on  corre-
lated patterns of activity that arise from the two eyes as a consequence of 
vision .  This  has  been  demonstrated  clearly  by  experiments  that  bring 
the patterns of activity from the two eyes out of register. For example, 
monocular deprivation, which replaces patterned activity in one eye with 
random activity, profoundly disrupts the binocular connections in striate 
cortex.  Neurons  that  normally  have  binocular  receptive  ﬁ elds  instead 
respond only to stimulation of the nondeprived eye. This change in the 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   809
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   809

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

810

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 23.6

B R A I N   F O O D

The Critical Period Concept

A critical period of development may be deﬁ ned as a pe-

riod of time in which intercellular communication alters a cell’s 
fate. The concept is usually credited to the experimental em-
bryologist  Hans  Spemann.  Working  around  the  turn  of  the 
twentieth century, Spemann showed that transplantation of 
a piece of early embryo from one location to another often 
caused  the  “donor”  tissue  to  take  on  the  characteristics  of 
the “host,” but only if transplantation had taken place during 
a well-deﬁ ned time period. Once the transplanted tissue had 
been induced to change its developmental fate, the outcome 
could not be reversed. The intercellular communication that 
altered  the  physical  characteristics  (the  phenotype)  of  the 
transplanted cells was shown to be mediated by both con-
tact and chemical signals.

The term took on new signiﬁ cance with respect to brain 
development as a result of the work of Konrad Lorenz in the 
mid-1930s. Lorenz was interested in the process by which 
young  graylag  geese  become  socially  attached  to  their 
mother.  He  discovered  that  in  the  absence  of  the  mother, 
the young geese formed social attachment to a wide variety 
of moving objects, including Lorenz himself (Figure A). Once 
imprinted on an object, the goslings would follow it and be-
have  toward  it  as  if  it  were  their  mother.  Lorenz  used  the 
word “imprinting” to suggest that this ﬁ rst visual image was 

Figure A
 Konrad Lorenz with graylag geese. (Source: Nina 
Leen/Time Pix.)

somehow  permanently  etched  in  the  young  bird’s  nervous 
system.  Imprinting  was  also  found  to  be  limited  to  a  ﬁ nite 
window of time (the ﬁ rst 2 days after hatching), which Lorenz 
called the “critical period” for social attachment. Lorenz him-
self drew the analogy between this process of imprinting the 
external environment on the nervous system and the induc-
tion of tissue to change its developmental fate during critical 
periods of embryonic development.

This work had a tremendous impact in the ﬁ eld of de-
velopmental  psychology.  The  very  terms  imprinting  and 
critical  period  suggested  that  changes  in  the  behavioral 
phenotype caused by early sensory experience were per-
manent and irreversible later in life, much like the determi-
nation of tissue phenotype during embryonic development. 
Numerous studies extended the critical period concept to 
aspects  of  mammalian  psychosocial  development.  The 
fascinating  implication  was  that  the  fate  of  neurons  and 
neural circuits in the brain depended on the experience of 
the animal during early postnatal life. It is not difﬁ cult to ap-
preciate why research in this area took on social as well as 
scientiﬁ c signiﬁ cance.

By necessity, the effects of experience on neuronal fate 
must be exercised by neural activity generated at the  sensory 
epithelia  and  communicated  by  chemical  synaptic  trans-
mission. The idea that synaptic activity can alter the fate of 
neuronal connectivity during CNS development ﬁ rst received 
solid neurobiological support from the study of mammalian vi-
sual system development, beginning with the experiments of 
Hubel and Wiesel. Using anatomical and neurophysiological 
methods, they found that visual experience (or lack thereof) 
was an important determinant of the state of connectivity in 
the central visual pathways, and that this environmental inﬂ u-
ence was restricted to a ﬁ nite period of early postnatal life. 
A  great  deal  of  work  has  been  devoted  to  the  analysis  of 
experience-dependent plasticity of connections in the visual 
system. Thus, the visual system is an excellent model for il-
lustrating the principles of critical periods in nervous system 
development.

binocular  organization  of  the  cortex  is  called  an   ocular  dominance 
shift  (Figure 23.22). 

 These  effects  of  monocular  deprivation  are  not  merely  a  passive 
reflection  of  the  anatomical  changes  in  layer  IV  discussed  earlier. 
First, ocular dominance shifts can occur very rapidly, within hours of 
monocular deprivation, before any gross changes in axonal arbors can 
be detected (Figure 23.23). Such rapid changes reflect changes in the 
structure and molecular composition of synapses without a substan-
tial remodeling of axons. Second, ocular dominance shifts can occur at 
ages well beyond the critical period for changes in LGN axonal arbors. 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   810
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   810

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

I
I
I
 
r
e
y
a
l
 
n
i
 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

40

30

20

10

0

1

(a)  

2

3

Ocular dominance group

4

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

811

I
I
I
 
r
e
y
a
l
 
n
i
 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

60

40

20

0

(b)  

Monocular
deprivation

5

1

2

3

4

5

Ocular dominance group

Contralateral

eye

Ipsilateral

eye

Closed

eye

Open
eye

▲ FIGURE 23.22
The ocular dominance shift.  These ocular dominance histograms were con-
structed after electrophysiological recording from neurons in the striate cortex 
of (a) normal cats and (b) cats after a period of monocular deprivation early in 
life. The bars show the percentage of neurons in each of five ocular dominance 
categories. Cells in groups 1 and 5 are activated by stimulation of either the 
contralateral or the ipsilateral eye, respectively, but not both. Cells in group 3 
are activated equally well by either eye. Cells in groups 2 and 4 are binocularly 
activated but show a preference for either the contralateral or the ipsilateral eye, 
respectively. The histogram in part a reveals that the majority of neurons in the 
visual cortex of a normal animal are driven binocularly. The histogram in part b 
shows that a period of monocular deprivation leaves few neurons responsive to 
the deprived eye.

Finally, ocular dominance shifts occur in all mammals that have bin-
ocular  vision,  not  just  those  few  species  with  ocular  dominance   col-
umns .  However,  such  ocular  dominance  plasticity  also  diminishes 
with  age,  disappearing  in  many  species  by  the  onset  of  adolescence 
(Figure 23.24). 

 The  critical  period  of  maximal  ocular  dominance  plasticity  coincides 
with the time of greatest growth of the head and eyes. Thus, it is believed 
that the plasticity of binocular connections is normally required for main-
taining good binocular vision throughout this period of rapid growth. The 
hazard associated with such activity-dependent ﬁ ne-tuning is that these 
connections are also highly susceptible to deprivation. 

 Synaptic Competition 
 As you well know, a muscle that is not used regularly will atrophy and 
lose strength, thus the saying “Use it or lose it.” Is the disconnection of 
activity-deprived synapses simply a consequence of disuse? This does not 
appear  to  be  the  case  in  striate  cortex,  because  the  disconnection  of  a 
deprived eye input requires that the open-eye inputs be active. Rather, 
a process of  binocular competition  evidently occurs, whereby the in-
puts from the two eyes actively compete for synaptic control of the post-
synaptic neuron. If the activity of the two eyes is correlated and equal 
in  strength,  the  two  inputs  will  be  retained  on  the  same  cortical  cell. 
However, if this balance is disrupted by depriving one eye, the more ac-
tive input will somehow displace the deprived synapses or cause them to 
be less effective. 

 Competition  in  visual  cortex  is  demonstrated  by  the  effects  of 
  strabismus ,  a  condition  in  which  the  eyes  are  not  perfectly  aligned 

Left-eye
response

Right-eye
response

l

s
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Time

(a)  Initial state  

Left-eye
response

Right-eye
response

l

s
a

i
t

n
e

t

 

o
p
n
o

i
t
c
a

 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Time

(b)  After 17-hour right-eye deprivation
▲ FIGURE 23.23
Rapid shifts in ocular dominance. 
 These histograms show the number of 
action potentials generated by a single 
neuron in the visual cortex of a young 
kitten over time. A visual stimulus was 
presented at the times indicated by the 
yellow bars, first to the left eye and then 
to the right eye. (a) Initial responses, be-
fore a period of monocular deprivation. 
Notice that although there is a slight oc-
ular dominance favoring the right eye, 
each eye evokes a strong response. 
(b) The same neuron, recorded after re-
opening the right eye following 17 hours 
of monocular deprivation. The eye that 
had been deprived is no longer able to 
evoke a response. (Source: Adapted 
from Mioche and Singer, 1989.)

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   811
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   811

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

812

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

70

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

s

l
l

e
c
 
f
o

0

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

8

12

16

Age (weeks)

1 2 3 4 5

Ocular

dominance

group

n
a
m
u
h
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
i
t
p
e
c
s
u
s
 
l
a
m
x
a
m

i

 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

l

n
o
i
t
a
v
i
r
p
e
d
 
r
a
u
c
o
n
o
m
 
o
t
 
n
o
s
v
 
r
a
u
c
o
n
b

i

l

i

i

100

80

60

40

20

Birth

3

6

9

(b)  

Age (years)

i

d
e
t
a
n
m
o
d
 
s

l
l

e
c
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

e
y
e
 
l
a
m
r
o
n
 
y
b

100

80

60

40

20

0
(a)  

I
I
I
 
r
e
y
a

l
 

n

i
 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

40

30

20

10

0

(a)  

I
I
I
 
r
e
y
a

l
 

n

i
 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

50

40

30

20

10

0

1

1

2

3

4

Ocular dominance group

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 23.25
The effects of strabismus on cortical 
binocularity.  (a) An ocular dominance 
histogram from a normal animal like that 
in Figure 23.22a. (b) In this case, the 
eyes have been brought out of alignment 
by cutting one of the eye muscles. After 
a brief period of strabismus, binocular 
cells are almost completely absent. The 
cells in visual cortex are driven by either 
the right or the left eye but not by both.

2

3

4

Ocular dominance group

5

5

▲ FIGURE 23.24
The critical period for plasticity of binocular connection.  These graphs show 
the sensitivity of binocular connections to monocular deprivation (of the contralat-
eral eye) initiated at different postnatal ages in a kitten. (a) The ocular dominance 
shifts recorded in kittens in response to 2 days of monocular deprivation. The line 
graph plots the decline in plasticity as a function of age, and the histograms 
show the corresponding ocular dominance shifts. (b) An estimate of the develop-
mental decline of plasticity of binocular connections in humans. (Source: Adapted 
from Mower, 1991.)

(i.e.,  they  are  “cross-eyed”  or  “wall-eyed”).  This  common  visual  dis-
order  in  humans  can  result  in  the  permanent  loss  of  stereoscopic  vi-
sion.  Experimental  strabismus  is  produced  by  surgically  or  optically 
misaligning the two eyes, thereby causing visually evoked patterns of 
activity from the two eyes to arrive out of sync in the cortex. If you press 
gently with a ﬁ nger alongside one eye, you can see the consequences of 
misalignment of the two eyes. A total loss of binocular receptive ﬁ elds 
occurs following a period of strabismus, even though the two eyes re-
tain equal representation in the cortex (Figure 23.25). This is a clear 
demonstration  that  the   disconnection  of  inputs  from  one  eye  results 
from competition rather than disuse (the two eyes are equally active, 
but for each cell, one “winner takes all”). If produced early enough, stra-
bismus can also sharpen the segregation of ocular dominance columns 
in layer IV. 

 The  changes  in  ocular  dominance  and  binocularity  after  deprivation 
have clear behavioral consequences. An ocular dominance shift after mon-
ocular deprivation leaves the animal visually impaired in the deprived 
eye, and the loss of binocularity associated with strabismus completely 
eliminates  stereoscopic  depth  perception.  However,  neither  of  these  ef-
fects is irreversible if corrected early enough in the critical period. The 
clinical lesson is clear: Congenital cataracts or ocular misalignment must 
be  corrected  in  early  childhood,  as  soon  as  surgically  feasible,  to  avoid 
permanent visual disability. 

 Modulatory Inﬂ uences 
 With  increasing  age,  there  appear  to  be  additional  constraints  on  the 
forms of activity that will cause modiﬁ cations of cortical circuits. Before 
birth,  spontaneously  occurring  bursts  of  retinal  activity  are  sufﬁ cient 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   812
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   812

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

813

to orchestrate aspects of address selection in the LGN and cortex. After 
birth,  an  interaction  with  the  visual  environment  is  of  critical  impor-
tance. However, even visually driven retinal activity may be insufﬁ cient 
for modiﬁ cations of binocularity during this critical period. Increasing 
experimental  evidence  indicates  that  such  modiﬁ cations  also  require 
the  animal  to  pay  attention  to  visual  stimuli  and  use  vision  to  guide 
behavior. For example, modiﬁ cations of binocularity following monocu-
lar stimulation do not occur when an animal is kept anesthetized, even 
though it is known that cortical neurons respond briskly to visual stimu-
lation under this condition. These and related observations have led to 
the proposal that synaptic plasticity in the cortex requires the release of 
“enabling factors” that are linked to behavioral state (level of alertness, 
for example). 

 Some  progress  has  been  made  in  identifying  the  physical  basis  of 
these  enabling  factors.  Recall  that  a  number  of  diffuse  modulatory 
systems innervate the cortex (see Chapter 15). These include the nor-
adrenergic inputs from the locus coeruleus and the cholinergic inputs 
from  the  basal  forebrain.  The  effects  of  monocular  deprivation  have 
been studied in animals in which these modulatory inputs to striate 
cortex  were  eliminated.  This  was  found  to  cause  a  substantial  im-
pairment  of  ocular  dominance  plasticity,  even  though  transmission 
in  the  retinogeniculocortical  pathway  was  unaffected  by  the  lesion 
(Figure 23.26). 

Striate cortex
(area 17)

Basal forebrain
complex

Locus
coeruleus

(a)  

Knife cut

Striate cortex
(area 17)

Basal forebrain
complex

Locus
coeruleus

(b)  

 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

 
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

40

30

20

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

Ocular dominance group

1

4

5

2

3

Ocular dominance group

Closed

eye

Open
eye

▲ FIGURE 23.26
The dependence of plasticity of 
 binocular connections on modulatory 
inputs.   (a) A midsagittal view of a cat 
brain, showing the trajectory of two 
types of modulatory input to striate 
 cortex. One, colored green, arises in the 
locus coeruleus and uses NE as a trans-
mitter, and the other, colored red, arises 
in the basal forebrain complex and uses 
ACh as a transmitter. The activity of both 
of these inputs is related to levels of at-
tention and alertness. If these systems 
are intact, monocular deprivation will 
produce the expected ocular dominance 
shift, shown in the histogram at the 
right. (b) The result of depleting the cor-
tex of these modulatory inputs. 
 Monocular deprivation has little effect on 
the binocular connections in striate cor-
tex. (Source: Adapted from Bear and 
Singer, 1986.)

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   813
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   813

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

814

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 ELEMENTARY MECHANISMS OF CORTICAL 
ELEMMENTAARY MECHANISMS OF CORTICAL 
SYNAAPTIC PLASTICITY 
SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY 

 Synapses form in the absence of any electrical activity. However, as we 
have seen, the awakening of synaptic transmission during development 
plays  a  vital  role  in  the  ﬁ nal  reﬁ nement  of  connections.  Based  on  the 
analysis of experience-dependent plasticity in the visual cortex and else-
where, we can formulate two simple “rules” for synaptic modiﬁ cation: 
 1. When the presynaptic axon is active and, at the same time, the postsyn-
aptic neuron is  strongly activated  under the inﬂ uence of other inputs, 
then the synapse formed by the presynaptic axon is strengthened. This 
is another way of stating Hebb’s hypothesis, mentioned previously. In 
other words,  neurons that ﬁ re together wire together . 

 2. When the presynaptic axon is active and, at the same time, the post-
synaptic neuron is  weakly activated  by other inputs, then the synapse 
formed by the presynaptic axon is weakened. In other words,  neurons 
that ﬁ re out of sync lose their link . 
 The key appears to be  correlation . Remember that in most locations 
in the CNS, including the visual cortex, a single synapse has little in-
ﬂ uence on the ﬁ ring rate of the postsynaptic neuron. To be “heard,” the 
activity of the synapse must be correlated with the activity of many 
other inputs converging on the same postsynaptic neuron. When the 
activity of the synapse consistently correlates with a strong postsyn-
aptic response (and, therefore, with the activity of many other inputs), 
the synapse is retained and strengthened. When synaptic activity con-
sistently  fails  to  correlate  with  a  strong  postsynaptic  response,  the 
synapse is weakened and eliminated. In this way, synapses are “vali-
dated” based on their ability to participate in the ﬁ ring of their post-
synaptic partner. 

AMPA receptor

NMDA receptor

Metabotropic
glutamate receptor

Presynaptic
axon terminal

Glutamate

Postsynaptic
dendritic spine

▲ FIGURE 23.27
Glutamate receptors at excitatory synapses.

Axon

Dendrite

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   814
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   814

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

 What mechanisms underlie such correlation-based synaptic modiﬁ ca-
tions? The answer requires knowledge of the mechanisms of excitatory 
synaptic transmission in the brain. 

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

815

 Excitatory Synaptic Transmission in the Immature 
Visual System 
 Glutamate is the transmitter at all of the modiﬁ able synapses we have 
discussed  (retinogeniculate,  geniculocortical,  and  corticocortical),  and 
it  activates  several  subtypes  of  postsynaptic  receptors.  Recall  from 
Chapter  6  that  neurotransmitter  receptors  may  be  classiﬁ ed  into  two 
broad  categories:  G-protein-coupled,  or  metabotropic,  receptors;  and 
transmitter-gated ion channels (Figure 23.27). Postsynaptic glutamate-
gated ion channels allow the passage of positively charged ions into the 
postsynaptic cell and may be further classiﬁ ed as either AMPA receptors 
or NMDA receptors. AMPA and NMDA receptors are colocalized at many 
synapses. 

 An NMDA receptor has two unusual features that distinguish it from 
an AMPA receptor (Figure 23.28). First, NMDA receptor conductance is 
voltage-gated, owing to the action of Mg 2  ⫹  at the channel. At the resting 
membrane potential, the inward current through the NMDA receptor is 
interrupted by the movement of Mg 2  ⫹  into the channel, where they be-
come lodged. As the membrane is depolarized, however, the Mg 2  ⫹  block 
is displaced from the channel, and current is free to pass into the cell. 
Thus, substantial current through the NMDA receptor channel requires 
the  concurrent  release  of  glutamate  by  the  presynaptic  terminal   and  
depolarization  of  the  postsynaptic  membrane.  The  other  distinguish-
ing  feature  of  an  NMDA  receptor  is  that  its  channel  conducts  Ca 2  ⫹ . 
Therefore,   the  magnitude  of  the  Ca  2 ⫹     ﬂ ux  passing  through  the  NMDA 
receptor  channel  speciﬁ cally  signals  the  level  of  pre-  and  postsynaptic 
coactivation . 

 Curiously, when a glutamatergic synapse ﬁ rst forms, only NMDA re-
ceptors appear in the postsynaptic membrane. As a consequence, released 
glutamate at a single synapse evokes little response when the postsynap-
tic membrane is at the resting potential. Such “silent” synapses announce 
their presence only when enough of them are active at the same time to 
cause  sufﬁ cient  depolarization  to  relieve  the  Mg 2  ⫹   block  of  the  NMDA 
receptor channels. In other words, “silent” synapses “speak” only when 
there is highly correlated activity, the necessary condition for synaptic 
enhancement during development. 

 Long-Term Synaptic Potentiation 
 Perhaps  NMDA  receptors  serve  as  Hebbian  detectors  of  simultaneous 
 presynaptic and postsynaptic activity, and Ca 2  ⫹  entry through the NMDA 
receptor  channel  triggers  the  biochemical  mechanisms  that  modify 
 synaptic effectiveness. Tests of this hypothesis have been performed by 
electrically stimulating axons to monitor the strength of synaptic trans-
mission before and after an episode of strong NMDA receptor activation 
(Figure  23.29a,  b).  Results  consistently  indicate  that  a  consequence  of 
strong  NMDA  receptor  activation  is  a  strengthening  of  synaptic  trans-
mission called  long-term potentiation (LTP) . 

 What accounts for LTP of the synapse? One consequence of the strong 
NMDA receptor activation, and the resulting ﬂ ood of Ca 2  ⫹  into the post-
synaptic dendrite, is the insertion of new AMPA receptors into the syn-
aptic  membrane  (Figure  23.29c).  Such  “AMPAﬁ cation”  of  the  synapse 

Presynaptic
glutamate
release

Glutamate

Mg2+

AMPA
receptor

Na+

NMDA
receptor

(a)  Postsynaptic membrane at

resting potential

Presynaptic
glutamate
release

Glutamate

Mg2+

AMPA
receptor

Na+

NMDA
receptor

Ca2+

Na+

(b)  

Postsynaptic membrane at
depolarized potential

▲ FIGURE 23.28
NMDA receptors activated by simulta-
neous presynaptic and postsynaptic 
activity.  (a) Presynaptic activation causes 
the release of glutamate, which acts on 
postsynaptic AMPA receptors and NMDA 
receptors. At the negative resting mem-
brane potential, the NMDA receptors 
pass little ionic current because they are 
blocked with Mg2⫹. (b) If glutamate re-
lease coincides with depolarization suffi-
cient to displace the Mg2⫹, then Ca2⫹ will 
enter the postsynaptic neuron via the 
NMDA receptor. Hebbian modification 
could be explained if the Ca2⫹ admitted 
by the NMDA receptor were to trigger 
enhanced synaptic  effectiveness.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   815
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   815

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

816

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Presynaptic

shock

Postsynaptic
EPSP

(a)

 
o
t
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
c
i
t
p
a
n
y
s
t
s
o
P

)
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
f
o
 
%

(
 
k
c
o
h
s
 
c
i
t
p
a
n
y
s
e
r
p

(b)

200

150

100

Postconditioning
measurements

LTP

Baseline measurements

1

50

-15

2

0

3

Time (min)

Apply conditioning stimulation
to produce strong activation
of NMDA receptors

15

30

Axon

Dendrite

Axon

Dendrite

Axon

Dendrite

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

NMDA receptor
AMPA receptor

(c)

1

Before LTP induction

2

During LTP induction

3

After LTP induction

▲ FIGURE 23.29
The lasting synaptic effects of strong NMDA receptor activation.  (a) An ex-
periment in which presynaptic axons are stimulated electrically to evoke an action 
potential and microelectrode recordings of the resulting EPSPs are made from the 
postsynaptic neuron. (b) This graph shows how the strength of synaptic transmis-
sion is changed by strong NMDA receptor activation. The conditioning stimulation 
consists of depolarizing the postsynaptic neuron via current injection through the 
microelectrode, at the same time that the synapses are repeatedly stimulated. 
LTP is the resulting enhancement of synaptic transmission. (c) LTP at many syn-
apses is associated with the insertion of AMPA receptors into synapses that pre-
viously had none. The circled numbers correspond to the times before and after 
LTP in part b.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   816
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   816

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

817

makes transmission stronger. In addition to this change in the comple-
ment of glutamate receptors, recent evidence suggests that the synapses 
can actually split in half following LTP induction, forming two different 
sites of synaptic contact. 

 Cortical  neurons  grown  in  a  tissue  culture  form  synapses  with  one 
another and become electrically active. The immature synapses contain 
 clusters  of  NMDA  receptors  but  few  AMPA  receptors.  Consistent  with 
the  idea  that  LTP  is  a  mechanism  for  synaptic  maturation,  electrically 
active synapses gain AMPA receptors over the course of development in 
cell culture. This change fails to occur, however, if NMDA receptors are 
blocked with an antagonist. Thus, the strong activation of NMDA recep-
tors that occurs when pre- and postsynaptic neurons ﬁ re together appears 
to account, at least in part, for why they wire together during visual sys-
tem development. (We will discuss LTP and its molecular basis further in 
Chapter 25.) 

 Long-Term Synaptic Depression 
 Neurons that ﬁ re out of sync lose their link. In the case of strabismus, 
for example, synapses whose activity fails to correlate with that of the 
postsynaptic  cell  are  weakened  and  then  eliminated.  Similarly,  during 
monocular deprivation, the residual activity in the deprived retina fails to 
correlate with the responses evoked in cortical neurons by the seeing eye, 
and the deprived-eye synapses are weakened. What mechanism accounts 
for this form of synaptic plasticity? 

 In principle, weak coincidences could be signaled by lower levels of 
NMDA  receptor  activation  and  less  Ca 2  ⫹   inﬂ ux.  Indeed,  experiments 
suggest that the lower level of Ca 2  ⫹  admitted under these conditions 
triggers  an  opposite  form  of  synaptic  plasticity,   long-term  depres-
sion  (LTD) ,  whereby  the  active  synapses  are  decreased  in  effective-
ness. One consequence of LTD induction is a loss of AMPA receptors 
from  the  synapse,  and  one  long-term  consequence  of  LTD  is  synapse 
elimination. Recall that at the neuromuscular junction, the loss of post-
synaptic  receptors  also  stimulates  the  physical  retraction  of  the  pre-
synaptic axon. 

 Studies  in  the  visual  cortex  of  rats  and  mice  have  conﬁ rmed  that 
AMPA  receptors  are  lost  from  the  surface  of  visual  cortical  neurons 
during monocular deprivation. This change, like the loss of visual re-
sponsiveness, requires residual activity in the deprived retina and ac-
tivation of cortical NMDA receptors. Furthermore, selective inhibition 
of NMDA receptor-dependent AMPA receptor internalization prevents 
the ocular dominance shift after monocular deprivation. Thus, it is pos-
sible to reconstruct, at least in rough outline, what happens when an 
animal  is  monocularly  deprived  by  closing  one  eyelid  (Figure  23.30). 
Eyelid  closure  prevents  proper  image  formation  on  the  retina;  there-
fore, it replaces well-correlated retinal ganglion cell activity with less-
correlated  activity  that  can  be  considered  as  static  or  noise.  This  ac-
tivity,  presynaptic  to  neurons  in  visual  cortex,  rarely  correlates  with 
a  strong  postsynaptic  response  and  therefore  only  weakly  activates 
NMDA receptors. The modest entry of Ca 2  ⫹  through the NMDA recep-
tors initiates a cascade of molecular events that results in the removal 
of  AMPA  receptors  from  the  visually  deprived  synapse.  With  fewer 
AMPA receptors, these synapses lose inﬂ uence over responses of corti-
cal neurons. 

 • • • 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   817
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   817

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

818

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Axons carrying
activity from
closed eye

Dendrite

1

2

Cortical
neuron

Axon
from
LGN

"Noise"

Correlated
patterns

Internalized
AMPA receptors

Ca2+

Dendrite

Axons carrying
activity from
open eye

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

1

Weak NMDA receptor activation
by poorly correlated activity
triggers loss of AMPA receptors

2

Strong NMDA receptor activation
by well-correlated activity
maintains AMPA receptors

▲ FIGURE 23.30
How brief monocular deprivation leads to reduced visual responsiveness. Closing one eye 
replaces well-correlated presynaptic action potentials ( denoted as yellow dots) with less corre-
lated “noise.” In the visual cortex, illustrated here, the noise weakly activates NMDA receptors, 
and the resulting modest increases in Ca2⫹ cause internalization of AMPA receptors (left en-
largement). On the other hand, the well-correlated activity strongly depolarizes the postsynap-
tic neurons and stimulates large increases in Ca2⫹, which stimulate AMPA receptor delivery to 
the synapse (right enlargement).

 How are presynaptic and postsynaptic correlations used to reﬁ ne synap-
tic connections in the visual system? The data accumulated thus far sug-
gest that the maintenance of some connections formed during  development 
depends on their success in evoking an NMDA receptor-mediated response 
beyond some threshold level. Failure to achieve this threshold leads to dis-
connection. Both processes depend on activity originating in the retina, 
NMDA receptor activation, and postsynaptic Ca 2  ⫹  entry. 

WHY CRITICAL PERIODS END 
WHYY CRITIICAL PERIODS ENDD 

 Although plasticity of visual connections persists in the adult brain, the 
range  over  which  this  plasticity  occurs  constricts  with  increasing  age. 
Early in development, gross rearrangements of axonal arbors are possi-
ble, while in the adult, plasticity appears to be restricted to local changes 
in  synaptic  efﬁ cacy.  In  addition,  the  adequate  stimulus  for  evoking  a 
change also appears to be increasingly constrained as the brain matures. 
An obvious example is the fact that simply patching one eye will cause a 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   818
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   818

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

profound alteration in the binocular connections of the superﬁ cial layers 
during infancy, but by adolescence, this type of experience typically fails 
to cause a lasting alteration in cortical circuitry. 

 Why do critical periods end? Here are three current hypotheses: 

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

819

 1.   Plasticity diminishes when axon growth ceases . We’ve seen that there is a 
period of several weeks when the geniculate arbors can contract and ex-
pand within layer IV under the inﬂ uence of visual experience. Thus, a fac-
tor that limits the critical period in layer IV could be a loss of the capability 
for changes in axon length, which in turn may be due to changes in the 
extracellular matrix or the myelination of the axons by oligodendroglia. 

 2.  Plasticity diminishes when synaptic transmission matures . The end of 
a critical period may reﬂ ect changes in the elementary  mechanisms of 
synaptic plasticity. Evidence indicates that glutamate receptors change 
during postnatal development. For example, it has been shown that the 
activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors stimulates very differ-
ent postsynaptic responses in striate cortex during the critical period 
when binocular connections are most susceptible to  monocular depri-
vation. In addition, the molecular composition and properties of NMDA 
receptors change during the course of the critical period. Accordingly, 
the properties of LTP and LTD vary with age, and at some synapses, 
they seem to disappear altogether. 

 3.  Plasticity diminishes when cortical activation is constrained . As devel-
opment proceeds, certain types of activity may be ﬁ ltered by succes-
sive synaptic relays to the point where they no longer activate NMDA 
receptors,  or  other  elementary  mechanisms,  sufﬁ ciently  to  trigger 
 plasticity.  As  mentioned  previously,  ACh  and  NE  facilitate  synaptic 
plasticity in the superﬁ cial cortical layers, perhaps simply by enhanc-
ing polysynaptic intracortical transmission. A decline in the effective-
ness of these neurotransmitters, or a change in the conditions under 
which  they  are  released,  may  contribute  to  the  decline  in  plasticity. 
Indeed,  evidence  suggests  that  supplementing  the  adult  cortex  with 
NE can restore some degree of modiﬁ ability. 
 Evidence also indicates that intrinsic inhibitory circuitry is late to mature 
in the striate cortex. Consequently, patterns of activity that may have gained 
access to modiﬁ able synapses in superﬁ cial layers early in postnatal develop-
ment might be tempered by inhibition in the adult. Consistent with the idea 
that inhibition regulates the duration of the critical period, recent research 
in mice has shown that genetic manipulations that accelerate the matura-
tion of GABAergic inhibition in visual cortex also shorten the duration of the 
critical  period  for  ocular  dominance  plasticity.  Conversely,  manipulations 
that slow the development of inhibition can prolong the critical period. 

 The question of why critical periods end is important. Synaptic modi-
ﬁ cation and rewiring of circuitry provide the capacity for some recovery 
of function after CNS damage. However, such recovery is disappointingly 
limited in the adult brain. On the other hand, the recovery of function 
after brain injury can be nearly 100% in the immature nervous system 
when synaptic rearrangements are widespread. Thus, an understanding 
of  how  plasticity  is  regulated  during  normal  development  may  suggest 
ways to promote recovery from damage later in life. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 We have seen that the generation of circuitry during brain development 
occurs mostly prior to birth and is guided by cell-to-cell communication 
through physical contact and by diffusible chemical signals. Nonetheless, 

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   819
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   819

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

820

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

while most of the “wires” ﬁ nd their proper place before birth, the ﬁ nal 
 reﬁ nement of synaptic connections, particularly in the cortex, occurs dur-
ing infancy and is inﬂ uenced by the sensory environment. Although we 
have focused on the visual system, other sensory and motor systems are 
also readily modiﬁ ed by the environment during critical periods of early 
childhood. In this way, our brain is a product not only of our genes but 
also of the world in which we grow up. 

 The  end  of  developmental  critical  periods  does  not  signify  an  end  to 
experience-dependent synaptic plasticity in the brain. Indeed, the environ-
ment must modify the brain throughout life, or there would be no basis for 
memory formation. In the next two chapters, we’ll explore the neurobiology 
of learning and memory. We will see that the mechanisms of synaptic plas-
ticity proposed to account for learning bear a close resemblance to those 
believed to play a role in synaptic rearrangement during development.       

K E Y   T E R M S
The Genesis of Neurons
radial glial cell (p. 785)
subplate (p. 788)
neural precursor cell (p. 788)
cortical plate (p. 789)

The Genesis of Connections
growth cone (p. 796)
extracellular matrix (p. 797)
fasciculation (p. 797)
cell-adhesion molecule (CAM) 

(p. 797)

chemoattractant (p. 797)
netrin (p. 797)
chemorepellent (p. 798)

chemoafﬁ nity hypothesis 

(p. 799)

ephrin (p. 801)

The Elimination of Cells and 
Synapses
trophic factor (p. 803)
nerve growth factor (NGF) 

(p. 804)

neurotrophin (p. 804)
apoptosis (p. 804)

Activity-Dependent Synaptic 
Rearrangement
Hebb synapse (p. 807)
Hebbian modiﬁ cation (p. 807)

monocular deprivation (p. 809)
critical period (p. 809)
ocular dominance shift (p. 810)
binocular competition (p. 811)
strabismus (p. 811)

Elementary Mechanisms of 
Cortical Synaptic Plasticity
long-term potentiation (LTP) 

long-term depression (LTD) 

(p. 815)

(p. 817)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What do we mean by saying that the cortex develops “inside out”?
2.  Describe the three phases of pathway formation. In which phase (or phases) does neural activity 

play a role?

3.  What are three ways that Ca2⫹ is thought to contribute to the processes of synapse formation and 

rearrangement?

4.  How are the elimination of polyneuronal innervation of a muscle ﬁ ber and the segregation of 

retinal terminals in the LGN similar? How do these processes differ?

5.  Not long ago, when a child was born with strabismus, the defect was usually not corrected until 
after adolescence. Today, surgical correction is always attempted during early childhood. Why? 
How does strabismus affect the connections in the brain, and how does it affect vision?

6.  Children are often able to learn several languages apparently without effort, while most adults 
must struggle to master a second language. From what you know about brain development, why 
would this be true?

7.  Neurons that ﬁ re out of sync lose their link. How does this occur?

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   820
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   820

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Cooke SF, Bear MF. 2014. How the mechanisms 
of long-term synaptic potentiation and depres-
sion serve experience-dependent plasticity 
in primary visual cortex. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological sciences 369, 
20130284.

Dehay C, Kennedy H. 2007. Cell-cycle control 
and cortical development. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 8(6):438–450.

Goda Y, Davis GW. 2003. Mechanisms of synapse 
assembly and disassembly. Neuron 40:243–264.

CHAPTER 23    WIRING THE BRAIN

821

Katz LC, Crowley JC. 2002. Development of cortical 
circuits: lessons from ocular dominance columns. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3(1):34–42.

McLaughlin T, O’Leary DDM. 2005. Molecular 

gradients and development of retinotopic maps. 
Annual Reviews of Neuroscience 28:327–355.

Price DJ, Jarman AP, Mason JO, Kind PC 2011. 

Building Brains: An Introduction to Neural 
Development. Boston: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wiesel T. 1982. Postnatal development of 

the visual cortex and the inﬂ uence of the 
environment. Nature 299:583–592.

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   821
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   821

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   822
781-822_Bear_23_revised_final.indd   822

12/20/14   6:23 AM
12/20/14   6:23 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

Memory Systems

INTRODUCTION
TYPES OF MEMORY AND AMNESIA
Declarative and Nondeclarative Memory

 BOX 24.1   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Extraordinary Memory

Types of Procedural Memory

Nonassociative Learning
Associative Learning

Types of Declarative Memory
Amnesia

WORKING MEMORY

The Prefrontal Cortex and Working Memory

Imaging Working Memory in the Human Brain

Area LIP and Working Memory

DECLARATIVE MEMORY

The Neocortex and Declarative Memory

Hebb and the Cell Assembly

Studies Implicating the Medial Temporal Lobes

Anatomy of the Medial Temporal Lobe
Electrical Stimulation of the Human Temporal Lobes
Neural Recordings from the Human Medial Temporal Lobe

Temporal Lobe Amnesia

The Case of H.M.: Temporal Lobectomy and Amnesia
An Animal Model of Human Amnesia
 BOX 24.2   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Korsakoff’s Syndrome and the Case of N.A.

Memory Functions of the Hippocampal System

The Effects of Hippocampal Lesions in Rats
Spatial Memory, Place Cells, and Grid Cells
 BOX 24.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: How the Brain Makes Maps, by Edvard 
and May-Britt Moser
Hippocampal Functions Beyond Spatial Memory
Consolidating Memories and Retaining Engrams

Standard and Multiple Trace Models of Consolidation
Reconsolidation
 BOX 24.4   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Introducing False Memories 
and Removing Bad Memories

PROCEDURAL MEMORY

The Striatum and Procedural Memory in Rodents
Habit Learning in Humans and Nonhuman Primates

CONCLUDING REMARKS

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   823
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   823

823

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

824

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 The brain has numerous systems for performing functions related to sen-
sation, action, and emotion, and each system contains billions of neurons 
with enormous numbers of interconnections. In Chapter 23, we explored 
the mechanisms that guide the construction of these systems during brain 
development. But as impressive and orderly as prenatal development is, 
no one would confuse a newborn baby and a Nobel Prize winner. Much of 
the difference between the two comes down to what has been learned and 
remembered.  From  the  moment  we  take  our  ﬁ rst  breath,  and  possibly 
before, the sensory stimuli we experience modify our brain and inﬂ uence 
our  behavior.  We  learn  an  enormous  number  of  things,  some  straight-
forward (e.g., snow is cold), and others more abstract (e.g., an isosceles 
triangle has two sides of equal length). Some of the things we learn are 
easily stated facts, while others, such as driving or playing soccer, involve 
ingrained motor patterns. We will see that brain lesions differentially af-
fect different types of remembered information, suggesting that there is 
more than one memory system. 

 There  is  a  close  relationship  between  what  we  called  experience- 
dependent brain development in Chapter 23 and what we call learning in 
this chapter. Visual experience during infancy is essential for the normal 
development  of  the  visual  cortex,  but  it  also  allows  us  to  recognize  an 
image of our mother’s face. Visual development and learning probably in-
volve similar mechanisms, but at different times and in different cortical 
areas. Understood in this way, learning and memory are lifelong adapta-
tions  of  brain  circuitry  to  the  environment.  They  enable  us  to  respond 
appropriately to situations we have experienced before. 

 In  this  chapter,  we  discuss  the  anatomy  of  memory—the  different 
parts  of  the  brain  involved  in  storing  particular  types  of  information. 
Chapter 25 will then focus on the elementary molecular mechanisms that 
can store information in the brain. 

TYPES OF MEMORY AND AMNESIA 
TYPEES OF MEMORY AND AMNESIA 

Learning  is the acquisition of new knowledge or skills.  Memory  is the 
retention of learned information. We learn and remember lots of different 
things, and it is important to appreciate that these various things might 
not be processed and stored by the same neural hardware. No single brain 
structure or cellular mechanism accounts for all learning. Moreover, the 
way in which information of a particular type is stored may change over 
time. 

 Declarative and Nondeclarative Memory 
 Psychologists  have  studied  learning  and  memory  extensively  and  have 
distinguished what appear to be different types. Useful for our purposes is 
the distinction between declarative memory and nondeclarative  memory. 
 During the course of our lives, we learn many facts (e.g., the capital of 
Thailand is Bangkok, Darth Vader is Luke Skywalker’s father). We also 
store memories of life’s events (e.g., “Yesterday’s neuroscience exam was 
fun!” or “I went swimming with my pet dog named Axon when I was ﬁ ve 
years old.”) Memory of facts and events is called  declarative memory
(Figure  24.1).  A  declarative  memory  distinction  we  will  examine  later 
on is between  episodic memory  for autobiographical life experiences and 
 semantic memory  for facts. Declarative memory is what people usually 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   824
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   824

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

Declarative memory

(Medial temporal lobe; diencephalon)

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

825

Nondeclarative memory

Classical conditioning

Facts

Events

Procedural memory:

skills and habits

(Striatum)

Skeletal musculature

Emotional responses

(Cerebellum)

(Amygdala)

+

▲ FIGURE 24.1
Types of declarative and nondeclara-
tive memory.  Brain  structures thought 
to be involved in each type of memory 
are indicated. (Note that this is not a 
complete representation of all types of 
memory.)

mean in everyday uses of the word “memory,” but we actually remember 
many other things too. These  nondeclarative memories  fall into sev-
eral categories. The type we are most concerned with here is   procedural 
memory , or memory for skills, habits, and behaviors. We learn to play 
the piano, throw a Frisbee, or tie our shoes, and somewhere that is stored 
in our brain. 

 Generally, declarative memories are accessed for conscious recollection, 
whereas the tasks we learn, as well as the reﬂ exes and emotional associa-
tions we have formed, operate smoothly without conscious recollection. 
As the old saying goes, you never forget how to ride a bicycle. You may not 
explicitly remember the day you ﬁ rst rode a two-wheeler on your own (the 
declarative part of the memory), but your brain remembers what to do 
when you’re on one (the procedural part of the memory). Nondeclarative 
memory is also frequently called  implicit memory,  because it results from 
direct experience, and declarative memory is often called  explicit memory , 
because it results from more conscious effort. 

 Another distinction is that declarative memories are often easy to form 
and are easily forgotten. In contrast, forming nondeclarative memories 
usually require repetition and practice over a longer period of time, but 
these  memories  are  less  likely  to  be  forgotten.  Think  of  the  difference 
between memorizing the names of people you meet at a party (declara-
tive) and learning to ski (nondeclarative). While there is no clear limit to 
the number of declarative memories the brain can store, there is great 
diversity in the ease and speed with which such new information is ac-
quired. Studies of humans with abnormally good memories suggest that 
the  limit  on  the  storage  of  declarative  information  is  remarkably  high 
(Box 24.1). 

 Types of Procedural Memory 
 The type of nondeclarative memory we will focus on is procedural  memory, 
which involves learning a motor response (procedure) in reaction to a sen-
sory  input.  The  formation  of  procedural  memories  occurs  through  two 
categories of learning: nonassociative learning and associative learning. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   825
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   825

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

826

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 24.1

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Extraordinary Memory 

 Some people have astonishing memory abilities, and these 

cases suggest that human memory capacity may, in general, 
be  incredibly  large.  For  example,  the  British  artist  Stephen 
Wiltshire draws enormous cityscapes from memory; his most 
elaborate is a 10-meter-wide accurate drawing of Tokyo that 
he drew in 7 days after only a 30-minute helicopter ride over 
the city. In rare cases of hyperthymesia, also known as su-
perior autobiographical memory, people have explicit memo-
ries for almost every day of their lives. The American actress 
Marylu Henner has this ability. 

 One of the oldest and best documented cases of an ex-
traordinary memory was documented by the Russian psychol-
ogist Alexander Luria. In the 1920s, a man named Solomon 
Shereshevsky came to see Luria, beginning a 30-year study 
of the uncommon memory of this man Luria referred to simply 
as S. Luria published his fascinating description of this study 
in his book,  The Mind of a Mnemonist . Luria initially studied 
S. by giving him conventional tests, such as memorizing lists 
of words, numbers, or nonsense syllables. He’d read the list 
once and then ask S. to repeat it. Much to Luria’s surprise, 
he couldn’t come up with a test that S. could not pass. Even 
when  70  words  were  read  in  a  row,  S.  could  repeat  them 
forward, backward, and in any other order. During the many 
years they worked together, Luria never found a limit to S.’s 
memory. In tests of his retention, S. demonstrated that he re-
membered lists he had previously seen even 15 years earlier! 
 How did he do it? S. described several factors that may 
have contributed to his great memory. One was his unusual 
sensory response to stimuli; he retained vivid images of things 
he saw. When shown a table of 50 numbers, he claimed it 
was easy to later read off numbers in one row or along the 
diagonal because he simply called up a visual image of the 
entire table. Interestingly, when he occasionally made errors 
in recalling tables of numbers written on a chalkboard, they 
appeared to be “reading” errors rather than memory errors. 
For instance, if the handwriting was sloppy, he would mistake 
a 3 for an 8 or a 4 for a 9. It was as if he were seeing the 
chalkboard and numbers all over again when he was recalling 
the information. 

 Another  interesting  aspect  of  S.’s  sensory  response  to 
stimuli  was  a  powerful  form  of  synesthesia.   Synesthesia   is 
a  phenomenon  in  which  sensory  stimuli  evoke  sensations 
 usually associated with stimuli of a different sense or  different 
stimuli  in  the  same  sense.  For  example,  when  S.  heard 
a  sound,  in  addition  to  hearing,  he  would  see  splashes  of 
 colored light and perhaps have a certain taste in his mouth. 
The multimodal response to sensory input may have caused 
the brain to form particularly strong memory traces. 

 After learning that his memory was unusual, S. left his job 
as a reporter and became a professional stage performer—
a  mnemonist.  In  order  to  remember  huge  lists  of  numbers 
or  tables  of  words  given  by  members  of  the  audience  try-
ing to stump him, he complemented his lasting sensory re-
sponses to stimuli and his synesthesia with memory “tricks.” 
To remember a long list of items, he made use of the fact 
that each item evoked some sort of visual image. As the list 
was read or written, S. imagined himself walking through his 
home town; as each item was given, he placed its evoked 
image along his walk—the image evoked by item 1 by the 
mailbox, the image for item 2 by a bush, and so on. To later 
recall  the  items,  he  walked  the  same  route  and  picked  up 
the imaginary items he had put down. Though we may not 
have the complex synesthetic sensations of S., this ancient 
technique of making associations with familiar objects is one 
we all can use. 

 But not everything about S.’s memory was to his advan-
tage. While the complex sensations evoked by stimuli helped 
him  remember  lists  of  numbers  and  words,  they  interfered 
with  his  ability  to  integrate  and  remember  more  complex 
things. He had trouble recognizing faces because each time 
a person’s expression changed, he would also “see” chang-
ing  patterns  of  light  and  shade,  which  would  confuse  him. 
He  also  wasn’t  very  good  at  following  a  story  read  to  him. 
Rather  than  ignoring  the  exact  words  and  focusing  on  the 
important ideas, S. was overwhelmed by an explosion of sen-
sory experiences. Imagine how bewildering it would be to be 
bombarded by constant visual images evoked by each word, 
plus sounds and images evoked by the tone of voice of the 
person reading the story. 

 S. also experienced the inability to forget. This became a 
particular problem when performing as a professional mne-
monist and he was asked to remember things written on a 
chalkboard. He would see things that had been written there 
on many different occasions. Although he tried various tricks 
to try to forget old information, such as mentally erasing the 
board, nothing worked. Only by the strength of his attention, 
and by actively telling himself to let information slip away, was 
he able to forget. It was as if the effort most of us use for re-
membering and the ease with which we forget were reversed 
for S. 

 We don’t know the neural basis for S.’s remarkable mem-
ory. Perhaps he lacked the segregation most of us have be-
tween sensations in different sensory systems. This may have 
contributed to an uncommonly strong multimodal coding of 
memories.  Maybe  his  synapses  were  more  malleable  than 
normal. Unfortunately, we’ll never know. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   826
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   826

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

827

Habituation

10
5
Stimulus number

15

Sensitization

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

(a)  

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

15

5
10
Stimulus number

(b)  
▲ FIGURE 24.2
Types of nonassociative learning.  (a) In 
habituation, repeated presentation of the 
same stimulus produces a progressively 
smaller response. (b) In sensitization, a 
strong stimulus (arrow) results in an 
 exaggerated response to all subsequent 
stimuli.

 Nonassociative Learning.   Nonassociative learning  describes a change 
in behavioral response that occurs over time in response to a single type 
of stimulus. There are two types: habituation and sensitization. 

 Suppose you live in a house with a single telephone. When the phone 
rings, you run to answer it, but every time the call is for someone else. 
Over time, you stop reacting to the ringing of the phone and eventually 
no longer even notice it. This type of learning,  habituation , is learning to 
ignore a stimulus that lacks meaning (Figure 24.2a). You are habituated 
to a lot of stimuli. Perhaps as you read this sentence, cars and trucks are 
passing by outside, a dog is barking, your roommate is playing the same 
tune  for  the  hundredth  time—and  all  this  goes  on  without  your  really 
noticing. You have habituated to these stimuli. 

 Now suppose you’re walking down the sidewalk on a well-lit city street 
at  night,  and  suddenly  there  is  a  blackout.  You  hear  footsteps  behind 
you, and though this wouldn’t normally disturb you, now you nearly jump 
out of your skin. Car headlights appear, and you react by side-stepping 
away from the street. The strong sensory stimulus (the blackout) caused 
  sensitization , a form of learning that intensiﬁ es your response to all stim-
uli, even ones that previously evoked little or no reaction (Figure 24.2b). 

 Associative Learning.  In  associative learning  behavior is altered by the 
formation of associations between events; this is in contrast to a changed 
response  to  a  single  stimulus  in  nonassociative  learning. Two  types  of 
associative learning are usually distinguished: classical conditioning and 
instrumental conditioning. 

  Classical conditioning  was discovered and characterized in dogs by 
the famous Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov around the turn of the nine-
teenth century. Classical conditioning involves associating a stimulus that 
evokes a measurable response with a second stimulus that normally does 
not evoke this response. The ﬁ rst type of stimulus, the one that normally 
evokes the response, is called the  unconditional stimulus (US)  because no 
training (conditioning) is required for it to yield a response. In Pavlov’s 
experiments, the US was the sight of a piece of meat, and the dog’s re-
sponse was salivation. The second type of stimulus, the one that normally 
does not evoke this same response, is called the   conditional stimulus (CS)  
because this one requires training (conditioning) before it will yield this 
response. In Pavlov’s experiments, the CS was an auditory stimulus, such 
as the sound of a bell. Training consisted of repeatedly  pairing  the presen-
tation of the meat with the sound of the bell (Figure 24.3a). After many 
of these pairings the meat was withheld, and the animal salivated to the 
sound alone. The dog had learned an association between the sound (CS) 
and the presentation of meat (US) (Figure 24.3b). The learned response to 
the conditioned stimulus is called the  conditioned response (CR) . 

  Instrumental conditioning  was discovered and studied by Columbia 
University psychologist Edward Thorndike early in the last century. In 
instrumental conditioning, an individual learns to associate a response, 
a motor act, with a meaningful stimulus, typically a reward such as food. 
For example, consider what happens when a hungry rat is placed in a box 
with a lever that dispenses food. In the course of exploring the box, the 
rat bumps the lever and out pops a piece of food. After this happy accident 
occurs a few more times, the rat learns that pressing the lever leads to a 
food reward. The rat will then work the lever (and eat the food) until it is 
no longer hungry. As in classical conditioning, a predictive relationship is 
learned during instrumental conditioning. In classical conditioning, the 
subject learns that one stimulus (CS) predicts another stimulus (US). In 
instrumental conditioning, the subject learns that a particular behavior is 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   827
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   827

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

828

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Stimulus

Response

Stimulus

Response

Before conditioning

Conditioning

CS

US

(a)

 ▲  FIGURE 24.3 
 Classical conditioning.   (a)  Before condi-
tioning, the sound of a bell (the condi-
tional stimulus, CS) elicits no response, in 
sharp contrast to the response elicited by 
the sight of a piece of meat (the uncondi-
tional stimulus, US).  (b)  Conditioning en-
tails pairing the sound of the bell with the 
sight of the meat. The dog learns to 
 associate the sound of the bell with the 
meat and after conditioning will salivate 
when the bell rings without the meat.  

After conditioning

CR

+

(b)

associated with a particular consequence. Because motivation plays such 
a large part in instrumental conditioning (after all, only a hungry rat will 
lever-press for a food reward), the underlying neural circuits are consid-
erably more complex than those involved in simple classical  conditioning. 

 Types of Declarative Memory 
 From  daily  experience  we  know  that  some  memories  last  longer  than 
 others.  Long-term memories  are those that you can recall days, months, 
or years after they were originally stored. The information that makes it 
into long-term memory, of course, represents only a fraction of what we 
experience every day. Most information is held by the brain only tempo-
rarily, on the order of hours. These  short-term memories  have in com-
mon the property that they are vulnerable to disruption. For example, 
short-term memory can be erased by head trauma or electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT) used to treat psychiatric illness. But the same trauma and 
ECT do not affect long-term memories, which were stored long ago (e.g., 
childhood memories). These observations have led to the idea that facts 
and events are stored in short-term memory and a subset are converted 
into  long-term  memories  via  a  process  called   memory  consolidation  
(Figure 24.4). 

Sensory
information

Working
memory

Short-term
memory

Time

Consolidation

Long-term
memory

  ▲ FIGURE 24.4 
 Memory Consolidation.  Sensory information can be  temporarily stored in short-
term memory that is susceptible to disruption. Stable long-term memories are 
formed by consolidation. Another type of memory, working memory, is used to 
hold information “in mind.”  

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   828
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   828

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

829

 A  second,  entirely  distinct  form  of  temporary  storage,  lasting  on  the 
order  of  seconds,  is   working  memory .  Unlike  the  short-term  memory 
discussed above, working memories are sharply limited in capacity and 
require rehearsal. It is often said that working memory is information held 
“in mind.” When someone tells you his or her phone number, you can re-
tain it for a limited period of time by repeating the number to yourself. 
Keeping a memory alive through repetition is a hallmark of working mem-
ory. If the number is too long (e.g., a phone number with extra numbers 
for a foreign country), you may have trouble remembering the number at 
all. Eventually the number may be consolidated into a long-term memory. 
Working memory is commonly studied by measuring a person’s  digit span , 
the maximum number of randomly chosen numbers a person can repeat 
back after hearing a list read. The normal digit span is seven plus or minus 
two.  Working  memory  is  distinguished  from  short-term  memory  by  the 
very limited capacity, the need for repetition, and the very short duration. 
 Interestingly,  there  are  reports  of  humans  with  cortical  lesions  who 
have  normal  memory  for  information  coming  from  one  sensory  system 
(e.g., they can remember the same number of visually seen numbers as 
other people) but a profound deﬁ cit when information comes from another 
sensory system (e.g., they cannot remember more than one number spo-
ken to them). These different digit spans in different modalities are con-
sistent with the notion of multiple temporary storage areas in the brain. 

 Amnesia 
 As we all know, in daily life, forgetting happens nearly as often as learning. 
Less commonly, certain diseases and injuries to the brain cause a serious 
loss of memory and/or the ability to learn called  amnesia . Concussion, 
chronic alcoholism, encephalitis, brain tumor, and stroke can all disrupt 
memory. You’ve probably seen a movie or television show in which a per-
son experiences some trauma and wakes up the next day not knowing 
who he or she is and not remembering the past. That kind of absolute 
amnesia  for  past  events  and  information  is  actually  extremely  rare.  It 
is more common for trauma to cause limited amnesia along with other 
nonmemory deﬁ cits. If amnesia is not accompanied by any other cognitive 
deﬁ cit, it is known as  dissociated amnesia  (i.e., the memory problems are 
dissociated from any other problems). We will focus on cases of dissoci-
ated amnesia because a clear relationship can be drawn between memory 
deﬁ cits and brain injury. 

 Following  trauma  to  the  brain,  two  different  types  of  memory  loss 
may occur: retrograde amnesia and anterograde amnesia (Figure 24.5). 

Retrograde amnesia

Anterograde amnesia

100

50

)

%

(
 
y
r
o
m
e
m

 
l

a
m
r
o
N

0
Birth

Time

100

50

)

%

(
 
y
r
o
m
e
m

 
l

a
m
r
o
N

Time of 
trauma

Today

(a)  
 ▲  FIGURE 24.5 
 Amnesia produced by trauma to the brain.   (a)  In retrograde amnesia, events for a period 
of time prior to the trauma are forgotten, but memories from the distant past and the pe-
riod following the trauma are intact.  (b)  In anterograde amnesia, events prior to the trauma 
can be remembered, but there are no memories for the period following the trauma.  

(b)  

0
Birth

Time

Time of 
trauma

Today

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   829
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   829

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

830

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Retrograde amnesia  is characterized by memory loss for events prior 
to the trauma; you forget things you already knew. In severe cases, there 
might be complete amnesia for all declarative information learned before 
the trauma. More often, retrograde amnesia follows a pattern in which 
events of the months or years preceding the trauma are forgotten, but 
memory is increasingly strong for older memories. The graded loss of old 
memories across time apparently reﬂ ects the changing nature of memory 
storage, a topic we explore in Chapter 25.  Anterograde amnesia  is an 
inability  to  form  new  memories  following  brain  trauma.  If  the  antero-
grade amnesia is severe, a person might be completely incapable of learn-
ing  and  remembering  anything  new.  In  milder  cases,  learning  may  be 
slower and require more repetition than normal. In clinical cases, there 
is often a mixture of retrograde and anterograde amnesias of different 
degrees of severity. 

 An  example  will  help  clarify.  Suppose  that  on  the  last  day  of  fresh-
man year in college you are walking past a friend’s dormitory. In a ﬁ t of 
excitement about the end of the semester, your friend throws her books 
out the window, crashing on your head. If this trauma causes you to have 
retrograde amnesia, you may be unable to remember the ﬁ nal exam you 
took  the  day  before  or,  in  a  more  serious  case,  any  of  the  courses  you 
took freshman year. If you experience anterograde amnesia, you may re-
call the exams you took before the accident, but when you graduate from 
 college you might be unable to recall the ambulance ride to the hospital 
after the accident, your friend’s endless apologies, or even the summer 
you spent recovering after freshman year. 

 A form of amnesia that involves a much shorter period of time is called 
 transient global amnesia . This is a sudden onset of anterograde amne-
sia that lasts for only a period of minutes to days, often accompanied by 
retrograde  amnesia  for  recent  events  preceding  the  attack.  During  the 
spell, the person may appear disoriented and ask the same questions re-
peatedly, but he or she is conscious, and measures of working memory, 
such as digit span, are normal. In a matter of hours the attack usually 
subsides, and the person is left with a permanent memory gap. 

 Transient  global  amnesia  can  be  frightening  to  both  the  person  ex-
periencing it and those witnessing it. Although the cause has not been 
clearly established, brief cerebral ischemia, in which the blood supply to 
the brain is temporarily reduced, or concussion to the head from trauma, 
such  as  a  car  accident  or  a  hard  blow  while  playing  football,  might  be 
implicated. There have been reports of transient global amnesia brought 
on by seizures, physical stress, drugs, cold showers, and even sex, pre-
sumably because all of these affect cerebral blood ﬂ ow. Many cases were 
linked to use of the antidiarrheal drug clioquinol (which was taken off the 
market). While we don’t know exactly what causes transient global amne-
sia, it may be a consequence of temporary blood deprivation to structures 
essential  for  learning  and  memory.  Other  forms  of  temporary  amnesia 
can be caused by disease, brain trauma, and environmental toxins. 

 WORKING MEMORY 
WORRKING MEMORY 

 Our brains acquire all kinds of information through our sensory systems, 
but as discussed in Chapter 21, we pay attention to only a fraction of it. 
To serve immediate behavioral needs, some of this sensory information is 
“held in mind” by working memory, such as a phone number that we must 
remember in order to call. Unlike long-term memory, working memory 
has a very small capacity, as shown by the digit span described earlier. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   830
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   830

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

831

However, there are subtleties to the quantiﬁ cation of working memory ca-
pacity. For example, more words can be held in memory if they are short 
common words. Also, more words and numbers can be held in working 
memory if they can be chunked into meaningful groups (e.g., a 12-digit 
number is easily held when chunked into three years, such as 1945 1969 
2001). Working memory can be thought of as a limited resource that can 
be used in a variety of ways; there are tradeoffs in the amount and preci-
sion of stored information that are inﬂ uenced by the behavioral signiﬁ -
cance of the information. 

 Information  held  in  working  memory  might  be  converted  into  long-
term memories, but most of it is discarded when no longer needed. How 
is information retained in the brain by working memory long enough to 
be useful? Research in both animals and humans suggests that, rather 
than a single system, working memory is a capability of neocortex found 
in numerous locations in the brain. To illustrate, we look at a couple of 
examples of working memory in the frontal and parietal cortex. 

 The Prefrontal Cortex and Working Memory 
 One of the most obvious anatomical differences between primates (espe-
cially humans) and other mammals is that primates have a large frontal 
lobe. The rostral end of the frontal lobe, the  prefrontal cortex , is par-
ticularly  highly  developed  (Figure  24.6).  Compared  to  the  sensory  and 
motor  cortical  areas,  the  function  of  the  prefrontal  cortex  is  relatively 
poorly  understood.  But  because  it  is  so  well  developed  in  humans,  the 
prefrontal cortex is often assumed to be involved in those characteristics 
that distinguish us from other animals, such as self-awareness and the 
capacity for complex planning and problem solving. 

Central sulcus

Prefrontal
cortex

 ▲  FIGURE 24.6 
 Prefrontal cortex.  The brain rostral to 
the central sulcus is the frontal lobe. The 
prefrontal cortex is the anterior portion 
of the frontal lobe that receives afferents 
from the medial dorsal nucleus of the 
thalamus.  

 Some  of  the  ﬁ rst  evidence  suggesting  that  the  frontal  lobe  is  impor-
tant for learning and memory came from experiments performed in the 
1930s  using  a   delayed-response  task .  A  monkey  was  ﬁ rst  shown  food 
being placed in a well below one of two identical covers in a table. A delay 
period followed, during which the animal could not see the table. Finally, 
the animal was allowed to see the table again and received the food as a 
reward if it chose the correct well. Large prefrontal lesions seriously de-
graded performance in this delayed-response task, as well as other tasks 
including a delay period. Moreover, the monkeys performed increasingly 
poorly as the delay period was lengthened. These results imply that the 
prefrontal cortex may normally be involved in retaining information in 
working memory. 

 Experiments conducted more recently suggest that the prefrontal cor-
tex is involved with working memory for problem solving and the planning 
of behavior. One piece of evidence comes from the behavior of  humans 
with lesions in the prefrontal cortex. Recall the case of Phineas Gage, dis-
cussed in Chapter 18. Having sustained severe frontal lobe damage by an 
iron bar passing through the head, Gage had a difﬁ cult time maintaining 
a course of behavior. Although he could carry out behaviors appropriate 
for different situations, he had difﬁ culty planning and organizing these 
behaviors, perhaps because of the damage to his frontal lobe. 

 The Wisconsin card-sorting test can demonstrate problems associated 
with prefrontal cortical damage. A person is asked to sort a deck of cards 
with  a  variable  number  of  colored  geometric  shapes  (Figure  24.7).  The 
cards can be sorted by color, shape, or number of symbols, but at the be-
ginning of the test, the subject isn’t told which category to use. The subject 
begins putting cards into stacks and is informed when  errors occur, by 
which the subject learns what sorting category is to be used. Then, after 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   831
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   831

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

832

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

First sort by color

Then sort by shape

▲  FIGURE 24.7 
 The Wisconsin card-sorting test.  Cards containing various numbers of colored 
symbols must first be sorted by color.  After a string of correct responses is made, 
the  sorting category is changed to shape. 

ten  correct  card  placements  have  been  made,  the  sorting  category  is 
changed, and the subject starts over again. To perform well on this test, 
a person must use memory of previous cards and errors in order to plan 
the next card placement. People with prefrontal lesions have great difﬁ -
culty on this task when the sorting category is changed; they continue to 
sort according to a rule that no longer applies. It appears that they have 
a working memory deﬁ cit that limits their ability to make use of recent 
information to change their behavior. 

 The same kind of deﬁ cit is seen in other tasks. For example, a person 
with a prefrontal lesion might be asked to trace a path through a maze 
drawn on a piece of paper. Although the patient understands the task, he 
or she will repeatedly make the same mistakes, returning to blind alleys. 
In other words, these patients do not learn from their recent experience in 
the same way as a normal person, suggesting a working memory deﬁ cit. 
 The neurons in prefrontal cortex have a variety of response types, some 
of which may reﬂ ect a role in working memory. Figure 24.8 shows two 
 response patterns obtained while a monkey performed a  delayed- response 
task. The neuron in the top trace responded while the animal ﬁ rst saw 
the food wells, was unresponsive during the delay interval, and  responded 
again  when  the  animal  saw  the  food  wells  again  (Figure  24.8a).  The 
 response of the neuron simply correlates with visual stimulation. More 
interesting is the response pattern of the other neuron, which ﬁ red only 
during the delay interval (Figure 24.8b). This cell was not directly acti-
vated by the stimuli in the ﬁ rst or second interval in which the monkey 
saw the food wells. The increased activity during the delay period may be 
related to the retention of information needed to make the correct choice 
after the delay (i.e., working memory). 

 Imaging Working Memory in the Human Brain.  Human brain imaging 
experiments suggest that numerous brain areas in the prefrontal cortex 
are involved in working memory. In one study by Courtney et al., brain 
activity was recorded by positron emission tomography (PET) while sub-
jects  performed  two  working  memory  tasks.  In  the  identity  task,  three 
face  photographs  were  brieﬂ y  shown  in  succession;  each  image  was  at 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   832
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   832

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
S

i

20

15

10

5

0

(a)  

c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
S

i

20

15

10

5

0

(b)  

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

833

0

10

 20

0

Cue
period

10

Delay (sec)

 20

Choice
period

 ▲  FIGURE 24.8 
 Working memory activity in monkey 
prefrontal cortex.  The two histograms 
show the activity of cells in prefrontal 
cortex recorded while the animal per-
formed a delayed-response task. During 
a cue period of 7 seconds, food is 
placed into one of two wells within the 
monkey’s view. During the delay period, 
the animal cannot see the food wells; af-
ter the delay, it is allowed to choose a 
well to receive a food reward (the choice 
period).  (a)  This cell responds when the 
animal first sees the food wells and 
when it sees them again after the delay 
period.  (b)  This cell responds strongest 
during the delay period, when there is 
no visual stimulus. (Source: Adapted 
from Fuster, 1973, Fig. 2.)  

a different location and the subject looked at each face to memorize it. 
In  the  test  phase,  a  face  picture  was  shown  at  a  new  location  and  the 
subject  indicated  whether  the  face  was  the  same  as  one  of  the  memo-
rized faces (Figure 24.9a). In the location task a similar paradigm was 
used, but the subject’s task was to memorize the locations of the three 
faces presented before the delay, the identities of the faces were irrele-
vant. In the test phase a fourth face was shown and the subject answered 
whether that face was at the same location as one of the memorized loca-
tions (Figure 24.9b). Both experiments looked for brain activity  during the 
delay interval  between the memorization and test phases during which 
the subject had to hold information in mind. In the ﬁ rst experiment, this 
was information about faces; in the second experiment, it was information 
about spatial locations. 

 The brain areas that demonstrated signiﬁ cant working memory activ-
ity  in  these  experiments  are  shown  in  Figure  24.9c  and  Figure  24.9d. 
Six areas in the frontal lobe showed signiﬁ cant sustained activity dur-
ing the delay period, suggesting a role in working memory. Three areas 
exhibited stronger sustained activity for facial identity than spatial loca-
tion,  one  area  was  more  responsive  to  spatial  memory,  and  two  areas 
were active equally in facial and spatial memory tasks. An interesting 
unanswered question is whether working memory for other types of in-
formation is held in the same or different brain areas. 

 Area LIP and Working Memory 
 Cortical areas outside the frontal lobe have also been found to contain neu-
rons that appear to retain working memory information. In Chapter 14, 
we saw an example in area 6 (see Figure 14.9). Another example is pro-
vided  by  the   lateral  intraparietal  cortex  (area  LIP) ,  buried  in  the 
intraparietal sulcus (see Figure 21.18). Area LIP is thought to be involved 
in  guiding  eye  movements  because  electrical  stimulation  here   elicits 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   833
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   833

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

834

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Identity task

Location task

Memorize

Delay

Test

(a)  

Memorize

Delay

Test

(b)  

Test face same identity

as one of the memorized faces?

Test face at same location as

one of the previous faces?

(c)  

(d)  

▲  FIGURE 24.9 
 Human brain activity in two working memory tasks.   (a)  In an identity task, sub-
jects saw three photographs of faces in succession (shown together in the figure). 
The faces were  memorized, and after a delay, a test face was presented at a new 
location. Subjects indicated whether the test face was the same as one of the 
memorized faces.  (b)  In a location task, three faces were shown in succession 
and the subjects memorized their locations on the display. In the test phase, a 
fourth face was shown and subjects indicated whether it appeared at the same 
location as one of the faces in the memorization phase.  (c)  Lateral and  (d)  medial 
views of brain activation in the two tasks. Six areas in the frontal lobe showed 
sustained activity correlated with working memory. The three blue areas showed 
greater activity in the facial identity task, the two green  areas were equally active 
in facial identity and spatial location tasks, and the red area was more active in 
the location task. (Source: Adapted from Haxby et al., 2000, Fig. 5.) 

 saccades in monkeys. The responses of many neurons in area LIP of mon-
keys suggest that they are also involved in a type of working memory. 
This pattern is evident in a  delayed-saccade task , in which the animal 
ﬁ xates on a point on a computer screen and a target is brieﬂ y ﬂ ashed at 
a peripheral location (Figure 24.10a). After the target goes off, there is a 
variable length delay. At the end of the delay period, the ﬁ xation point 
disappears, and the animal’s eyes make a saccadic movement to the re-
membered location of the target. The response of an LIP neuron while a 
monkey performs this task is shown in Figure 24.10b. The neuron begins 
ﬁ ring shortly after the peripheral target is presented; this seems like a 
normal  stimulus-evoked  response.  But  the  cell  keeps  ﬁ ring  throughout 
the delay period in which there is no stimulus. The neuron stops ﬁ ring 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   834
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   834

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

Target flashed

Delay

Saccade

(a)

Fixation

point

Target

120

i

s
e
k
p
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N
(b)

0

Target on 

Delay

Fixation point
disappears

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

835

▲ FIGURE 24.10 
 The delayed-saccade task.   (a)  To ob-
tain a juice reward, the monkey is 
trained to perform the following actions. 
First, the animal fixates a central point 
while a peripheral target flashes on and 
off. During a delay period after the target 
goes off, the monkey continues to fixate 
the central point (the dashed square 
shows the remembered location where 
the target had been). At the end of the 
delay, the fixation point disappears, and 
the animal saccades to the remembered 
location of the target.  (b)  The histogram 
shows the response of an LIP neuron. 
The neuron begins firing when the target 
is presented and continues firing through 
the delay period until after the fixation 
point is gone and the saccadic eye 
movement begins. (Source: Adapted 
from Goldman-Rakic, 1992, Fig. p. 113, 
and Gnadt and Andersen, 1988, Fig. 2.) 

only after the saccadic eye movement begins. Further experiments using 
this delayed-saccade task suggest that the response of the LIP neuron is 
temporarily holding information that will be used to produce the saccade. 
 Other areas in the parietal and temporal cortex have been shown to have 
analogous working memory responses. These areas seem to be modality- 
speciﬁ c, just as the responses in area LIP are speciﬁ c to vision. This is con-
sistent with the clinical observation that there are distinct auditory and 
visual working memory deﬁ cits in humans produced by cortical lesions. 

DECLARATIVE MEMORY 
DECLLARATTIVE MEMORY 

 We’ve seen that sensory information can be temporarily held in mind by 
working  memory,  but  how  does  the  brain  retain  information  for  a  lon-
ger time? Even before humans evolved to the point that we could cram 
for neuroscience exams by drawing cartoons of the brain, we needed to 
remember many things—the location of the river to drink from, where 
to ﬁ nd food, which cave to call home. To understand the neural basis of 
declarative memory storage, we ﬁ rst need to examine  where  in the brain 
it is stored. In other words, we must explore the location of a memory, 
known as an  engram  or  memory trace . For example, when you learn 
the meaning of a word in a foreign language, where in your brain is this 
information stored; where is the engram? 

 The Neocortex and Declarative Memory 
 In the 1920s, American psychologist Karl Lashley conducted experiments 
to study the effects of brain lesions on learning in rats. Well aware of the 
cytoarchitecture of the neocortex, Lashley set out to determine whether 
engrams resided in particular association areas of cortex (see Chapter 7), 
as was widely believed at the time. 

 In  a  typical  experiment,  he  trained  a  rat  to  run  through  a  maze  to 
get a food reward. On the ﬁ rst trial, the rat was slow getting to the food 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   835
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   835

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

836

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 because it would enter blind alleys and have to turn around. After run-
ning through the same maze repeatedly, the rat learned to avoid blind 
alleys and go straight to the food. Lashley was investigating how perfor-
mance on this task was affected by different lesions in the rat’s cortex. He 
found that a rat given a brain lesion after it had learned to run the maze 
then made mistakes and went down blind alleys it had previously learned 
to avoid. Apparently the lesion damaged or destroyed the memory for how 
to reach the food. 

 How did the size and location of lesions affect learning and memory? 
Interestingly,  Lashley  found  that  the  severity  of  the  deﬁ cits  caused  by 
the lesions (both learning and remembering) correlated with the  size  of 
the  lesions  but  was  apparently  unrelated  to  the   location   of  the  lesion 
within the cortex. Based on these ﬁ ndings, he speculated that all cortical 
areas contribute equally (are  equipotential)  to learning and memory; it 
was simply a matter of performance on the maze task becoming poorer 
as the lesion became bigger and the ability to remember the maze wors-
ened. If true, this would be a very important ﬁ nding because it implied 
that engrams are based on neural changes spread throughout the cortex 
rather than being localized to one area. The problem with this interpreta-
tion was that the Lashley’s lesions were large, each damaging multiple 
brain areas possibly involved in  learning or remembering the maze task. 
Another problem was that the rats may have solved the maze in several 
different  ways—by  sight,  feel,  and  smell—and  the  loss  of  one  memory 
might have been compensated for by another. 

 Subsequent research has proven Lashley’s conclusions to be incorrect. 
All cortical areas do not contribute equally to all memories. Nonetheless, 
his conclusions that all of the cortex participates in memory storage, and 
that an engram can be widely distributed in the brain, are correct and im-
portant. Lashley had a major impact on the study of learning and memory 
because he led other scientists to consider ways in which memories might 
be distributed among the vast number of neurons of the cerebral cortex. 

 Hebb and the Cell Assembly.  Lashley’s most famous student was Donald 
Hebb,  introduced  in  Chapter  23.  Hebb  reasoned  that  it  was  crucial  to 
understand  how  external  events  are  represented  in  the  activity  of  the 
brain before one can hope to understand how and where these represen-
tations are stored. In his remarkable book  The Organization of Behavior , 
published in 1949, Hebb proposed that the internal representation of an 
object  consists  of  all  the  cortical  cells  that  are  activated  by  the  exter-
nal stimulus (e.g., the circle in Figure 24.11). Hebb called this group of 
simultaneously  active  neurons  a   cell  assembly   (Figure  24.11a).  Hebb 
imagined that all these cells were reciprocally interconnected. The inter-
nal representation of the object was held in working memory as long as 
activity reverberated through the connections of the cell assembly. Hebb 
further hypothesized that if activation of the cell assembly persisted long 
enough, consolidation would occur by a “growth process” that made these 
reciprocal connections more effective; neurons that ﬁ red together would 
wire together (Figure 24.11b). Subsequently, if only a fraction of the cells 
of the assembly were activated by a later stimulus (e.g., segments of a 
circle),  the  now-powerful  reciprocal  connections  would  cause  the  whole 
assembly to become active again, thus recalling the entire internal repre-
sentation of the external stimulus—in this case, the circle (Figure 24.11c). 
 Hebb’s important message about the engram was twofold: (1) It could 
be  widely  distributed  among  the  connections  that  link  the  cells  of  the 
assembly,  and  (2)  it  could  involve  the  same  neurons  that  are  involved 
in sensation and perception. Destruction of only a fraction of the cells of 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   836
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   836

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

837

Activation of the cell
assembly by a stimulus.

Reverberating activity
continues activation after
the stimulus is removed.

Hebbian modification
strengthens the reciprocal
connections between
neurons that are active 
at the same time.

The strengthened
connections of the cell
assembly contain the
engram for the stimulus.

After learning, partial
activation of the assembly
leads to activation of the
entire representation of
the stimulus.

= “Circle.”

Reciprocal connections
between neurons

Neurons

(a)

The cell assembly

External
stimulus

(b)

 ▲ FIGURE 24.11 
 Hebb’s cell assembly and memory 
 storage. 

(c)

the assembly would not be expected to eliminate the memory, possibly 
explaining Lashley’s results. Hebb’s ideas stimulated the development of 
neural network computer models. Although his original assumptions had 
to be modiﬁ ed slightly, we will see in Chapter 25 that these models have 
successfully reproduced many features of human memory. 

 Where is the engram for a foreign language? Look to the regions of the 
brain in the temporal and parietal lobes that normally process language. 
A lesion here can disrupt your memory of a foreign word but leave intact 
the memory of your foreign-born grandmother’s face. However, although 
declarative memories may ﬁ nally reside in many areas of the neocortex, 
decades of research indicate that to get there, they must pass through 
structures in the medial temporal lobes. Let’s explore the evidence. 

 Studies Implicating the Medial Temporal Lobes 
 A variety of experiments indicate that structures in the medial tempo-
ral lobe are particularly important for the consolidation and storage of 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   837
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   837

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

838

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Lateral view

Medial view

Hippocampus

(a)

Hippocampus

Lateral ventricle

Thalamus

Hippocampus

▲  FIGURE 24.12 
 Structures in the medial temporal 
lobe involved in declarative 
 memory formation.   (a)  Lateral and 
medial views show the location of 
the hippocampus in the temporal 
lobe.  (b)  The brain is sectioned coro-
nally to show the hippocampus and 
cortex of the medial temporal lobe. 

Entorhinal
cortex

Hippocampus

Rhinal
sulcus

(b)

Rhinal
sulcus

Perirhinal
cortex

Parahippocampal
cortex

declarative  memories.  Examples  are  experiments  that  used   electrical 
 stimulation  or  neural  recordings  from  the  temporal  lobe.  Further  evi-
dence  came  from  cases  of  amnesia  that  resulted  from  damage  to  the 
temporal lobes. Before considering the studies that suggest that memory 
storage involves the medial temporal lobes, let’s look at the anatomy of 
this brain region. 

 Anatomy  of  the  Medial  Temporal  Lobe.   The  temporal  lobe  is  located 
under  the  temporal  bone,  so  named  because  the  hair  of  the  temples  is 
often the ﬁ rst to go gray with the passage of time ( tempus  is Latin for 
“time”). The association of the temporal lobe with time was fortuitous as 
this region of the brain is important for recording past events. The medial 
portion of the temporal lobe contains the temporal neocortex, which may 
be a site of long-term memory storage, and a group of structures intercon-
nected  with  neocortex  that  are  critical  for  the  formation  of  declarative 
memories. 

 The  key  structures  are  the  hippocampus,  the  nearby  cortical  areas, 
and the pathways that connect these structures with other parts of the 
brain  (Figure  24.12).  As  we  saw  in  Chapter  7,  the   hippocampus   is  a 
folded structure situated medial to the lateral ventricle. The name means 
“seahorse,”  a  resemblance  you  can  see  in  Figure  24.13.  Ventral  to  the 
 hippocampus  are  three  important  cortical  regions  that  surround  the 
rhinal sulcus: the  entorhinal cortex , which occupies the medial bank 
of the rhinal sulcus; the  perirhinal cortex , which occupies the lateral 
bank; and the  parahippocampal cortex , which lies lateral to the rhinal 

▲  FIGURE 24.13 
 The hippocampus.  In Greek mythology, 
the hippocampus was a creature com-
bining the front of a horse with the hind 
end of a dolphin or fish. Here a dis-
sected hippocampus is shown next to a 
seahorse. (Source: Laszlo Seress/Wiki-
media Commons.) 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   838
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   838

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

Sensory

information

Cortical

association

areas

Parahippocampal

and rhinal

cortical areas

Hippocampus

Fornix

Thalamus,
hypothalamus

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

839

 ▲ FIGURE 24.14 
 Information flow through the medial temporal lobe. 

sulcus. (We’ll refer to entorhinal cortex and perirhinal cortex collectively 
as rhinal cortex.) 

 Inputs to the medial temporal lobe come from the association areas of the 
cerebral cortex, containing highly processed information from all sensory 
modalities (Figure 24.14). For instance, inferotemporal visual cortex (area 
IT) projects to the medial temporal lobe, but low-order visual areas such as 
striate cortex do not. This means that the input contains complex repre-
sentations, perhaps of behaviorally important sensory information, rather 
than responses to simple features such as light–dark borders. Input ﬁ rst 
reaches the rhinal and parahippocampal cortex before being passed to the 
hippocampus. A major output pathway from the hippocampus is the  fornix , 
which loops around the thalamus before terminating in the hypothalamus. 

 Electrical Stimulation of the Human Temporal Lobes.  One of the most 
intriguing and controversial studies implicating the neocortex of the tem-
poral lobe in the storage of declarative memory traces involved electri-
cal stimulation of the human brain. In Chapters 12 and 14 we discussed 
the work of Wilder Penﬁ eld, in which patients’ brains, as part of surgical 
treatment for severe epilepsy, were electrically stimulated at numerous 
locations prior to ablation of the seizure-prone region. Stimulation of so-
matic sensory cortex caused the patient to experience tingling sensations 
in regions of skin, whereas stimulation of motor cortex caused a certain 
muscle to twitch. 

 Electrical stimulation of the temporal lobe occasionally produced more 
complex  sensations  than  stimulation  in  other  brain  areas.  In  a  num-
ber of cases, Penﬁ eld’s patients described sensations that sounded like 
 hallucinations or recollections of past experiences. This is consistent with 
reports that epileptic seizures of the temporal lobes can evoke complex 
sensations, behaviors, and memories. Here is part of Penﬁ eld’s account 
of one operation: 

 At the time of operation, stimulation of a point on the anterior part 
of the ﬁ rst temporal convolution on the right caused him [the pa-
tient] to say, “I feel as though I were in the bathroom at school.” Five 
minutes later, after negative stimulations elsewhere, the electrode 
was  reapplied  near  the  same  point.  The  patient  then  said  some-
thing  about  “street  corner.”  The  surgeon  asked  him,  “where”  and 
he replied, “South Bend, Indiana, corner of Jacob and Washington.” 
When asked to explain, he said he seemed to be looking at himself—
at a younger age. (Penﬁ eld, 1958, p. 25.) 
 Another patient reported a similar sense of experiencing ﬂ ashbacks. 
When her temporal cortex was stimulated, she said, “I think I heard a 
mother calling her little boy somewhere. It seemed to be something that 
happened  years  ago.”  With  stimulation  at  another  location,  she  said, 
“Yes, I hear voices. It is late at night around the carnival somewhere—
some sort of traveling circus. . . I just saw lots of big wagons that they use 
to haul animals in.” 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   839
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   839

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

840

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 Are  these  people  reexperiencing  events  from  earlier  in  their  life  be-
cause memories are evoked by the electrical stimulation? Does this mean 
that memories are stored in the neocortex of the temporal lobe? Those are 
tough questions! One interpretation is that the sensations are recollec-
tions of past experiences. The fact that such elaborate sensations resulted 
only when the temporal lobe was stimulated suggests that the temporal 
lobe may play a special role in memory storage. However, other aspects of 
the ﬁ ndings do not clearly support the hypothesis that engrams are being 
electrically activated. For instance, some brain-stimulated patients said 
they  saw  themselves,  something  that  we  cannot  normally   experience. 
Also, it is important to appreciate that complex sensations were reported 
only by a minority of the patients, and all of these patients had an abnor-
mal cortex associated with their epilepsy. 

 There is no way to prove whether the complex sensations evoked by 
temporal  lobe  stimulation  are  recalled  memories.  However,  it  is  clear 
that  the  consequences  of  temporal  lobe  stimulation  and  temporal  lobe 
seizures can be qualitatively different from stimulation of other areas of 
the  neocortex. 

 Neural Recordings from the Human Medial Temporal Lobe.  Electrical 
stimulation  of  the  temporal  lobe  sometimes  produces  memory-like 
 experiences, and as we will see, lesions here disrupt memory. But what 
are the medial temporal neurons normally doing? A glimpse at the  normal 
function  of  these  neurons  comes  from  studies  using  microelectrodes  to 
record from the brains of living humans who suffered from epileptic sei-
zures  that  were  not  alleviated  by  drugs. As  in  Penﬁ eld’s  studies,  plans 
were made to surgically remove the abnormally active part of the brain 
after  localizing  the  area  with  electrode  recordings.  Because  temporal 
lobe  seizures  are  common,  the  electrodes  were  often  placed  in  the  hip-
pocampus and surrounding structures. In some ways such recordings are 
reminiscent of studies of visual neurons in monkey inferotemporal cortex. 
As seen in monkeys, neurons were found that preferentially responded 
to  categories  of  objects,  including  faces,  household  objects,  and  outdoor 
scenes (recall face-selective neurons in Chapter 10). These neurons are 
said to be invariant because they responded to quite a variety of visual 
images that are structurally or conceptually related. 

 In further studies, even more selectivity was discovered in a small per-
centage of the neurons examined. For example, individual hippocampal 
neurons were found in one patient that responded selectively to pictures 
of the actress Jennifer Aniston or the basketball player Michael Jordan. 
Figure 24.15 shows a neuron in the hippocampus that responded to  various 
stimuli associated with the actress Halle Berry. The diversity of the effec-
tive stimuli was striking, including photographs of Ms. Berry, a drawing of 
her face, and even her printed name. The neuron was activated by pictures 
of Ms. Berry dressed for her role in the movie  Catwoman,  yet it did not 

Halle Berry

 ▲ FIGURE 24.15 
 A patient’s hippocampal neuron 
 selectively responds to actress Halle 
Berry.  This neuron responded to photos 
and drawings of Halle Berry as well as her 
written name. The cell responded less or 
not at all to photos, drawings, and  written 
names of other people. (Adapted from: 
Quiroga et al., 2005, Fig. 2.) 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   840
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   840

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

841

 respond to other women similarly dressed. Other neurons were selective 
for landmarks such as the Eiffel Tower and the Leaning Tower of Pisa. 

 What are we to make of these neurons? One way to think about them 
is that they are somewhere on a continuum between purely visual coding 
in the lateral temporal lobe and memory coding in the medial  temporal 
lobe. We can’t be sure, but such neurons are probably not essential for 
 recognition  because  common  objects  and  famous  faces  are  recognized 
even after lesions to the hippocampus; even H.M. recognized people and 
things that existed before his surgery. Recognition may rely on portions 
of the  temporal lobe that are more lateral and posterior. The highly se-
lective  neurons  in  the  hippocampus  may  serve  a  role  in  the  formation 
of new memories of people and things we already recognize, such as the 
patient’s  memory  of  Halle  Berry.  Many  questions  remain.  Might  less 
speciﬁ c  responses have been found in these experiments if more stimuli 
were used (a cell that responds to Justin Timberlake, canned peas, and 
doorknobs)? Are there neurons selectively activated by every object that 
we recognize, or are the examples we’ve discussed rare cases related to 
repeated  exposure  of  very  famous  people  or  things?  Do  these  ﬁ ndings 
even apply to normal brains, since it is conceivable that the seizure-prone 
brains were abnormally organized and responsive? 

 Temporal Lobe Amnesia 
 If the temporal lobe is particularly important for learning and memory, 
one would expect that removing both temporal lobes would have a pro-
found  effect  on  these  functions.  Studies  in  both  humans  and  animals 
show that this is indeed the case. 

 The Case of H.M.: Temporal Lobectomy and Amnesia.  A renowned case 
of amnesia resulting from temporal lobe damage provides further evidence 
for the importance of this region in memory. This case concerns the memory 
of Henry Molaison, whose name was made public only after his death in 
2008 (Figure 24.16). For the previous half century, studies referred to him 
as H.M., probably the most famous initials in the history of  neuroscience. 
H.M. experienced minor epileptic seizures beginning around age 10, and 
as he aged, they became more serious generalized seizures involving con-
vulsions, tongue biting, and loss of consciousness. Although the cause of 
the seizures is not known, they may have resulted from damage sustained 
in a bicycle accident at the age of 9 that left him unconscious for 5 minutes. 
After graduating from high school he got a job, but despite heavy medica-
tion with anticonvulsants, his seizures increased in frequency and severity 
to the point that he was unable to work. In 1953, at the age of 27, H.M. 
had an operation in which an 8 cm length of medial temporal lobe was bi-
laterally excised, including cortex, the underlying amygdala, and the ante-
rior two-thirds of the hippocampus, in a last-ditch attempt to  assuage the 
 seizures. The surgery was successful in alleviating the seizures. 

 The removal of much of the temporal lobes had little effect on H.M.’s 
perception,  intelligence,  or  personality,  but  the  surgery  left  him  with 
profound and debilitating anterograde amnesia. Drs. Brenda Milner and 
Suzanne Corkin, initially at the Montreal Neurological Institute, worked 
with H.M. for 50 years, but, incredibly, they had to introduce themselves 
to him every time they met. They found that H.M. would forget events 
almost as quickly as they occurred. With repetition he could remember 
a  number  for  a  short  time,  but  if  he  was  distracted  he  would  not  only 
forget the number, he would also forget that he had even been asked to 
remember one. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   841
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   841

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

842

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

8 cm

Temporal
lobe

Cerebellum

(c)

(a)

H.M.'s  brain

(b) Normal brain

Hippocampus

▲  FIGURE 24.16 
 The brain lesion in patient H.M. that produced profound anterograde amnesia. 
  (a)  The medial temporal lobe was removed from both hemispheres in H.M.’s brain 
to  alleviate epileptic seizures.  (b)  A normal brain, showing the location of the hip-
pocampus and cortex that were removed from H.M.’s brain. (Source: Adapted from 
Scoville and Milner, 1957, Fig. 2.)  (c)  Henry Molaison as a high school student 
 before the surgery. (Source: Photo courtesy of Suzanne Corkin. Copyright © by 
Suzanne Corkin used by permission of The Wylie Agency LLC.) 

 To be clear about the nature of H.M.’s amnesia, we must contrast what 
was lost with what was retained. In addition to anterograde amnesia, he 
had  some  degree  of  retrograde  amnesia.  He  retained  some  memories  of 
his childhood but little or no memory for events just before his surgery. 
Testing shortly after the surgery suggested that H.M. had retrograde am-
nesia  for  events  extending  back  several  years  before  his  surgery.  Later 
studies suggested that his retrograde amnesia might extend back decades. 
H.M.’s working memory was largely normal. For instance, with constant 
rehearsal he could remember a list of six numbers, although any interrup-
tion would cause him to forget. H.M. was actually able to learn a very small 
number of declarative facts after his surgery. For example, he could recog-
nize and name a few people who became famous after his surgery, such as 
U.S. President John Kennedy. He also learned the ﬂ oor plan of a home he 
moved to after the surgery. These rare remembered facts probably resulted 
from extensive daily repetition. H.M. was also able to learn new tasks (i.e., 
form new  procedural  memories). For example, he was taught to draw by 
looking at his hand in a mirror, a task that takes a good deal of practice for 
anyone. The odd thing is that he learned to perform new tasks despite the 
fact that he had no recollection of the speciﬁ c experiences in which he was 
taught to do them (the declarative component of the learning). 

 To appreciate the signiﬁ cance of H.M., realize that prior to his surgery, 
little was known about the function of the hippocampus and surrounding 
structures. Considering H.M.’s amnesia in the context of earlier research, 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   842
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   842

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

843

we can conclude that the medial temporal lobe is critical for memory con-
solidation but not for the retrieval of memories. Although there is some 
controversy about the temporal extent of H.M.’s retrograde amnesia, he 
clearly  retained  declarative  memories  for  many  things  from  before  the 
surgery, such as famous faces and the meanings of words. This implies 
that medial temporal structures do not store all memories even though 
engrams for some things may be located there. The fact that his  working 
memory was largely intact means this does not rely on the medial tem-
poral lobe. Finally, H.M’s amnesia indicates that the formation and re-
tention of procedural memories use brain structures distinct from those 
involved in declarative memory consolidation and perhaps storage. 

 An  Animal  Model  of  Human  Amnesia.   The  amnesia  of  H.M.  makes  a 
strong case that one or more structures in the medial temporal lobe are 
essential for the formation of declarative memories. If these structures 
are  damaged,  severe  anterograde  amnesia  results.  Experiments  have 
mostly used the experimental ablation technique to assess whether the 
removal of various parts of the temporal lobe affects memory. 

 Because  the  macaque  monkey  brain  is  similar  in  many  ways  to  the 
human brain, macaques are frequently studied to further our understand-
ing of human amnesia. The monkeys are often trained to perform tasks 
called  delayed  match-to-sample  and   delayed  non-match  to  sample 
(DNMS)  (Figure 24.17). In this type of experiment, a monkey faces a table 
that has several small wells in its surface. It ﬁ rst sees the table with one 
object on it covering a well. The object might be a wooden block or a chalk-
board eraser (the sample stimulus). The monkey is trained to displace the 
object so that it can grab a food reward in the well under the object. After 
getting the food, a screen prevents the monkey from  seeing the table for 
some period of time (the delay interval). Finally, the animal gets to see the 
table again, but now there are two objects on it: One is the same as before, 
and another is new. If a  match-to-sample experiment is being conducted, 
the animal must displace the object it  recognizes to get a food reward. In 
DNMS, the monkey’s task is to displace the new object (the non-matching 
object) in order to get a food reward in the well below it. Normal monkeys 
are relatively easy to train on the non-matching task and get very good 
at it, perhaps because it exploits their natural curiosity for novel objects. 
With delays between the two stimulus presentations of anywhere from a 
few seconds to 10 minutes, the monkey correctly displaces the non-match-
ing stimulus on about 90% of the trials. Memory required in the DNMS 
task has been called  recognition memory  because it involves the ability 
to judge whether a stimulus has been seen before. 

Delay

▲  FIGURE 24.17 
 The delayed non-match to sample 
(DNMS) task.  A monkey first displaces 
a sample object to obtain a food re-
ward. After a delay, two objects are 
shown, and recognition memory is 
tested by having the animal choose the 
object that does not match the sample. 
(Source: Adapted from Mishkin and 
 Appenzeller, 1987, p. 6.) 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   843
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   843

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

844

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

100

t
c
e
r
r
o
c
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
 
n
a
e
M

90

80

70

60

50

8–10
sec

Normal

With lesion

15–30

60–70

sec

sec
Length of delay

2–10
min

▲  FIGURE 24.18 
 The effect of medial temporal lesions 
on DNMS performance.  The Y axis 
shows the percentage of correct choices 
made by monkeys as a function of the 
length of the delay interval. The perfor-
mance of normal monkeys is compared 
to that of monkeys with large bilateral 
medial temporal lesions. (Source: 
Adapted from Squire, 1987, Fig. 49.) 

 In the early 1980s, experiments performed by Mortimer Mishkin and 
his  colleagues  at  the  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health,  and  Larry 
Squire  and  his  coworkers  at  the  University  of  California,  San  Diego, 
 demonstrated that severe deﬁ cits on the DNMS task result from bilateral 
medial temporal lesions in macaque monkeys. Performance was close to 
normal if the delay between the sample stimulus and the two test stimuli 
was short (a few seconds). This is important because it indicates that the 
monkey’s  perception  was  still  intact  after  the  ablation  and  the  animal 
remembered  the  DNMS  procedure.  But  when  the  delay  was  increased 
from a few seconds to a few minutes, the monkey made increasingly more 
errors choosing the non-matching stimulus (Figure 24.18). With the le-
sion, the animal was no longer as good at remembering what the sample 
stimulus was in order to choose the other object. This behavior suggests 
that it forgot the sample stimulus if the delay was too long. The deﬁ cit in 
recognition memory produced by the lesion was not speciﬁ c to the visual 
modality, since this deﬁ cit was also observed if the monkey was allowed 
to touch but not see the objects. 

 The  monkeys  with  medial  temporal  lesions  appeared  to  provide  a 
good model of human amnesia. As with H.M., the amnesia was antero-
grade, it involved declarative rather than procedural memory, working 
 memory was intact, and consolidation was severely impaired. Note that 
the  surgical lesions that produced recognition memory deﬁ cits in these 
monkeys  were  quite  large.  They  included  the  hippocampus,  amygdala, 
and  rhinal  cortex.  At  one  time  it  was  thought  that  the  key  structures 
damaged  in  such  lesions  were  the  hippocampus  and  amygdala.  Recall 
from Chapter 18 that the amygdala plays a special role in memory for 
emotional experiences. However, research has now shown that selective 
amygdala  lesions  have  no  effect  on  recognition  memory,  and  lesions  of 
the hippocampus alone produce only relatively mild amnesia. For exam-
ple, Squire studied a man known as R.B. who had bilateral hippocampal 
damage as a result of oxygen deprivation during surgery. Although R.B. 
clearly  had  difﬁ culty  forming  new  memories,  his  anterograde  amnesia 
was not nearly as severe as that seen in H.M. The most severe memory 
deﬁ cits result from damage to the perirhinal cortex. The anterograde am-
nesia resulting from perirhinal lesions is not speciﬁ c to information from 
a particular sensory modality, reﬂ ecting the convergence of input from 
association cortex of multiple sensory systems. 

 Together with the hippocampus, the cortex in and around the rhinal 
sulcus  evidently  performs  a  critical  transformation  of  the  information 
coming  from  association  cortex.  Some  studies  suggest  that  the  hippo-
campus and rhinal cortex are involved in different facets of memory; the 
hippocampus  may  signal  that  a  particular  object  had  been  seen  before 
(“I remember that object”), whereas the perirhinal cortex may be involved 
more in signaling familiarity (“That object looks familiar but I don’t re-
member it speciﬁ cally”). Still, such distinctions remain controversial. At 
any  rate,  it  appears  that,  collectively,  medial  temporal  structures  are 
critical for the consolidation of memory. They may also have an essential 
intermediate processing role that involves something more than consoli-
dation. H.M. and possibly R.B. had some retrograde amnesia. Perhaps in 
addition to consolidation, medial temporal structures play a role in the 
storage of memories for a long or short time (depending on which expert 
you ask). Our discussion of brain areas involved in anterograde amnesia 
has focused on structures in the medial temporal lobe, but it is important 
to note that lesions to interconnected areas elsewhere in the brain also 
produce amnesia (Box 24.2). 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   844
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   844

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

845

BOX 24.2

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Korsakoff’s Syndrome and the Case of N.A.

 In Chapter 18 we learned about the Papez circuit, a series of 

strongly interconnected structures that ring the  diencephalon. 
A  major  component  of  this  circuit  is  a  massive  bundle  of 
axons called the fornix that connects the hippocampus with 
the mammillary bodies in the hypothalamus (Figure A). The 
mammillary bodies, in turn, send a strong projection to the 
anterior nuclei of the thalamus. The dorsomedial nucleus of 
the  thalamus  also  receives  input  from  temporal  lobe  struc-
tures, including the amygdala and inferotemporal neocortex, 
and it projects to virtually all of the frontal cortex. 

 Considering  the  central  role  of  the  temporal  lobes  in 
 memory processing, it is perhaps not surprising that damage 
to these connected diencephalic structures can also cause 
amnesia. 

 A particularly dramatic example of the amnesic effects of 
damage to the diencephalon in humans is the case of a man 
known as N.A. In 1959 at the age of 21, N.A. was a radar 
technician in the U.S. Air Force. One day he was sitting down 
assembling a model in his barracks, while behind him a room-
mate played with a miniature fencing foil. N.A. turned at the 
wrong moment and was stabbed. The foil went through his 
right nostril and took a leftward course into his brain. Many 
years later when a CT scan was performed, the only obvious 
damage was a lesion in his left dorsomedial thalamus, though 
there may have been other damage. 

 After his recovery, N.A.’s cognitive ability was normal, but 
his memory was impaired. He had relatively severe antero-
grade  amnesia  as  well  as  retrograde  amnesia  for  a  period 
of about 2 years preceding the accident. While he could re-
member some faces and events from the years following his 
accident,  even  these  memories  were  sketchy.  He  had  dif-
ﬁ culty watching television because during commercials, he’d 
forget what had previously happened. In a sense, he lived in 
the past and preferred to wear old familiar clothes and keep 
his hair in an older style. 

 Although N.A.’s amnesia was less severe than H.M.’s, its 
quality was strikingly similar. He had preservation of  short-term 
memory,  recollection  of  old  memories,  and   general  intelli-
gence. Along with difﬁ culty forming new declarative memo-
ries,  he  had  retrograde  amnesia  for  2  years  preceding  the 
accident  that  produced  the  amnesia.  The  similarities  in  the 
effects of medial temporal and diencephalic lesions suggests 
that these interconnected areas are part of a system serving 
the common function of memory consolidation. 

 Further support for a role of the diencephalon in  memory 
comes from studies of Korsakoff’s syndrome. Usually result-
ing from chronic alcoholism,  Korsakoff’s syndrome  is char-
acterized by confusion, confabulations, severe  memory im-
pairment, and apathy. As a result of poor nutrition,  alcoholics 
may  develop  a  thiamin  deﬁ ciency,  which  can  lead  to  such 

symptoms as abnormal eye movements, loss of coordination, 
and tremors. This condition can be treated with supplemen-
tal thiamin. If left untreated, however, thiamin deﬁ ciency can 
lead  to  structural  brain  damage  that  produces  Korsakoff’s 
syndrome.  Although  all  cases  of  Korsakoff’s  syndrome  are 
not associated with damage to the same parts of the brain, 
there are usually lesions in the dorsomedial thalamus and the 
mammillary bodies. 

 In addition to anterograde amnesia, Korsakoff’s syndrome 
can involve more severe retrograde amnesia than observed 
in  N.A.  and  H.M.  No  strong  correlation  exists   between  the 
severities  of  anterograde  amnesia  and  retrograde  amne-
sia  in  Korsakoff’s  syndrome.  This  is  consistent  with  the 
other   studies  of  amnesia  we’ve  discussed,   suggesting  that 
the  mechanisms  involved  in  consolidation  (disrupted  in  an-
terograde  amnesia)  are  largely  distinct  from  the  processes 
used  to  recall  memories  (disrupted  in  retrograde  amnesia). 
Based  on  a  small  number  of  cases  such  as  that  of  N.A., 
 researchers  suspect  that  anterograde  amnesia  associated 
with  diencephalic lesions results from damage to the thala-
mus and  mammillary bodies. Although it is not clear which 
damage  causes  the  retrograde  amnesia,  in  addition  to 
 diencephalic  lesions,  Korsakoff’s  patients  sometimes  have 
 damage to the  cerebellum, brain stem, and neocortex. 

Fornix

Thalamus

Amygdala

Hippocampus

Mammillary
body

 Figure A
Midline brain structures involved in memory.  Temporal 
lobe structures including the hippocampus, amygdala, and infero-
temporal cortex project to the thalamus and hypothalamus, includ-
ing the mammillary bodies, in the diencephalon. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   845
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   845

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

846

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 Memory Functions of the Hippocampal System 
 Memory  formation,  retention,  and  retrieval  involve  a  system  of  inter-
connected  brain  areas.  Considerable  evidence  points  to  the  importance 
of the medial temporal lobe for declarative memory, and within this re-
gion of the brain the hippocampus has received the greatest attention. 
It’s  not  simple  to  pin  down  just  what  the  hippocampus  does,  however, 
as it is involved in various memory functions at multiple time scales. To 
avoid  getting lost, keep a few basic points in mind. First, the hippocam-
pus  appears to play a critical role in binding sensory information for the 
purpose of memory consolidation. Second, a lot of research, particularly 
in rodents, has shown that the hippocampus supports spatial memory of 
the location of objects of behavioral importance. This may be one of the 
specialized functions of the hippocampus, or it might be an example of the 
binding of sensory information. Finally, the hippocampus is involved in 
the storage of memories for some length of time, though the time duration 
is controversial. 

 The  Effects  of  Hippocampal  Lesions  in  Rats.   Rodents  have  played  an 
important role elucidating the memory functions of the hippocampus. In 
one type of experiment, rats are trained to get food in a  radial arm maze , 
a  device  devised  by  David  Olton  and  his  colleagues  at  Johns  Hopkins 
University. This  apparatus  consists  of  arms,  or  passageways,  radiating 
from a central platform (Figure 24.19a). If a normal rat is put in such a 
maze, it will explore until it ﬁ nds the food at the end of each arm. With 
practice,  the  rat  becomes  efﬁ cient  at  ﬁ nding  all  the  food,  going  down 
each arm of the maze just once (Figure 24.19b). To run through the maze 
without  going  twice  into  any  of  the  arms,  the  rat  uses  visual  or  other 
cues around the maze to remember where it has already been. Working 
 memory is presumably used to retain information about which arms have 
been visited. 

 If the hippocampus is destroyed before the rat is put in the maze, its 
performance will differ from normal behavior in an interesting way. In 
one sense, rats with lesions seem normal; they learn to go down the arms 
of the maze and eat the food placed at the end of each arm. But unlike 
normal rats, they never learn to do this efﬁ ciently. Rats with hippocam-
pal lesions go down the same arms more than once, only to ﬁ nd no food 
after the ﬁ rst trip, and they leave other arms containing food unexplored 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

▲  FIGURE 24.19 
 Following a rat through a radial arm maze.   (a)  An eight-arm radial maze. 
 (b)  The path of a rat through a maze in which all the arms contain food.  (c)  If a 
rat learns that four of the eight arms never contain food, it will ignore these and 
follow a path to only the baited arms. (Source: Parts b and c, adapted from 
 Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993, Fig. 7.4.) 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   846
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   846

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

847

for an abnormally long time. It appears that the rats can learn the task 
in the sense that they go down the arms in search of food (the procedural 
memory). But they cannot seem to remember which arms they’ve already 
visited. 

 A  variation  on  the  radial  arm  experiment  illustrates  an  important 
 subtlety in the deﬁ cit produced by destroying the hippocampus. Instead 
of placing food at the end of all the arms of the maze, food is placed only 
at the ends of certain arms and never in the other ones. After a bit of prac-
tice, a normal rat learns to avoid going down the arms that never contain 
food (Figure 24.19c). At the same time, the rat learns to efﬁ ciently get 
the food in the other arms, entering each arm just once. How do rats with 
hippocampal lesions perform on this task? Interestingly, just like normal 
rats, they are able to learn to avoid the arms that never contain food. But 
they still are not able to get the food from the other arms without wasting 
time going down the same arms more than once. So how can we argue 
that the lesion disrupts the ability to learn the locations of arms that have 
already been entered, even though the rat can learn to avoid arms that 
never contain food? Evidently, the key to making sense of these ﬁ ndings 
is that the information about the no-food arms is always the same each 
time the rat goes in the maze (i.e., no-food arms are memorized as part 
of the “procedure”), whereas the information about which arms the rat 
has already entered requires working memory and varies from one trial 
to the next. 

 Spatial Memory, Place Cells, and Grid Cells.  Several lines of evidence 
suggest that the hippocampus is particularly important for spatial mem-
ory. The  Morris water maze,  a commonly used test of spatial memory 
in rats, was devised by Richard Morris of the University of Edinburgh. In 
this test, a rat is placed in a pool ﬁ lled with cloudy water (Figure 24.20). 
Submerged just below the surface in one location is a small platform that 
allows the rat to escape the water. A rat placed in the water the ﬁ rst time 
will  swim  around  until  it  bumps  into  the  hidden  platform,  and  then  it 
will climb onto it. Normal rats quickly learn the spatial location of the 
platform and on subsequent trials waste no time swimming straight to 
it. Moreover, once they have ﬁ gured out what to search for, rats put in a 
maze with the platform at a different location learn the task much faster. 
But rats with bilateral hippocampal damage never seem to ﬁ gure out the 
game or remember the location of the platform. 

Hidden platform

Wading pool

(a)  Before learning
 ▲ FIGURE 24.20 
 The Morris water maze.   (a)  The trajectory a rat might take to find a  hidden plat-
form the first time the rat is placed in the pool.  (b)  After repeated trials, the rat 
knows where the platform is and swims straight to it. 

(b)  After learning

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   847
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   847

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

848

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 ▲ FIGURE 24.21 
 Place cells in the hippocampus.  A rat 
explores a small box for 10 minutes (left 
panels). Then the partition is removed, so 
the rat can explore a larger area (center 
and right panels).  (a)  Color coding indi-
cates the area in the box where one 
place cell in the hippocampus responds: 
red, large response; yellow, moderate re-
sponse; blue, no response. This cell has 
a place field in the smaller upper box; 
when the partition is removed, it stays in 
the same location.  (b)  In this case, an 
electrode is next to a cell in the hippo-
campus that does not respond when the 
rat is in the smaller upper box (left). In 
the first 10 minutes after the partition is 
removed, the cell also does not respond 
(center). But after another 10 minutes, a 
place field develops in the new larger box 
(right). (Source: Adapted from Wilson and 
McNaughton, 1993, Fig. 2.) 

Cell 1

Partition

(a)

Cell 2

Partition

(b)

 What  properties  of  hippocampal  neurons  aid  them  in  their  spatial 
navigation and memory? In a fascinating series of experiments begun in 
the early 1970s, John O’Keefe and his colleagues at University College 
London  showed  that  many  neurons  in  the  hippocampus  selectively  re-
spond when a rat is in a particular location in its environment. Suppose 
we have a microelectrode implanted in the hippocampus of a rat while 
it scurries about inside a large box. At ﬁ rst the cell is quiet, but when 
the rat moves into the northwest corner of the box, the cell starts ﬁ ring. 
When it moves out of the corner, the ﬁ ring stops; when it returns, the cell 
starts ﬁ ring again. The cell responds only when the rat is in that one por-
tion of the box (Figure 24.21a). This location, which evokes the greatest 
response, is called the neuron’s  place ﬁ eld . We try recording from another 
hippocampal cell and it too has a place ﬁ eld, but this one ﬁ res only when 
the rat goes to the center of the box. For obvious reasons, these neurons 
are called  place cells . 

 In some ways, place ﬁ elds are similar to the receptive ﬁ elds of neurons 
in the sensory systems. For instance, the location of the place ﬁ eld is re-
lated to sensory input such as visual stimuli in the environment. In our 
experiment with the rat in the box, we could paint images above the four 
corners, such as a star above the northwest corner, a triangle above the 
southeast corner, and so on. Consider a cell that responds only when the 
rat is in the northwest corner of the box, near the painted star. Suppose 
we take the rat out of the box and blindfold it. We then secretly go back 
and rotate the box 180° so that now the northwest corner has the triangle 
and the southeast corner has the star. Will the cell we were previously 
studying respond when the animal is in the northwest corner, or will it 
respond in the corner where the star is now located (the southeast cor-
ner)? We put the rat back in the box and take off the blindfold. It starts 
exploring, and the neuron becomes active when the rat goes to the corner 
near the star. This demonstrates that, at least under some conditions, the 
response is based on visual input. 

 While  place  cells  are  similar  to  receptive  ﬁ elds  in  some  ways,  there 
are  also  major  differences.  For  instance,  once  the  animal  has  become 
 familiar with the box with the images painted in each corner, a neuron 
will continue to ﬁ re when the rat goes into the northwest corner, even if 
we turn off the lights so it cannot see the location markers. Evidently, 
the responses of place cells are related to where the animal  thinks  it is. 
If there are obvious visual cues (such as the star and triangle), the place 
ﬁ elds will be based on these cues. But if there are no cues (e.g., because 
the lights are out), the place cells will still be location-speciﬁ c as long as 
the animal has had enough time to explore the environment and develop 
a sense of where it is. 

 Performance  in  the  radial  arm  maze,  discussed  above,  may  utilize 
these place cells that code for location. Of particular importance in this 
regard is the ﬁ nding that place ﬁ elds are dynamic. For instance, if the 
box the animal is in is stretched along one axis, place ﬁ elds will stretch 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   848
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   848

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

849

(a)

(b)

▲  FIGURE 24.22 
 Activity in the human brain related to 
spatial navigation.   (a)  A virtual town 
was shown on a computer monitor, and 
subjects in a PET imaging machine 
used buttons to navigate the virtual 
 environment.  (b)  Increased brain activity 
 associated with spatial navigation was 
observed in the right hippocampus and 
left tail of the caudate (yellow). 
(Source: Maguire et al., 1998, Fig. 1.) 

in the same direction. In another manipulation, we ﬁ rst let a rat explore 
a small box and determine the place ﬁ elds of several cells. Then we cut a 
hole in a side of the box so the animal can explore a larger area. Initially, 
there are no place ﬁ elds outside the smaller box, but after the rat has 
explored  its  new  expanded  environment,  some  cells  will  develop  place 
ﬁ elds outside the smaller box (Figure 24.21b). These cells seem to  learn  in 
the sense that they alter their receptive ﬁ elds to suit behavioral needs in 
the new larger environment. It’s easy to imagine how these sorts of cells 
could be involved in remembering arms already visited in the radial arm 
maze, just as you might return from a long hike by following markers you 
left when you ﬁ rst walked through the woods. If hippocampal place cells 
are  involved  in  running  the  maze,  it  makes  sense  that  performance  is 
degraded by destroying the hippocampus. 

 Whether or not there are place cells in the human brain is not known. 
However, PET imaging studies show that the human hippocampus is ac-
tivated  in  situations  involving  virtual  or  imagined  navigation  through 
the environment. In one experiment, subjects were positioned in a PET 
machine while playing a video game. They could navigate a virtual town 
on the game monitor by using buttons for forward movement, backward 
movement, and turning (Figure 24.22a). After learning their way around 
the virtual town, their brain activity was recorded while they navigated 
from an arbitrary starting point to a chosen destination. In a control con-
dition, subjects moved through the virtual environment from the same 
start to ﬁ nish locations, but arrows in the town always pointed them in 
the correct direction. In this condition, they did not have to think about 
how to navigate. 

 Figure 24.22b shows the difference in brain activity between the navi-
gation condition and the control condition with directional arrows. When 
the person had to navigate the environment, there was increased activa-
tion of the right hippocampus and the left tail of the caudate. The asym-
metry in the activation of the left and right hemispheres is an interesting 
frequent observation, but our primary point here is that the hippocampus 
is particularly active in this spatial navigation task with humans, just 
as  it  is  in  rats.  The  caudate  activation  is  thought  to  reﬂ ect  movement 
 planning. 

 The  hippocampus  has  also  been  studied  in  London  taxi  drivers  who 
must  learn  the  locations  of  innumerable  city  sites  and  roughly  25,000 
streets to pass rigorous exams and acquire a license. One study showed 
that, compared to a control group, taxi drivers have a larger posterior and 
smaller anterior hippocampus. The size of the posterior hippocampus also 
seems to correlate with the length of experience as a taxi driver. 

 If  the  human  hippocampus  is  used  for  spatial  navigation,  do  hippo-
campal lesions impair navigation? An interesting case is a man known as 
T.T. who suffered bilateral hippocampal damage from encephalitis after 
a career of nearly 40 years as a London taxi driver. After his hippocampal 
damage, T.T. was very good at recognizing city landmarks and their topo-
graphical layout. A virtual reality simulation of driving through London 
was used to test his navigation skills. The researchers found that some-
times T.T. could “drive” efﬁ ciently from one point to another in the city 
while at other times he deviated from the ideal route. They found that 
T.T. did a good job when he could stick to main roads but got lost when 
smaller roads were required, as if he had lost the ﬁ ne-grained knowledge 
of city topography he once had. The studies of humans navigating space 
in video games and the streets of London suggest that the human hippo-
campus is important for spatial memory, a ﬁ nding reminiscent of the rat 
lesion experiments. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   849
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   849

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

850

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 In  addition  to  place  cells  in  the  hippocampus,  recordings  in  rodents 
have  identiﬁ ed  neurons  in  the  entorhinal  cortex  that  are  called   grid 
cells . These cells, discovered by Edvard and May-Britt Moser and their 
colleagues  at  the  Norwegian  University  of  Science  and  Technology 
(Box  24.3),  are  also  spatially  selective.  However,  unlike  place  cells, 
grid cells respond when the animal is at multiple locations that form a 
 hexagonal  grid  (Figure  24.23).  Cells  in  different  portions  of  entorhinal 
cortex differ in the spacing between “hotspots” in the grid, but the sensi-
tivity grid for each cell tiles the environment the rodent is in. 

 A  recent  experiment  suggests  that  there  may  also  be  grid  cells  in 
human entorhinal cortex. If you imagine drawing lines through the cen-
ters of grid cell hotspots in Figure 24.23, you will notice that along some 
axes you can connect many of the hotspots, such as with diagonal lines 

BOX 24.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

 How the Brain Makes Maps 
 by Edvard and May-Britt Moser 

 We both grew up on remote islands off the west coast of 

Norway, a couple of hundred miles north of Bergen. This was 
not exactly a center of academic ferment or intellectual com-
petition. Still, our scientiﬁ c interests were nurtured by parents 
who’d had no opportunity to get an education themselves. 
We went to the same high school but didn’t really get to know 
each other until we met again at the University of Oslo in the 
1980s. 

 With  no  clear  career  plan,  and  with  different  scientiﬁ c 
backgrounds,  we  met  in  an  undergraduate  course  in  psy-
chology.  Psychology  kindled  and  reinforced  our  fascination 
with the brain, and we jointly decided to learn more about the 
neural basis of behavior. The university had no neuroscience 
curriculum at the time, but Carl-Erik Grenness, who taught an 
undergraduate course on behavior analysis, alerted us to the 
pioneering work on brain–behavior relationships taking place 
at this time. He also gave us a copy of a special issue about 
the brain published by  Scientiﬁ c American  in 1979. During our 
wandering in wilderness, this was like manna from heaven. 
The issue conveyed the enthusiasm of the ﬁ eld and strongly 
attracted us to this evolving scientiﬁ c discipline. Among the 
advances  reviewed  there  were  Kandel’s  demonstration  of 
synaptic  mechanisms  of  memory  in   Aplysia  californica   and 
Hubel  and  Wiesel’s  characterization  of  the  mechanism  for 
feature analysis in the visual cortex. 

 Grenness also sent us to Terje Sagvolden, the only psy-
chologist at the university with research projects in neurosci-
ence at that time. We worked on neurochemical mechanisms 
of attention deﬁ cit disorder for two years, in parallel with stud-
ies in psychology, and learned the basics of animal behavior 

and experimental design. This triggered our interest in animal 
learning.  That  brought  us  to  visit  Per  Andersen,  the  grand 
neurophysiologist of Norway. We sat there for hours, trying to 
persuade him to take us on as graduate students. He really 
couldn’t get us out of his ofﬁ ce, and we wouldn’t take no for 
an answer. In the end, he yielded to our combination of furi-
ous curiosity and unwavering determination and took us on. 
 Per  Andersen  became  our  Ph.D.  supervisor  and  intro-
duced us to the mysteries of the brain. We learned to focus 
on  basic  questions  with  broad  implications.  Through  Per, 
we  came  in  touch  with  Richard  Morris  at  the  University  of 
Edinburgh and John O’Keefe at University College London. 
Richard  and  John  were  the  best  mentors  we  could  have 
had.  They  guided  us  into  the  mysteries  at  the  intersection 
of behavior and neuroscience. During our studies we visited 
Richard several times to participate in work on the functions 
of the hippocampus and the role of hippocampal long-term 
potentiation  in  memory  formation.  After  our  Ph.D.  defense 
late  in  1995,  we  spent  a  few  very  rewarding  months  with 
John to learn place cell recording in the hippocampus. This 
was  probably  the  most  intense  learning  experience  in  our 
lives. But then, in 1996, we were almost ambushed with a job 
offer in Trondheim. We could not move there if only one of us 
got a job, so we negotiated two jobs as well as equipment 
to start up a new lab. We literally started our lab in a bomb 
shelter  in  a  basement  at  the  university.  Our  few  months  of 
postdoctoral  experience  had  been  brief,  but  with  a  decent 
start-up  package  we  now  had  the  opportunity  to  combine 
what we had learned about animal behavior and neurophysi-
ology,  fulﬁ lling  our  dream  from  the  early  1980s.  We  began 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   850
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   850

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

851

from the lower left to the upper right. If the drawn line is then rotated 
around the clock, there will be a periodic variation in the number of hot-
spots connected. This suggests that if a rat or human were to walk in vari-
ous directions, grid cells would be activated more often and there would 
be more overall activity in the entorhinal cortex in some directions than 
others.  This  idea  was  tested  by  Christian  Doeller,  Caswell  Barry,  and 
Neil  Burgess  at  University  College  London  by  having  human  subjects 
navigate a virtual reality game while fMRI images of their brain activity 
were recorded. The recordings made in this clever experiment showed a 
sinusoidal  variation  in  the  size  of  the  fMRI  signal  from  the  entorhinal 
cortex when subjects navigated in different directions around the clock. 
This implies the presence of human grid cells that have their hotspots 
aligned similarly in space. 

recording the activity of individual cells in the hippocampus, 
with electrodes implanted in the brains of rats as they roamed 
a square black box. 

 Our start-up in Trondheim was tough but enjoyable. There 
were  no  animal  housing  facilities,  no  workshops,  and  no 
technicians. We did all the work on our own; we cleaned rat 
cages, changed bedding, sliced brains, and repaired cables. 
Starting from scratch gave us the opportunity to shape the 
lab exactly as we wanted it. 

 As  we  began,  we  got  a  grant  from  the  European 
Commission to coordinate a consortium of seven groups that 
collectively aimed to perform one of the ﬁ rst integrated neu-
ral network studies of hippocampal memory. This was virgin 
territory in the late 1990s. One of the aims was to determine 
how the position code of the hippocampus is computed. It 
had been known since John O’Keefe’s studies in 1971 that 
the  hippocampus  has  place  cells  that  ﬁ re  if  and  only  if  an 
animal is in a certain place. But it was unclear whether those 
place  signals  originated  in  the  hippocampus  itself  or  came 
from the outside. To address this question, we made intra-
hippocampal lesions that disconnected the output stage of 
the  circuit—CA1—from  the  earlier  stages.  To  our  surprise, 
this  did  not  abolish  place  coding  in  CA1.  Then  we  had  to 
grapple with the idea that the spatial signal might originate 
from  somewhere  else,  most  likely  the  surrounding  cortex, 
through connections that went around the intrahippocampal 
circuit. The most likely candidate was the entorhinal cortex, a 
cortical region with major direct connections to the CA1 area 
of the hippocampus. 

 We  started  recording  in  this  region,  with  invaluable  help 
from Menno Witter, a neuroanatomist who was then located 
at the Free University of Amsterdam but later moved to be-
come a part of the Kavli Institute in Trondheim. Witter had by 
that time worked out much of the connectivity between the 
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus and helped us in the deli-
cate task of guiding electrodes to the right spot. By 2002, our 
research group had grown, and we now had an outstanding 

team of students working side by side with us in the lab and 
on the computer. 

 Sometimes scientiﬁ c discoveries are portrayed as “Eureka” 
moments,  where  the  researcher  suddenly  understands  the 
signiﬁ cance of what he or she has found. In our case, it didn’t 
quite  work  that  way:  We  didn’t  immediately  realize  that  the 
cells we recorded from were grid cells. At ﬁ rst we noticed that 
many entorhinal cells spiked every time a rat went to a par-
ticular spot, like the place cells in the hippocampus. However, 
each cell had multiple ﬁ ring locations. After seeing the ﬁ ring 
locations in sufﬁ ciently large environments, we became con-
vinced  that  those  locations  formed  a  peculiarly  regular  pat-
tern—a hexagonal grid—much like the arrangement of mar-
bles in a Chinese checker board. Every cell did it this way, with 
actual ﬁ ring locations differing between cells. The cells were 
organized  topographically  in  the  sense  that  the  size  of  and 
distance between grid ﬁ elds increased from dorsal to ventral. 
Moreover, cells maintained ﬁ ring relationships from one envi-
ronment to the next, suggesting that we were on track of a 
universal type of spatial map, a map whose activity pattern in 
many ways disregarded the ﬁ ne details of the environment. 
With their strict regularity, the cells had the metrics of the spa-
tial map that had not been found in the hippocampus. 

 These  discoveries  were  published  in  a  series  of  papers 
that  began  in  2004,  only  two  years  after  we  published  the 
hippocampal disconnection study. The grid pattern itself was 
published in 2005. Since then we have continued to explore 
how  grid  cells  operate,  how  they  are  generated,  and  how 
they interact with other spatial cell types. There is still a lot to 
ﬁ nd out. Grid cells have helped us better understand the neu-
ral representation of space, but they also provide a window 
into some of the innermost workings of the brain. Perhaps the 
most fascinating thing is that the hexagonal pattern is gener-
ated by the cortex itself. There is no grid pattern in the outside 
world; this is made by the brain alone. Because the pattern 
is  so  reliable  and  so  regular,  it  may  put  us  on  the  track  of 
understanding the fundamental computations of the cortex. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   851
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   851

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

852

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 24.23
A rat place cell and a grid cell. The black lines show the path a rat took 
through a square enclosure. Red spots indicate locations of the rat associated 
with neural activity. (a) A place cell in the hippocampus responds when the rat is 
in one region of the enclosure. This is the cell’s place field. (b) A grid cell in ento-
rhinal cortex is active when the rat is at multiple locations that form a grid pat-
tern. (Source: Moser et al., 2008, Fig. 1.)

 Recall that the entorhinal cortex provides input to the hippocampus. 
Models  suggest  that  place  ﬁ elds  in  the  hippocampus  may  result  from 
summation of inputs from grid cells. The single place ﬁ eld of a hippocam-
pal neuron would be the location at which the grid locations of multiple 
input grid cells align. Like place cells, grid cells continue to ﬁ re when the 
animal is at the same grid locations even when the lights are turned off. 
This suggests that rather than being simply a sensory receptive ﬁ eld, the 
cell’s response is based on where the animal thinks it is. Taken together, 
place  cells,  grid  cells,  and  other  hippocampal  system  neurons  showing 
sensitivity for head direction make a compelling case that this brain re-
gion is highly specialized for spatial navigation. 

 Hippocampal Functions Beyond Spatial Memory.  From our discussion of 
the hippocampus to this point, it may seem that its role is easily deﬁ ned. 
First,  we  saw  that  performance  in  a  radial  arm  maze,  which  requires 
memory for the locations of arms already explored, is disrupted by hip-
pocampal lesions. Second, the responses of place cells in the hippocam-
pus,  considered  along  with  grid  cells  in  the  entorhinal  cortex,  suggests 
that these neurons are specialized for location memory. This is consistent 
with the  cognitive map theory  proposed by O’Keefe and his colleague 
Lynn Nadel, which states that the hippocampus is specialized for creating 
a spatial map of the environment. In one sense it is undeniable that the 
hippocampus, at least in rats, seems to play an important role in spatial 
memory. 

 Others  argue,  however,  that  this  is  not  the  only  or  best  description 
of  what  the  hippocampus  does.  In  his  original  studies  using  the  radial 
arm maze, Olton described the result of hippocampal lesions as a deﬁ cit 
in working memory. The rats were not able to retain recently acquired 
information  concerning  arms  already  explored.  Thus,  working  memory 
might be one aspect of hippocampal function. This would explain why the 
rats with lesions could avoid going down arms that never contained food 
but still not remember which arms they had recently visited. Presumably 
after  training,  the  information  about  no-food  arms  was  saved  in  long-
term memory, but working memory was still required to avoid the arms 
where food had already been retrieved. 

 Other  theories  are  built  on  observations  that  the  hippocampus  inte-
grates or associates sensory input of behavioral importance. For example, 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   852
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   852

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

853

Port A

Port B

Odor 1

Odor 2

▲  FIGURE 24.24 
An odor discrimination experiment 
used to study relational memory.  
For various combinations of odors, rats 
were trained to move toward a port 
emitting one odor and avoid the other 
port. (Source: Adapted from Eichenbaum 
et al., 1988, Fig. 1.)

as you read this book, you may form memories relating multiple things: 
speciﬁ c facts, illustrations that catch your eye, interesting passages, the 
arrangement of material on the page, and information about the sounds 
or events going on around you as you read. Maybe you’ve tried ﬁ nding 
a passage in a book by searching for a page that looks a particular way. 
Another  common  example  is  how  remembering  one  thing,  such  as  the 
theme song to an old television show, can bring back a ﬂ ood of related 
associations—the characters in the show, your living room at home, the 
friends you watched with, and so on. Interconnectedness is a key feature 
of declarative memory storage. 

 Odor discrimination provides an example of the involvement of the hip-
pocampus in tasks that are not entirely based on spatial memory. In one 
such task, a rat’s cage had two ports at which the animal smelled two dif-
ferent odors (Figure 24.24). For each pair of odors, the animal was trained 
to  go  toward  the  port  releasing  one  odor  and  to  avoid  the  other  port. 
The  researchers  found  that  some  neurons  in  the  hippocampus  became 
selectively responsive for certain pairs of odors. Moreover, the neurons 
were particular about which odor was at which port; they would respond 
strongly with odor 1 at port A and odor 2 at port B, but not with the odors 
switched to the opposite ports. This indicates that the response of the hip-
pocampal neurons related the speciﬁ c odors, their spatial locations, and 
whether they were presented separately or together. It was also shown 
that hippocampal lesions produced deﬁ cits on this discrimination task. 

 Let’s summarize the diverse studies of the hippocampus we’ve  discussed. 
First,  research  since  the  time  of  H.M.  indicates  that  the  hippocampus 
is critical for memory consolidation of facts and events. Strong evidence 
suggests  that  in  rodents,  and  in  people,  the  hippocampus  is  especially 
important  for  spatial  memory.  In  recordings  from  human  hippocampal 
neurons there is sometimes surprising selectivity for people or objects we 
are familiar with. Finally, hippocampal cells appear to form associations 
between sensory stimuli even when the information is not about space. 
A thread that runs through these various studies is that the hippocampus 
links different experiences together. It receives a huge spectrum of sen-
sory inputs and may construct new memories by integrating the varied 
sensory experiences associated with an event (e.g., the theme music of 
a television show is integrated with memories of people and place). The 
hippocampus may also be essential for building or enhancing memories 
by  connecting  new  sensory  input  with  existing  knowledge.  It  has  been 
suggested that the input from the grid cells in the entorhinal cortex pro-
vides “where” information to the hippocampus, while other input contains 
information about “what.” The neural associations constructed and then 
consolidated in the hippocampus might effectively establish memories for 
“what happened where.” 

 Consolidating Memories and Retaining Engrams 
 There is compelling evidence that declarative memory formation involves 
a system of interconnected brain structures that take in sensory informa-
tion, make associations between related information, consolidate learned 
information, and store engrams for later recall. Components of this sys-
tem  include  the  hippocampus,  cortical  areas  around  the  hippocampus, 
the diencephalon, neocortex, and more. The questions we want to look at 
now concern the timing of these things: When and where are memories 
stored in a permanent form? How long does it take memories to become 
“permanent”?  Do  engrams  change  location  over  time?  Can  subsequent 
experiences alter, enhance, or degrade memories? 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   853
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   853

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

854

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 Standard and Multiple Trace Models of Consolidation.  Since the time of 
H.M., a view of memory consolidation and storage has developed that has 
come to be called the  standard model of memory consolidation . In 
this model, information comes through neocortex areas associated with 
sensory  systems  and  is  then  sent  to  the  medial  temporal  lobe  for  pro-
cessing (especially the hippocampal system). As we will discuss in more 
detail in Chapter 25, changes in synapses create a memory trace via a 
process sometimes called  synaptic consolidation  (Figure 24.25a). After 
synaptic consolidation, or perhaps overlapping with it in time,  systems 
consolidation  occurs in which engrams are moved gradually over time 
into distributed areas of the neocortex (Figure 24.25b). It is in a variety 
of neocortical areas that permanent engrams are stored. Before systems 
consolidation, memory retrieval requires the hippocampus, but after sys-
tems consolidation is complete, the hippocampus is no longer needed. 

 Many  observations  about  memory  formation  are  consistent  with  the 
standard model, but questions have been raised about whether it provides 
the most accurate account of consolidation. A key point is the  duration 
of  retrograde  amnesia.  For  example,  early  accounts  of  H.M.’s  amnesia 
reported that his retrograde amnesia extended back a few years. An in-
terpretation of this observation is that synaptic consolidation is complete 
quickly but systems consolidation takes years to complete and the retro-
grade memories H.M. lost were ones not “fully baked” (i.e., engrams still 
dependent  on  the  hippocampus).  Later  studies  examined  H.M.’s  retro-
grade amnesia in more detail and found that it extended back decades. 
Perhaps systems consolidation is a very slow process that takes decades. 
However, some scientists have asked whether this makes sense in a spe-
cies whose individuals, not so long ago, lived only for a few decades. As if 
that question isn’t confusing enough, it should be noted that later studies 
of H.M. suggested that he had retrograde amnesia for episodic memories 
that extended back virtually his entire life. This implies that the hippo-
campus, perhaps in concert with other medial temporal structures, may 
be involved with memories for a lifetime. 

 Alternatives to the standard model have been proposed, most notably 
the  multiple trace model of consolidation  proposed by Lynn Nadel 
of the University of Arizona and Morris Moscovitch of the University of 
Toronto. The multiple trace model was proposed as a way to avoid the 
necessity of the decades-long systems consolidation process the standard 
model  needs  to  account  for  extended  retrograde  amnesia.  If  hippocam-
pal damage disrupts episodic memories going back decades or a lifetime, 
perhaps the hippocampus is always involved in memory storage. In other 
words, systems consolidation does not ever relinquish engrams entirely 
to neocortex. 

 According to this theory, engrams involve neocortex, but even old mem-
ories also involve the hippocampus (Figure 24.25c). The term “multiple 
trace” refers to the way the model allows for retrograde amnesia result-
ing from hippocampal damage to sometimes be graded in time. The hy-
pothesis is that each time an episodic memory is retrieved, it occurs in a 
context different from the initial experience and the recalled information 
combines with new sensory input to form a new memory trace involving 
both the hippocampus and neocortex. This creation of multiple memory 
traces presumably gives the memory a more solid foundation and makes 
it easier to recall. Because retrieval requires the hippocampus, complete 
loss of the hippocampus should cause retrograde amnesia for all episodic 
memories no matter how old. If there is partial damage, then the memo-
ries that are intact would be the ones with multiple traces. To the extent 
that  older  memories  would  have  been  recalled  more  times  than  recent 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   854
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   854

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

855

Neocortex

Hippocampus

(a)  

Neocortex

Neocortex

Hippocampus

Hippocampus

(c)  

(b)  
▲  FIGURE 24.25 
Two models of memory consolidation.   (a) In both standard and multiple trace 
models, memory formation is initiated by synaptic changes in the hippocampus. 
In this schematic, the hippocampal neurons interact with neurons in three distrib-
uted areas of neocortex. (b) In the standard model, a temporary memory trace is 
formed in the hippocampus through synaptic consolidation and engrams later 
 develop in neocortex through systems consolidation. Over time, memory depends 
more on connections in neocortex (solid lines) and less on the hippocampus 
(dashed lines). (c) In the multiple trace model, engrams for episodic memories 
 always involve both the hippocampus and neocortex (all lines are solid). The red 
and green lines indicate two traces for the same memory that were made in 
somewhat different sensory contexts.

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   855
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   855

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

856

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

memories, they would be more likely to survive hippocampal damage, and 
this would give rise to a temporal gradient in retrograde amnesia. Sufﬁ ce 
it to say that at present experts disagree about assessments of gradients 
in retrograde amnesia and the validity of various models of consolidation. 

 Reconsolidation.  In 1968 a report published by James Misanin, Ralph 
Miller,  and  Donald  Lewis  of  Rutgers  University  made  the  surprising 
claim that memories can be altered or selectively erased even after they 
are consolidated. From the perspective of the standard model, this is un-
expected because memories should be sensitive to disruption, such as by 
electrical convulsive shock (ECS), only before consolidation. After consol-
idation, memories should be stable and ﬁ xed. Indeed, varying the time 
between an experience and ECS has been used to measure how long con-
solidation takes. In an experiment by Misanin and colleagues, rats were 
trained by presenting a loud noise followed by a foot shock (don’t confuse 
the foot shock with the ECS to the head). This is an example of classical 
conditioning in which the foot shock is the unconditional stimulus (US) 
and the loud noise is the conditional stimulus (CS). Trained rats subse-
quently fear a shock when they hear the noise. After the loud noise, the 
unconditioned rats licked rapidly from a drinking tube, but the trained 
animals drank much slower, an indication that they feared the foot shock. 
If  an  animal  was  conditioned  but  immediately  given  electroconvulsive 
shock, it would lick quickly the next day, just as if it had never been con-
ditioned. This is evidence of retrograde amnesia for the conditioning. If 
there was a delay of 24 hours between the conditioning and the electro-
convulsive shock, there was no fear attenuation. Apparently by 24 hours 
the fear memory had been consolidated and amnesia for the conditioning 
could no longer be caused by ECS. 

 On the second day of the experiment, presumably after consolidation 
of the fear memory, some of the conditioned animals were presented the 
loud noise immediately followed by the ECS. On the third day of the ex-
periment the rats were tested once more. Surprisingly, the rats that re-
ceived the noise–foot shock combination on the second day licked as much 
as rats that had received ECS on the ﬁ rst day immediately after training 
(i.e., the animals with amnesia that didn’t fear the loud noise). They also 
licked much more than rats given ECS on the second day but without the 
loud noise. What these results suggest is that the sound on the second 
day reactivated the fear memory, and, once reactivated, this memory was 
wiped out by ECS. If the memory was not reactivated (the animals that 
got ECS on the second day but without the loud sound), then ECS had no 
effect. The implication of the study is very important because it suggests 
that reactivating a memory makes it sensitive just as it had been imme-
diately after the memory was ﬁ rst formed (before consolidation). For this 
reason the reactivation effect is called  reconsolidation . 

 In recent years there has been increased interest in reconsolidation, 
which appears to also occur in human memory. The original rat  experiment 
on  reconsolidation  involved  procedural  learning  (classical  condition-
ing),  but  it  now  appears  that  reconsolidation  is  also  seen  with  human 
episodic memory. In one experiment, college students were  instructed to 
 memorize 20 objects (e.g., balloon, crayon, spoon) that they were shown 
one at a time and then placed in a basket. Each student practiced nam-
ing all the items until they remembered at least 17 of them from this day 
1  list.  One  day  later,  presumably  after  memory  consolidation,  some  of 
the students were given a reminder by showing them the empty basket 
and asking them to describe what happened the day before without nam-
ing the objects. The aim was to subtly reactivate the memories, possibly 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   856
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   856

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

857

opening them up to reconsolidation. A control group of students did not 
receive this reminder, with the hope of not reactivating their day 1 memo-
ries. Both the reminded and the not-reminded groups were then asked to 
memorize a second group of 20 objects on day 2. Finally, on day 3 of the 
experiment, all the subjects were asked to recall the objects from the ﬁ rst 
group on day 1 of the study. 

 On average, subjects recalled about eight of the objects from day 1 re-
gardless of whether they had received a reminder on day 2. The interesting 
ﬁ nding was that the subjects given the reminder on day 2 “ accidentally” 
included numerous objects from day 2 in their recall (ﬁ ve objects on aver-
age), whereas these intrusions rarely occurred in subjects not given the 
reminder on day 2. Based on that experiment and several other varia-
tions, it appeared that the reminder may have served to reactivate the 
consolidated day 1 memories, making them labile again. These memories 
were  then  reconsolidated  on  day  2,  erroneously  mixing  in  new  sensory 
information associated with the day 2 objects. A variety of experiments 
looking at reconsolidation in humans have been performed and have even 
shown  hippocampal  activity  in  the  reactivation  condition.  Evidently, 
when we recall a memory, it becomes susceptible to change and reconsoli-
dation. This fascinating ﬁ nding has profound implications for the treat-
ment of post-traumatic stress associated with unpleasant memories and 
even for the reliability of our normal recollections (Box 24.4). 

PROCEDURAL MEMORY
PROCCEDURRAL MEMORY

 Thus far, we have focused on the brain systems involved in the formation 
and retention of declarative memories, partly because declarative infor-
mation is what we usually mean when we say we remember something. 
In addition, however, the neural basis of nondeclarative memory is com-
plex because different types seem to involve different brain structures. 
As indicated in Figure 24.1, various kinds of nondeclarative memory are 
thought to involve different parts of the brain. As an example of nonde-
clarative memory, we will take a look at evidence supporting the involve-
ment of the striatum in habit learning and procedural memory. 

 Recall from Chapter 14 that the basal ganglia are important for the 
control of voluntary movements. Two elements of the basal ganglia are 
the caudate nucleus and the putamen, together called the  striatum . The 
striatum  sits  at  a  key  location  in  the  motor  loop,  receiving  input  from 
frontal  and  parietal  cortex  and  sending  output  to  thalamic  nuclei  and 
cortical areas involved in movement. Several lines of evidence in studies 
of rodents and humans suggest that the striatum is critical for the proce-
dural memory involved in forming behavioral habits. 

 The Striatum and Procedural Memory in Rodents 
 The  amnesia  experienced  by  H.M.  was  surprising,  in  part,  because  he 
was able to learn new habits despite his complete inability to form new 
declarative memories. Indeed, this is one of the most compelling reasons 
for hypothesizing that procedural memory uses distinct circuitry. In the 
monkey  model  of  amnesia,  we  saw  that  the  formation  of  new  declara-
tive memories could be disrupted by making small lesions in the rhinal 
cortex  of  the  medial  temporal  lobe.  Such  a  lesion  had  relatively  little 
effect on procedural memory, which raises an obvious question: Are there 
comparable lesions that disrupt procedural memory without affecting de-
clarative memory? In rodents, lesions to the striatum have this effect. 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   857
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   857

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

858

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 24.4

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

 Introducing False Memories and Erasing Bad Memories 

 If reconsolidation can alter existing memories, how can we 

ever  be  sure  what  we  remember  is  correct?  It  may  sound 
like science ﬁ ction, but it has been reported that memories 
already consolidated can be altered and memories for things 
that never happened can be introduced into the brain. 

 Experiments testing the ability to tinker with memories 
have  largely  been  conducted  with  mice.  In  a  frightening 
situation a mouse will “freeze” in place, a reaction that is 
presumably  a  form  of  “playing  dead”  to  avoid  detection 
or consumption by a predator. In a laboratory experiment 
a  mouse  is  placed  in  a  box  that  the  animal  can  recog-
nize based on its visual appearance and smell. When the 
mouse enters the box it receives an electrical foot shock. 
If  the  mouse  is  removed  from  the  box  and  returned  to  it 
the next day, it will freeze when it recognizes the box, in 
anticipation of a foot shock even when none is given. The 
animal does not freeze when placed in a distinctly differ-
ent box, indicating that the animal has formed a memory 
associating the shock with only the box where it received 
the shock. 

 A  team  of  scientists  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology recently used transgenic mice in a clever variation 
on this fear-conditioning experiment to study the malleability 
of memories. The mice explored a box, and a small percent-
age of hippocampal neurons became activated by the visual 

and olfactory experiences associated with the box. Critically, 
in  these  transgenic  animals  the  scientists  had  the  ability  to 
essentially  turn  a  switch  on  and  off  chemically  so  that  ac-
tive neurons would or would not express channelrhodopsin-2 
(ChR2), as described in Chapter 4. Neurons with ChR2 could 
then be activated at a later time by exposing them to blue 
light. With these abilities in place, the experimental procedure 
went like this (Figure A): 

 1.   On day 1, expose animals to box A with the label-active-
cells  switch  on  so  that  neurons  activated  by  the  box  A 
sensory stimulation express ChR2. No foot shock is given, 
and animals do not freeze in box A. 

 2.   On day 2, expose animals to the different sensory context 
of box B. On this day the cell label switch is off, so ChR2 
is not expressed in the hippocampal neurons activated by 
the box B context. While the animals are in box B, blue 
light was delivered to the hippocampus through a ﬁ ne ﬁ ber 
optic cable, which reactivated the neurons from the pre-
vious  day  that  encoded  sensory  information  associated 
with box A. At the same time, a foot shock was delivered. 
Remember, this all occurs when the animal is in box B. 
The hypothesis was that the reactivated memory of box A 
would be reconsolidated on the second day in a manner 
that links in the painful foot shock. 

Blue
light:

OFF

Label
active
cells:
ON

Blue
light:

ON

Label
active
cells:
OFF

Blue
light:

OFF

Label
active
cells:
OFF

Blue
light:

OFF

Label
active
cells:
OFF

Day 1 - Box A

Day 2 - Box B

Day 3 - Box A

Day 4 - Box C

 Figure A 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   858
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   858

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

859

 3.   The  moment  of  truth!  On  day  3  the  mouse  is  put  back 
in box A, and as predicted, it freezes even though it has 
never actually experienced a foot shock in box A. When 
the  animal  is  placed  in  an  unfamiliar  context,  box  C,  it 
does not freeze. 

 It  appears  that  a  false  memory  has  been  created  such 
that the animal fears box A even though the electrical shock 
occurred only in box B. The lack of freezing behavior in box 
C indicates that the false memory is speciﬁ c to box A, pre-
sumably because neurons encoding box A information were 
reactivated by the blue light while the animal was in box B. 
You  have  probably  heard  of  people  convicted  of  crimes 
based on eyewitness testimony and the convicted person is 
later released from prison based on DNA evidence proving 
their innocence. Evidently the memory of the eyewitness had 
been wrong. Might this happen in some cases because wit-
nesses are coached and the coached information interacts 
and  reconsolidates  with  the  events  of  the  recalled  crime? 
Ongoing research is examining the conditions under which 
reconsolidation can occur; the results have important impli-
cations for the judicial system and our ability to trust our own 
memories. 

 If  we  are  able  to  alter  memories  after  they  have  been 
consolidated,  perhaps  a  process  can  be  devised  to  treat 
people with memories that haunt them. We all have embar-
rassing moments we would like to forget, but some people 
have memories that are so disturbing that they interfere with 
daily life. In post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), an earlier 
traumatic event has serious deleterious effects on later be-
havior, mood, and social interactions, even in nonthreaten-
ing situations. An example is a war veteran who experiences 
stress and fear in daily life long after the war is over. What if 
there was a way to erase or at least weaken such unpleas-
ant memories? Studies exploring this question suggest that 
it might be possible. 

 One  approach  takes  advantage  of  the  observation  that 
administration of the beta-adrenergic antagonist propranolol 
shortly  after  a  traumatic  event  will  reduce  physiological  re-
sponses  (e.g.,  heart  rate)  to  later  recollection  of  the  event. 
It  is  thought  that  propranolol  may  counter  the  effect  of 
stress hormones usually activated by the fearful experience. 
Unfortunately,  it  is  generally  not  possible  to  mediate  with 
someone immediately after a traumatic experience. The im-
portant question for a potential PTSD treatment is whether 
it is possible to make use of reconsolidation to weaken the 
traumatic memory well after the event. In one study looking 
into this question, people suffering from chronic PTSD were 
instructed  to  describe  the  trauma  they  experienced.  They 
were  simultaneously  given  either  propranolol  or  a  placebo. 

One  week  later  when  they  were  asked  to  recall  their  trau-
matic event, physiological responses were lower in the peo-
ple given propranolol than in the placebo group. Perhaps the 
drug administration at the time of memory reactivation led to 
a reconsolidated memory with weakened emotional impact. 
Note  that  in  this  case,  the  propranolol  treatment  affected 
the emotional weight of the memory but not the declarative 
memory itself. 

 We  don’t  know  if  mice  experience  PTSD,  but  a  recent 
study by Tsai and her colleagues at MIT attempted to reduce 
an unpleasant memory in mice by targeting neural plasticity 
rather than affecting whole-body physiology as with propran-
olol. As in experiments we have already examined, mice are 
made to fear a loud sound by pairing the sound with an elec-
trical foot shock. When mice later hear the sound they freeze 
in fear even if the foot shock is not given. The usual way to 
decrease the strength of the fear reaction is to repeatedly ex-
pose the mice to the sound without giving an electrical shock 
(similar to the treatment humans with PTSD are given in which 
they recall a traumatic memory in a safe environment). This 
extinction therapy in the mice is found to reduce or eliminate 
fear associated with the chamber if the therapy is started one 
day after the traumatic experience but not 30 days later. With 
an  eye  toward  the  delayed  treatment  of  PTSD  in  humans, 
Tsai et al aimed to reduce the memory in mice a month after 
the electrical shock, a time at which extinction therapy alone 
is ineffective. This was accomplished by combining the fear-
inducing sound with administration of a drug that inhibits the 
HDAC2 (histone deacetylase 2) enzyme. This enzyme, which 
switches neuroplasticity genes off in the nucleus of neurons 
(discussed in Chapter 25), was found to be inactive the day 
after the electrical shock but active a month later. By inhibit-
ing HDAC2, the plasticity genes were activated at the later 
time. With the genes active and the traumatic memories re-
vived by the loud sound, it was possible to reconsolidate the 
memory in a less fearful form. After just one dose, the mice 
no longer froze when the sound was heard. We don’t know if 
this or a related approach will work to treat human PTSD, but 
there is hope that memory reconsolidation might be of use in 
alleviating this disorder. 
Further Reading:
Brunet A, Orr, SP, Tremblay J, Robertson K, Nader K, Pitman RK. 2008. 
Effect of post-retrieval propranolol on psychophysiologic responding 
during subsequent script-driven traumatic imagery in post-traumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research 42:503–506. 

Graff J, Joseph NF, Horn, ME, Samiei A, Meng J, Seo J, et al. 2014. 
Epigenetic priming of memory updating during reconsolidation to 
attenuate remote fear memories. Cell 156:261–276.

Ramirez  S,  Liu  X,  Lin  P,  Suh  J,  Pignatelli  M,  Redondo  RL,  et  al. 
2013. Creating a false memory in the hippocampus. Science 341:
387–391.

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   859
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   859

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

860

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 In  one  study,  rats  had  to  learn  two  versions  of  the  radial  arm  maze 
task.  The  ﬁ rst  was  the  standard  version  described  earlier,  in  which  the 
rat learned to move as efﬁ ciently as possible when retrieving the food from 
each of the baited arms of the maze. In the second version, small lights were 
illuminated above one or more arms containing food, and the unlit arms 
had no food. The lights could be turned on or off at any time. In this case, 
optimal performance meant that the animal kept returning to retrieve food 
from lit arms as long as they were lit, and avoided arms that were never 
lit. The standard maze task was designed to require the use of declarative 
memory. The “light” version of the task was intended to draw on proce-
dural memory because of the consistent association between the presence 
of food and the illuminated lights. The rat did not have to remember which 
arms it had already explored; it simply had to form a habit based on the 
association of the light with food. The rat’s performance on the light task 
was analogous to the habits H.M. was able to form, such as mirror drawing. 
 Performance  on  the  two  versions  of  the  radial  arm  maze  task  were 
affected in markedly different ways by two types of brain lesions. If the 
hippocampal system was damaged (in this case, with a lesion to the for-
nix that sends hippocampal output), performance was degraded on the 
standard maze task but was relatively unaffected on the light version. 
Conversely, a lesion in the striatum impaired performance of the light 
task but had little effect on the standard task. This “double dissociation” 
of the lesion site and the behavioral deﬁ cit suggests that the striatum is 
part of a procedural memory system but is not crucial for the formation 
of declarative memories. 

 Recordings made from the rat striatum in other experiments showed 
that  neural  responses  changed  as  the  animals  learned  a  procedure  as-
sociated with a food reward. In a simple T-maze task, rats were placed 
at the end of one arm of the T and, as they moved away from the arm’s 
end,  a  tone  sounded  (Figure  24.26a).  A  low  tone  was  used  to  train  the 

Start

Tone

Turn

▲  FIGURE 24.26 
 Changing responses in rat striatum 
during the learning of a habit.   (a)  The 
rat began at the end of the long arm of 
a T-maze and turned left or right de-
pending on the pitch of a tone.  (b)  The 
percentage of neurons that responded 
during several phases of the task: start 
position, tone sounding, turning into 
 reward arm, and reaching the reward 
(goal). Each stage of training and testing 
consisted of 40 runs through the maze. 
Over the stages of learning and master-
ing the maze, more cells responded to 
the start and the goal and fewer to the 
turn. (Source: Adapted from Jog et al., 
1999, Figs. 1 and 2.) 

(a)

100

80

60

40

20
0

)

%

(
 
s

l
l

i

e
c
 
g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
R

(b)

Start

1

3

5

7 9

Stage

100

80

60

40

20
0

Tone

1

3

5

7

9

Stage

100

80

60

40

20
0

Turn

1

3

5

7

9

Stage

100

80

60

40

20
0

Goal

Goal

1

3

5

7

9

Stage

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   860
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   860

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

861

animal to turn left into the next arm of the T to get a chocolate snack, 
and a high tone was used to train the animal to turn right for the reward. 
Figure 24.26b shows the percentage of neurons that responded when the 
animal was in several phases of the task: start position, tone sounding, 
turning into reward arm, and reaching the reward. 

 When the rats ﬁ rst performed the task (stage 1), the highest percent-
age of neurons responded when the animals turned into the reward arm. 
However, in later stages of the experiment, as training and testing pro-
gressed, this percentage decreased signiﬁ cantly. As the rats mastered the 
procedure, increasingly more neurons became responsive at the start and 
completion of the task. Also, increasing numbers of neurons responded 
during  more  than  one  stage  of  the  task.  One  possible  interpretation  of 
these changes in response patterns is that they reﬂ ect the formation of a 
habit for which the striatum codes a sequence of behaviors initiated in the 
T-maze situation. At present this is only a hypothesis, but it is intriguing 
because of the connectivity of the striatum—taking in highly processed 
sensory information and sending out signals involved in motor responses. 

 Habit Learning in Humans and Nonhuman Primates 
 Studies with monkeys indicate that the effects of selective brain lesions 
on memory are comparable in rodents and primates. In primates, there 
is a similar dissociation between the effects of lesions to the hippocampal 
system and the striatum. As we have already seen, lesions to the medial 
temporal lobe signiﬁ cantly impair performance on the delayed non-match 
to sample task that uses declarative memory. However, consider another 
task in which the animal repeatedly sees two visual stimuli, such as a 
square and a cross, and must learn to associate a food reward with only 
the cross (i.e., instrumental conditioning). This kind of habit learning is 
relatively  unaffected  by  medial  temporal  lesions.  Such  preservation  of 
habit learning in monkeys is analogous to the rat’s ability to retrieve food 
consistently associated with a light above an arm of a maze, even after a 
fornix lesion. 

 In monkeys, lesions that involve the striatum or connections to it have 
quite different effects from medial temporal lesions. When the striatum is 
damaged, there is no effect on the performance of the DNMS task, dem-
onstrating both that declarative memory formation is still possible and 
that the animal can discriminate visual stimuli. But when the striatum 
is damaged, the animal is unable to form the habit of always retrieving 
food associated with one visual stimulus rather than another. Repeated 
exposure to this ﬁ xed stimulus–reward situation just doesn’t seem to sink 
in. Thus, there appear to be somewhat distinct anatomical systems for de-
clarative memory and procedural memory, and behaviors such as learned 
habits utilize the striatum. 

 Several  diseases  in  humans  attack  the  basal  ganglia,  and  certain 
of  their  effects  on  memory  appear  consistent  with  the  striatum’s  role 
in  procedural  memory.  For  example,  Huntington’s  disease  kills  neu-
rons  throughout  the  brain,  but  the  striatum  is  a  focus  of  the  attack. 
Huntington’s patients have been shown to have difﬁ culty learning tasks 
in which a motor response is associated with a stimulus. Although these 
people generally have motor dysfunction, difﬁ culty in learning the stimu-
lus–response habit does not correlate with the severity of the motor deﬁ -
cits, suggesting that it is an independent consequence of the disease. 

 Further evidence for the involvement of the striatum in habit learning 
comes from comparisons of patients with Parkinson’s disease with amnesic 
patients. As we saw in Chapter 14, Parkinson’s disease is characterized by 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   861
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   861

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

862

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

In this learning game, you are the weather
forecaster.  You will learn how to predict rain
or shine using a deck of four cards:

(a)

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

)

%

(
 
s
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

(b)

10

20

30
Trials

40

50

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

)

%

(
 
s
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

(c)

Control
Amnesia

Parkinson's
disease

▲  FIGURE 24.27 
 The performance of patients with amnesia and Parkinson’s disease on two 
memory tasks.   (a)  Four cue cards were presented in various combinations asso-
ciated with the icons indicating sun or rain. Based on repeated exposure to the 
combinations, patients had to learn to predict sun or rain by inferring the associa-
tions.  (b)  With successive trials, control subjects and amnesic patients improved 
on the association task. Parkinson’s patients showed little improvement.  (c)  On a 
test of declarative memory formation (a questionnaire), Parkinson’s patients per-
formed similar to control subjects, and amnesia patients were greatly impaired. 
(Source: Adapted from Knowlton et al., 1996, Figs. 1 and 2.) 

degeneration of the substantia nigra inputs to the striatum. In one study, 
people were tested on two tasks. In the ﬁ rst task, patients saw one, two, 
or three out of four possible cues in one of 14 possible combinations. They 
then  had  to  guess  whether  this  combination  was  arbitrarily  associated 
with a prediction of sunny or rainy weather (Figure 24.27a). For each pa-
tient, the experimenter assigned different probabilities that various cues 
were associated with sun or rain. By being told when they guessed cor-
rectly or incorrectly about the predicted weather, the patients slowly built 
up an association between the cues and the weather. The idea behind this 
task was that it draws on the formation of a stimulus–response habit. In 
the second task, declarative memory was tested by having patients answer 
multiple-choice questions about the appearance of the cues and the com-
puter screen. 

 The  Parkinson’s  patients  had  great  difﬁ culty  learning  the  weather 
forecasting task (Figure 24.27b) but performed at normal levels on the 
declarative memory questionnaire (Figure 24.27c). Conversely, amnesic 
patients had no trouble learning the weather classiﬁ cation, but they per-
formed  signiﬁ cantly  worse  than  either  Parkinson’s  patients  or  normal 
controls  on  the  questionnaire.  These  results  suggest  that  the  striatum 
in  humans  may  play  a  role  in  procedural  memory  as  part  of  a  system 
distinct from the medial temporal system used for declarative memory. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS 

 Far from being a computer with ﬁ xed connections, the human brain is 
constantly changing as a result of experience. We use working memory 
to temporarily hold onto information, and the patterns of sensory input 
from some of our experiences are assembled into permanent engrams. As 
a child you learned to do a summersault, and the sequence of movements 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   862
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   862

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER 24    MEMORY SYSTEMS

863

was unconsciously stored for use time after dizzying time. You learned 
the  structure  of  the  brain  and  are  able  to  impress  Aunt  Tilly  by  mak-
ing a sketch showing the location of the medulla oblongata. We cannot 
identify the precise neurons and synapses involved in storing nondeclara-
tive  or  declarative  memories,  but  research  is  moving  us  closer  to  such 
an understanding. We know that learning and memory involve changes 
widely across the brain. Structures in the medial temporal lobe and dien-
cephalon are critical for memory consolidation, and engrams are stored 
in  the  neocortex  through  interactions  with  the  hippocampus  and  other 
structures. Specifying precisely what each brain structure contributes to 
learning and memory continues to challenge researchers. 

 We have seen that memories can be classiﬁ ed based on duration, the 
kind of information stored, and the brain structures involved. Early brain 
research  relied  on  interpreting  the  effects  of  brain  lesions  on  amnesia. 
From the case of H.M. alone, a tremendous amount was learned about 
memory  in  the  human  brain.  The  distinct  types  of  memory,  and  the 
fact that one type can be disrupted without affecting others in amnesia, 
indicate that multiple brain systems are used for memory storage. More 
recent research uses human brain imaging and molecular genetic tech-
niques to examine memory formation and sort out the temporal processes 
and multiple systems. There is even hope that one day there will be a 
treatment  to  signiﬁ cantly  reduce  the  deleterious  consequences  of  trau-
matic memories. 

 In this chapter we have focused on questions about where memories 
are stored and how different brain structures interact. But what is the 
physiological basis for the memory storage? When we try to remember a 
phone number, an interruption can make us forget, suggesting that mem-
ories are initially held in a particularly fragile form. Long-term memory 
is much more robust; it can survive interruption, anesthesia, and the nor-
mal bumps and traumas of life. Because of this robustness, it is thought 
that memories are ultimately stored in structural brain changes. The na-
ture of these structural changes in the brain is the subject of Chapter 25. 

K E Y   T E R M S

 Types of Memory and Amnesia 
 learning (p. 824) 
 memory (p. 824) 
 declarative memory (p. 824) 
 nondeclarative memory (p. 825) 
 procedural memory (p. 825) 
 nonassociative learning (p. 827) 
 habituation (p. 827) 
 sensitization (p. 827) 
 associative learning (p. 827) 
 classical conditioning (p. 827) 
 instrumental conditioning 

(p. 827) 

 long-term memory (p. 828) 
 short-term memory (p. 828) 
 memory consolidation (p. 828) 
 working memory (p. 829) 

 amnesia (p. 829) 
 retrograde amnesia (p. 830) 
 anterograde amnesia (p. 830) 

 Working Memory 
 prefrontal cortex (p. 831) 
 lateral intraparietal cortex 

(area LIP) (p. 833) 

 Declarative Memory 
 engram (p. 835) 
 memory trace (p. 835) 
 cell assembly (p. 836) 
 hippocampus (p. 838) 
 entorhinal cortex (p. 838) 
 perirhinal cortex (p. 838) 
 parahippocampal cortex (p. 838) 
 fornix (p. 839) 

 delayed non-match to sample 

(DNMS) (p. 843) 

 recognition memory (p. 843) 
 Korsakoff’s syndrome (p. 845) 
 Morris water maze (p. 847) 
 place cell (p. 848) 
 grid cell (p. 850) 
 cognitive map theory (p. 852) 
 standard model of memory 

 consolidation (p. 854) 

 synaptic consolidation (p. 854) 
 systems consolidation (p. 854) 
 multiple trace model of 
consolidation (p. 854) 
 reconsolidation (p. 856) 

 Procedural Memory 
 striatum (p. 857) 

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   863
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   863

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

864

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

   1. If you try to recall how many windows there are in your house by mentally walking from room 

to room, are you using declarative memory, procedural memory, or both? 

   2. What kind of experiment might you conduct to ﬁ nd the place in the brain that people use to hold 

a phone number in mind? 

   3. In what brain areas have neural correlates of working memory been observed? 
   4. What structures in the medial temporal lobe are thought to be involved in memory? 
   5. Why did Lashley conclude that all cortical areas contribute equally to learning and memory? 

Why was this conclusion later called into question? 

   6. What arguments can you think of for and against the idea that Wilder Penﬁ eld’s electrical brain 

stimulation evoked memories? 

   7. What  evidence  is  there  that  declarative  and  nondeclarative  memory  use  distinctly  different 

circuits? 

   8. In the famous amnesic known as H.M., what types of memory were lost after temporal lobe 

surgery? What kinds were preserved? 

   9. What are place cells and grid cells? Where have they been observed? 
 10. What evidence indicates that long-term memories are stored in the neocortex? 
 11. The multiple trace model of memory consolidation was proposed to deal with what concern(s) 

about the standard model of memory consolidation? 

 12. Where is it thought that procedural memories are stored? 

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

 Corkin S. 2013.  Permanent Present Tense: The 

Unforgettable Life of the Amnesic Patient H.M . 
New York: Basic Books. 

 Nadel L, Hardt O. 2011. Update on memory sys-

tems and processes.  Neuropsychopharmacology
36:251–273. 

 Kandel ER, Dudai Y, Mayford MR. 2014. The 
molecular and systems biology of memory. 
Cell  157:163–186. 

 Ma WJ, Husain M, Bays PM. 2014. Changing 

concepts of working memory.  Nature 
Neuroscience  17:347–356. 

 McKenzie S, Eichenbaum H. 2011. Consolidation 

and reconsolidation: two lives of memories? 
Neuron  71:224–233. 

 Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser M. 2008. Place cells, 
grid cells, and the brain’s spatial representa-
tion system.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  
31:69–89. 

 Quiroga RQ, Kreiman G, Koch C, Fried I. 2008. 
Sparse but not “grandmother-cell” coding in 
the medial temporal lobe.  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  12:87–91. 

 Squire LR, Wixted JT. 2011. The cognitive neuro-
science of human memory since H.M.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  34:259–288. 

Wang S, Morris RGM. 2010. Hippocampal-

neocortical interactions in memory formation, 
consolidation, and reconsolidation. Annual 
Review of Psychology 61:49–79.

823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   864
823-864_Bear_24_revised_final.indd   864

12/20/14   8:08 AM
12/20/14   8:08 AM

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

Molecular Mechanisms of 
Learning and Memory

INTRODUCTION
MEMORY ACQUISITION

Cellular Reports of Memory Formation

Distributed Memory Storage
 BOX 25.1   PATH OF DISCOVERY: What Attracted Me to the Study of Learning 
and Memory in Aplysia? by Eric Kandel

Strengthening Synapses

Anatomy of the Hippocampus
Properties of LTP in CA1
Mechanisms of LTP in CA1
 BOX 25.2   BRAIN FOOD: Synaptic Plasticity: Timing Is Everything

Weakening Synapses

 BOX 25.3   PATH OF DISCOVERY: Memories of Memory, by Leon Cooper
 BOX 25.4   BRAIN FOOD: The Wide World of Long-Term Synaptic Depression
Mechanisms of LTD in CA1
Glutamate Receptor Trafﬁ cking

LTP, LTD, and Memory

 BOX 25.5   OF SPECIAL INTEREST: Memory Mutants

SYNAPTIC HOMEOSTASIS

Metaplasticity
Synaptic Scaling

MEMORY CONSOLIDATION

Persistently Active Protein Kinases

CaMKII
Protein Kinase M Zeta

Protein Synthesis and Memory Consolidation

Synaptic Tagging and Capture
CREB and Memory
Structural Plasticity and Memory

CONCLUDING REMARKS

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   865
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   865

865865
6868686868686686868686866555555555555686868868686686868686866555555555555

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

866

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCCTION 

 An important ﬁ rst step in understanding the neurobiology of memory is 
identifying  where  different types of information are stored. As we saw in 
Chapter  24,  basic  neuroscientiﬁ c  research  is  beginning  to  answer  this 
question.  However,  an  equally  important  question  concerns   how   infor-
mation is stored. As Hebb pointed out, memories can result from subtle 
alterations in synapses, and these alterations can be widely distributed 
in the brain. This insight helps narrow the search for a physical basis of 
memory, synaptic modiﬁ cations, but it also raises a dilemma. The synap-
tic modiﬁ cations that underlie memory may be too small and too widely 
distributed to be observed and studied experimentally. 

 These  considerations  inspired  some  researchers,  led  by  Eric  Kandel 
of  Columbia  University,  to  study  the  nervous  systems  of  simple  inver-
tebrate animals for insights into the molecular mechanisms of memory. 
Through the history of neuroscience, researchers have used a large me-
nagerie  of  invertebrate  creatures  for  neurobiological  experiments.  You 
are already familiar with the squid and the contribution of its giant axon 
and giant synapse to our understanding of cellular neurophysiology (see 
Chapters 4 and 5). Other experimental invertebrates are lobsters, cray-
ﬁ sh, cockroaches, ﬂ ies, bees, leeches, and nematode worms. The reason 
for using them is that invertebrates have some important experimental 
advantages, including small nervous systems with large neurons, known 
and reproducible connections between neurons, and simple genetics. 

 Invertebrates can be particularly useful for analyzing the neural basis 
of behavior. Although the behavioral repertoire of the average inverte-
brate  is  rather  limited,  many  invertebrate  species  exhibit  some  of  the 
simple forms of learning that were introduced in the last chapter. One 
species in particular has been used to study the neurobiology of learning, 
the sea snail  Aplysia californica . Kandel shared the 2000 Nobel Prize in 
Physiology or Medicine for his seminal contributions to the understand-
ing of memory mechanisms in this creature. Invertebrate research has 
clearly shown that Hebb was right: Memories  can  reside in synaptic al-
terations. Moreover, it has been possible to identify some of the molecular 
mechanisms that lead to this synaptic plasticity. Although nonsynaptic 
changes have also been found that may account for some types of memory, 
invertebrate research leaves little doubt that the synapse is an important 
site of information storage. 

 The past several decades have seen rapid advances in understanding 
how  our  own  brains  form  memories.  This  progress  has  come  from  the 
study of neural activity in regions of the mammalian brain associated with 
different types of memory. Insight from theoretical analysis of neural net-
works helped focus attention on modiﬁ cations most likely to store informa-
tion, and new technologies have made feasible the detection of candidate 
mechanisms. One fruitful approach has been the use of electrical brain 
stimulation  to  produce  measurable  synaptic  alterations  whose  mecha-
nisms  can  be  studied.  Researchers  could  then  ask  if  these  same  mech-
anisms  contribute  to  natural  memory  formation.  One  of  the  interesting 
conclusions of this research is that the mechanisms of activity-dependent 
synaptic plasticity and memory formation in the adult brain have much 
in common with those operating during development for wiring the brain. 
 There is a growing sense of optimism among neuroscientists that we 
may soon know the physical basis of learning and memory. This inves-
tigation  has  beneﬁ ted  from  the  combined  approaches  of  researchers  in 
disciplines ranging from psychology to molecular biology. In this chapter, 
we’ll take a look at some of their discoveries. 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   866
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   866

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

867

MEMORY ACQUISITION
MEMMORY AACQUISITION

It is useful to consider learning and memory as occurring in two stages: 
(1) the acquisition of a short-term memory and (2) the consolidation of 
a long-term memory (Figure 25.1). In this context, memory acquisition 
(learning) occurs by a  physical modiﬁ cation of the brain  caused by incom-
ing  sensory  information.  This  is  different  from  working  memory  intro-
duced in Chapter 24, which is vulnerable to erasure by distraction and 
has a very limited capacity (think about holding a phone number in mind). 
Working memory can be achieved by keeping neural activity going with 
continuous rehearsal, and does not require any lasting physical change 
in the brain. In contrast, short-term memory survives distraction, has a 
large capacity, and can last minutes to hours with no conscious effort. Do 
you remember what you had for breakfast this morning or for dinner last 
night? These memories persist for some time without rehearsal but are 
considered to be “short term” because they will be forgotten unless they 
are consolidated into long-term memory. Thus, you probably do not read-
ily remember what you had for dinner two weeks ago on Tuesday because 
the brain changes that encoded this information have since faded away.

Memory  consolidation ,  introduced  in  Chapter  24,  is  the  process 
by which some experiences, held temporarily by transient modiﬁ cations 
of  neurons,  are  selected  for  permanent  storage  in  long-term  memory. 
Perhaps  last  Tuesday’s  dinner  coincided  with  an  emotionally  charged 
event, like a ﬁ rst date with the love of your life. In that case, it would not 
be surprising if every detail of the evening was etched into your long-term 
memory. This example makes the point that not all memories are created 
equal. The brain has mechanisms that ensure that some experiences are 
retained while others are lost. 

 We  will  divide  our  discussion  of  memory  mechanisms  into  those  re-
sponsible for the initial acquisition of short-term memory and those act-
ing to convert a temporary change into a permanent one. We’ll see that 
acquisition occurs by modifying synaptic transmission between neurons 
and that synaptic consolidation requires, in addition, new gene expres-
sion and protein synthesis. 

 Cellular Reports of Memory Formation 
 “While it might appear that I am doing nothing, at the cellular level I 
am  really  quite  busy.”  We  don’t  know  to  whom  this  statement  should 
be attributed, but it certainly applies to memory. In the last chapter we 
discussed different types of memories and where they are stored. For ex-
ample, we learned that declarative memories (facts, events, places, faces) 
ultimately reside in the cerebral cortex. However, when it comes to in-
formation  storage,  no  neuron  is  spared.  Virtually  every  neuron  in  the 
nervous system can form a memory of recent patterns of activity. By the 
same token, countless molecular mechanisms participate in information 

Sensory

experience

Memory
acquisition

Short-term
memory

Memory

consolidation

Long-term
memory

▲ FIGURE 25.1
The flow of sensory information into long-term memory.  The first step is 
memory acquisition, by which experiences are encoded by synaptic modifi-
cations. The second step is memory consolidation, by which temporary synaptic 
changes are made permanent.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   867
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   867

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

868

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

▲ FIGURE 25.2
Famous people who may be familiar to 
you.  What happened in your brain when 
you first saw photos or video of these peo-
ple and formed a memory?

storage of various kinds, so our coverage here will necessarily be selec-
tive. As a general example, let’s consider what happens in the cerebral 
cortex when a novel experience becomes familiar (Figure 25.2). 

 We  and  other  primates  are  experts  at  using  vision  to  recognize  and 
discriminate differences between familiar objects and individuals. Where 
is this information stored? According to Hebb, if an engram is based on in-
formation from only one sensory modality, it should be possible to localize 
it within the regions of cortex that serve this modality (see Chapter 24). 
For  example,  if  the  engram  relies  only  on  visual  information,  then  we 
would  expect  it  to  reside  within  the  visual  cortex.  Studies  of  visual 
discrimination in monkeys are consistent with this proposal. 

 Macaque monkeys can be trained to discriminate images of objects and 
associate them with a food reward. However, they lose this ability when 
lesions are made in the inferotemporal cortex. This region contains area 

c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
S

i

100

80

60

40

20

0

Inferotemporal
cortex (area IT)

1

400

1

400

c
e
s
/
s
e
k
p
S

i

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

(a)  

(b)  

Time (ms)

(c)  

1

2

4
Presentation number

3

Face 1

Face 2

Face 3
Face 4

5

▲ FIGURE 25.3
Responses to faces in the inferotemporal cortex.  (a) The location of area IT in the 
inferior temporal lobe of a macaque monkey. (b) IT neurons respond to faces, and 
these responses can be highly selective. The histograms show the response of a neu-
ron in area IT to slightly different images of human faces. The horizontal bar under 
each histogram indicates when the stimulus was presented. (c) Changing responses of 
a cell as novel faces become familiar. When the four faces are presented for the first 
time, there is a moderate response to each. With subsequent presentations, the cell 
becomes more responsive to faces 1 and 2 and less responsive to faces 3 and 4. Ac-
quisition of face selectivity correlates with the ability of the animal to recognize and 
distinguish among these faces. (Sources: Part b, adapted from Leopold et al., 2006, 
Fig. 6; part c, adapted from Rolls et al., 1989, Fig. 1.)

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   868
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   868

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

869

IT (Figure 25.3a) which we learned in Chapter 10 is part of the “ventral 
stream,” a series of higher order visual areas concerned with visual per-
ception.  After  lesions  of  inferotemporal  cortex,  monkeys  appear  to  be 
unable to recognize familiar objects, even though basic visual capacities 
remain intact. IT therefore appears to be both a visual area and an area 
involved  in  memory  storage.  This  conclusion  is  further  supported  by  a 
fascinating clinical condition called  prospagnosia , a selective amnesia for 
familiar faces (including one’s own) that can result from damage to the 
inferotemporal cortex in humans. 

 Like most cortical neurons, IT neurons typically show the property of 
 stimulus selectivity ; that is, they respond with a barrage of action poten-
tials to the presentation of some but not all stimuli. As we learned back in 
Chapter 10, IT neurons have the distinction of responding to complex im-
ages and shapes that can include familiar faces. In a typical experiment, 
an electrode is used to record from an IT neuron in an alert monkey. When 
shown a series of images of familiar faces (other monkeys in the colony 
or the experimenters), the neuron responds vigorously to some but not all 
images: The neuron shows stimulus (face) selectivity (Figure 25.3b). 

 Now, what happens to an IT neuron as a visual recognition memory is 
formed, when a novel set of faces becomes familiar? The ﬁ rst time new 
faces are seen, the cell responds at about the same moderate level to all 
of them: There are responses but no selectivity (Figure 25.3c, presenta-
tion 1). However, with repeated presentations, the responses change and 
selectivity emerges. The response of the neuron grows to some faces and 
diminishes to others. With continued presentation of the same group of 
faces, the response of the neuron becomes more stable and more selective 
(Figure 25.3c, presentations 4 and 5). Other nearby neurons in IT show 
similar changes, but their responses grow and diminish to different faces. 
Are we observing the birth of a memory trace? There are good reasons to 
think so. Shifts in the selectivity of cortical neurons are a very common 
cellular correlate of memories formed in other modalities (audition, so-
matic sensation, etc.) as well. 

 Distributed  Memory  Storage.   Analysis  of  a  simple  “neural  network” 
model helps illustrate what is behind an experience-dependent shift in 
neuronal selectivity. Consider the network of connected neurons depicted 
in Figure 25.4. Three stimuli (say, the faces of Mark, Barry, and Mike) are 
conveyed by separate inputs to three postsynaptic cortical neurons (call 
them A, B, and C). Initially, in our ﬁ rst experience of these gentlemen, we 
ﬁ nd that neurons A, B, and C respond moderately to Mark, Barry, and 
Mike. There is no selectivity, and there is no neural response that could 
be used to distinguish one face from another. However, after repeated ex-
posure  to  Mark,  Barry,  and  Mike,  the  neurons  of  the  network  acquire 
selectivity; although all neurons respond to all faces, neuron A responds 
best to Mark, neuron B responds best to Barry, and neuron C responds 
best to Mike. This transformation of the responses to (now) familiar faces 
occurred by adjustments in the strength or “weights” of the three synaptic 
inputs converging on the cortical neurons. 

 Where is the “memory” in this network? Put another way, how does 
output from our three cortical neurons uniquely represent Mark, Barry, 
or Mike? The answer is that after learning, there is a unique  pattern  or 
ratio of activity in the three neurons for each face. Mark is represented 
by high activity in neuron A, moderate activity in neuron B, and weak 
activity in neuron C. We call this a  distributed memory . By analogy, 
consider how a color is represented in the visual system, not solely by the 
output of any one type of cone photoreceptor, but by a comparison of the 
activity in all the three types of cone photoreceptor (Chapter 9). 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   869
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   869

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

Before learning

After learning

870

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

▲ FIGURE 25.4
A model of a distributed memory. (a) In this simple neu-
ral network, three inputs conveying information about the 
appearance of three faces (Mark, Barry, and Mike) 
synapse on three cortical neurons: cells A, B, vand C. 
(b) Before learning to recognize these faces, every neuron 
in the network responds moderately to every face. There 
is no selectivity for one face over another. (c) After learn-
ing, the neurons display a face preference. Cell A prefers 
Mark, cell B prefers Barry, and cell C prefers Mike. Notice 
that comparing the relative responses of all three neurons 
can determine which face is being viewed. For example, 
Mark evokes a strong response in A, a moderate re-
sponse in B, and a weak response in C. Even if neuron A 
were to die, Mark would continue to be represented by a 
specific pattern of activity in neurons B and C.

Stimulus

Mark Barry Mike

A

B

C

 
f
o
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

 
f
o
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

f
o
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

A

 
l
l

e
c

B

 
l
l

e
c

C

 
l
l

e
c
 

(a)

(b)

Stimulus

(c)

Stimulus

Mark

Barry Mike

Mark Barry Mike

 To understand the advantages of this type of memory storage, let’s con-
sider an alternative in which the memory were encoded solely by neuron A: 
When it is active, Mark would be recalled. After learning, neuron A would 
become a “Mark detector” that certainly could store the memory of Mark, 
but what would happen if neuron A died from a bump on the head or some 
other mishap of normal life?  Poof , there goes Mark. The distributed memory 
avoids this problem because no single neuron represents Mark; he is repre-
sented by the pattern of activity across all neurons in the cortical network. If 
neuron A met an early demise, there is still a unique pattern or ratio of activ-
ity in neurons B and C that can represent Mark. The more neurons there are 
in the network, the more unique memories can be stored and the more resis-
tant the memories are to damage to individual neurons. This is a good thing, 
because although they are numerous, neurons in the brain die every day. 

 Using artiﬁ cial neural network models created in the laboratory with 
a computer, researchers can ask what happens when neurons in the net-
work  are  gradually  removed.  The  answer  is  that  memories  show  what 
is called  graceful degradation . Instead of a catastrophic loss of any one 
memory, representations tend to blend together as neurons are lost, such 
that one memory gets confused with another. This type of memory loss is 
similar to what often happens in old age or following the death of a large 
number of neurons due to a brain disease. 

 Neural network models can reproduce the experimental observations 
of  experience-dependent  shifts  in  neuronal  selectivity,  thereby  yielding 
insights into how memory is stored. As we have said, one such insight is 
that memories are distributed and show graceful degradation in response 
to a loss of neurons. Another key insight is that  the physical change that 
leads to memory can be the modiﬁ cation of synaptic weight  that changes 
the input–output relationships of neurons. Synapses store memories. 

 The notion of a synaptic basis for memory received strong experimental 
support from Eric Kandel’s studies of the marine snail  Aplysia . Kandel and 
colleagues were able to show that simple forms of learning, such as habitua-
tion and sensitization, were accompanied by changes in the strength of syn-
aptic transmission between sensory neurons and motor neurons. Moreover, 
they were able to dissect many of the molecular mechanisms that underlie 
these changes. These studies provided a strong foundation for subsequent 
analysis of synaptic modiﬁ cation in the mammalian brain (Box 25.1). 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   870
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   870

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

871

BOX 25.1

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

What Attracted Me to the Study of Learning 
and Memory in Aplysia?
by Eric Kandel

There was little in my early life to indicate that the biology 

of mind would become the passion of my academic career. 
In fact, there was little to suggest that I would have an aca-
demic career. Rather, my early life was shaped in large part 
by  the  traumatic  events  that  occurred  in  the  place  of  my 
birth: Vienna, Austria.

I was born in November 1929. In March 1938, when I was 
eight years old, Hitler entered Austria and was received by 
the Viennese with enormous enthusiasm. Within hours, that 
enthusiasm turned into an almost indescribable outburst of 
anti-Semitic violence. After a humiliating and frightening year, 
my older brother, Ludwig, and I were able to leave Vienna in 
April 1939. The two of us crossed the Atlantic by ourselves 
to live with our grandparents in New York. Our parents joined 
us six months later.

The spectacle of Vienna under the Nazis presented me for 
the ﬁ rst time with the dark side of human behavior. How is 
one to understand the sudden viciousness of so many peo-
ple?  How  could  a  highly  cultivated  society  listen  to  Haydn, 
Mozart, and Beethoven one day and the next day embrace 
the brutality of Kristallnacht? This question still haunted and 
fascinated me while in college at Harvard, where I majored 
in twentieth-century history and literature. I wrote my honors 
dissertation on the attitude of three German writers toward 
National  Socialism,  and  I  intended  to  do  graduate  work  in 
modern European intellectual history. But at the end of my 
junior year, I decided that to obtain insights into the human 
mind and its capability for good and evil, it would be better to 
become a psychoanalyst rather than an intellectual historian.
I entered medical school in the fall of 1952, dedicated to 
becoming a psychoanalyst. While in medical school I loved 
the clinical work but had no particular interest in basic sci-
ence.  In  my  senior  year,  however,  I  decided  that  perhaps 
even  a  New  York  psychoanalyst  should  know  something 
about the brain, so I took an elective at Columbia University 
with the neurophysiologist Harry Grundfest.

In Grundfest’s laboratory I was astonished to discover that 
science in the laboratory is dramatically different from taking 
courses and reading books.

Knowing of my interest in behavior, Grundfest suggested 
that  I  set  up  an  electrophysical  system  to  record  from  the 
large axon of the crayﬁ sh, which controls the animal’s tail and 
thus its escape from predators. I learned how to manufac-
ture glass microelectrodes for insertion into individual nerve 
cells  of  crayﬁ sh  and  how  to  obtain  and  interpret  electrical 
recordings from them. It was in the course of those experi-
ments, which were almost laboratory exercises, since I was 

not exploring new ground scientiﬁ cally or conceptually, that 
I  ﬁ rst  began  to  feel  the  excitement  of  working  on  my  own. 
Whenever I penetrated a cell, I, too, could hear the crack of 
an action potential. I am not fond of the sound of gunshots, 
but I found the “bang! bang! bang!” of action potentials in-
toxicating. The idea that I had successfully impaled a cell and 
was actually listening in on the brain of the crayﬁ sh as it con-
veyed messages seemed marvelously intimate. I was becom-
ing a true psychoanalyst: I was listening to the deep, hidden 
thoughts of my crayﬁ sh!

Had I not been exposed to the excitement of actually doing 
research, of carrying out experiments to discover something 
new, I would have ended up with a very different career and, 
I presume, a very different life.

I began to realize that what makes science so distinctive is 
not just the experiments themselves but also the social con-
text, the sense of equality between student and teacher, and 
the open, ongoing, and brutally frank exchange of ideas and 
criticism.

Based on my six-month stay in his laboratory, Grundfest 
nominated me for a research position at the National Institutes 
of Health. I arrived at the NIH in July 1957, just after Brenda 
Milner published her classic research showing that complex 
memories—for  people,  places,  and  objects—are  localized 
in the hippocampus. I realized that the problems of memory 
storage,  once  the  exclusive  province  of  psychologists  and 
psychoanalysts, were now approachable with the methods 
of  cell  biology.  What  are  the  cellular  mechanisms  for  that 
storage? I wondered. No one knew anything about the nerve 
cells of the hippocampus at that time. I thought perhaps the 
nerve  cells  that  participate  in  memory  storage  would  have 
novel properties that would speak to me of memory!

Together  with  Alden  Spencer,  a  young  colleague  from 
NIH, I set out to study the properties of hippocampal nerve 
cells. We were the ﬁ rst scientists in the world to record signals 
from those cells. Our work showed, surprisingly, that these 
cells from the region of the brain that encodes our dearest 
memories function pretty much the same way as other nerve 
cells in the brain. I now realized that these cells did not speak 
to us about memory. We had climbed Mt. Everest, but we 
had no view.

I further realized that to explore memory I would need to 
study not nerve cells per se, but nerve cells during a learning 
experience that leads to the formation of a memory. This was 
too difﬁ cult to do in a complex structure like the hippocam-
pus: In the late 1950s, we did not even know what sensory 
(continues on page 8)

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   871
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   871

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

872

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 25.1

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y   ( c o n t i n u e d )

input  affected  hippocampal  cells.  Alden  and  I  tried  visual, 
tactile, and auditory inputs, all without effect. I became con-
vinced that to succeed in bringing the power of cell biology to 
bear on the study of learning and memory, I would ﬁ rst have 
to  take  a  very  different  approach,  a  reductionist  approach. 
My ﬁ rst step had to be to study not the most complex case 
but  the  simplest  case  of  memory  storage—and  to  study  it 
in the simplest, most tractable experimental animal available.
While a reductionist strategy was within the realm of tra-
ditional biology, most investigators were reluctant to apply it 
to mental processes such as learning and memory. From the 
outset it seemed to me that the mechanisms of memory stor-
age are so important for survival that they must have been 
conserved through evolution. Moreover, a molecular analysis 
of learning, no matter how simple the animal or the task, was 
likely to reveal those mechanisms.

I  needed  to  develop  an  experimental  system  in  which  a 
simple reﬂ ex behavior, controlled by a small number of large, 
accessible nerve cells, could be modiﬁ ed by a simple form 
of learning like classical conditioning. Only then could I relate 
the animal’s overt learned behavior to cellular and molecular 
events occurring in the neurons that control the behavior.

After looking at crayﬁ sh, lobsters, worms, and ﬂ ies, I set-
tled  on  the  marine  snail  Aplysia,  which  has  extremely  large 
nerve cells that are conducive to recording. One of the two 
people  in  the  world  working  on  Aplysia  at  that  time  was 
Ladislav Tauc, so I spent 1962–1963 in Paris with him, and I 
have worked on Aplysia ever since.

In the early 1960s we had no frame of reference for study-
ing  the  biological  basis  of  memory  formation  and  storage. 
Two  conﬂ icting  theories  prevailed.  One  was  the  aggregate 
ﬁ eld  approach,  which  assumed  that  information  is  stored 
in  the  bioelectric  ﬁ eld  generated  by  the  aggregate  activity 
of  many  neurons.  The  other  was  the  cellular  connectionist 
approach,  which  derived  from  Santiago  Ramón  y  Cajal’s 
idea that memory is stored as an anatomical change in the 
strength of synaptic connections between nerve cells (Cajal, 
1894). In 1948 Jerzy Konorski renamed Cajal’s concept “syn-
aptic plasticity” (Konorski, 1948).

In my studies of Aplysia my work focused on the cellular 
substrates of the gill-withdrawal reﬂ ex that occurs when the 
siphon of the animal is touched (Figure A). This reﬂ ex under-
goes  sensitization  (a  simple  form  of  learning)  when  a  nox-
ious stimulus is applied to the tail of the animal. I found that 
short-term memory results from a transient strengthening of 
preexisting synaptic connections, due to the modiﬁ cation of 
preexisting proteins, whereas long-term memory results from 
a  persistent  strengthening  of  synaptic  connections  brought 
about by alterations in gene expression, the synthesis of new 
proteins, and the growth of new synaptic connections. I dis-
covered that the transient strengthening results in an increase 

Gill

Siphon

(a)

Water jet

(b)

Figure A 
 The gill-withdrawal reﬂ ex in Aplysia. (a) The mantle is held aside to 
show the gill in its normal position. (b) The gill retracts when water is 
sprayed on the siphon.

in  the  amount  of  transmitter  released  by  the  sensory  neu-
ron onto the motor neuron that controls the gill musculature. 
This increase is produced by activation by the tail stimulus of 
 serotonergic modulatory neurons (Figure B part a). Serotonin 
increases the strength of the synapse between sensory and 
motor  neurons  by  increasing  the  concentration  of  cAMP, 
an  intracellular  signaling  molecule  in  sensory  neurons  that 
 activates  protein  kinase  A  (PKA).  When  we  similarly  simply 
injected cAMP directly into the sensory neuron, it resulted in 
an increase in the release of the transmitter (glutamate) into 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   872
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   872

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

873

Siphon

Sensitizing
stimulus

Tail

(a)

Serotonin
modulatory
neuron

Sensory
neuron

Motor
neuron

Gill muscle

Sensory
neuron

Sensory
neuron

New gene
expression

Serotonin
modulatory
neuron

Active PKA

to the nucleus

Serotonin
modulatory
neuron

New proteins

stimulate
synapse
growth

PKA facilitates

glutamine
release

cAMP

PKA

cAMP

PKA

Motor neuron

Motor neuron

(b)

(c)

Figure B 
 A mechanism for sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reﬂ ex. (a) A simple wiring diagram showing the 
minimal circuitry for sensitization of the gill withdrawal reﬂ ex. A noxious stimulus to the tail activates 
serotonergic modulatory neurons that inﬂ uence synaptic transmission at the sensory–motor synapse. 
(b) Serotonin stimulates a rise in cAMP and activation of PKA in the sensory nerve terminal, causing an 
increase in the amount of glutamate released when the siphon is touched. (c) Repeated activation of the 
serotonergic modulatory neurons causes long-term sensitization, requiring new nuclear gene expression 
and protein synthesis.

the synaptic cleft, thus temporarily strengthening the connec-
tion with the motor neuron (Figure B part b).

Beginning  in  1980,  the  insights  and  methods  of  molecu-
lar  biology  enabled  us  to  identify  common  mechanisms  of 
 short-term  memory  in  different  animals  and  to  explore  how 
short-term  memory  is  converted  to  long-term  memory.  We 
found that, following long-term sensitization, PKA moves into 
the nucleus and activates gene expression, leading to the syn-
thesis of new proteins and a twofold increase in the number 
of  synaptic  connections  made  by  Aplysia’s  sensory  neurons 
(Figure B part c). Moreover, the dendrites of the motor neurons, 
which receive the signals from the sensory neurons, grow and 
remodel to accommodate the additional sensory input.

Together,  these  early  cellular  studies  of  simple  behaviors 
provided  direct  evidence  supporting  Cajal’s  suggestion  that 
synaptic connections between neurons are not immutable; they 
can be modiﬁ ed in learning, and those anatomical modiﬁ cations 
are likely to subserve memory storage. In the gill- withdrawal re-
ﬂ ex of Aplysia, changes in synaptic strength occur not only in 

the connections between sensory and motor neurons but also 
in the connections between sensory neurons and interneurons. 
Thus, even in a simple  reﬂ ex, memory appears to be distributed 
among multiple sites. Studies showed further that a single syn-
aptic connection is capable of being modiﬁ ed in opposite ways 
by different forms of learning and for different periods of time, 
paralleling the different stages of memory.

By 1980 my progress on Aplysia had been so heartening 
that I summoned up the courage to return to the hippocam-
pus. There I found, much as Charles Darwin might have pre-
dicted, that once nature ﬁ nds a solution that works, it tends 
to hold on to it. In other words, the same general principles 
that govern short- and long-term memory storage in simple 
animals also apply to complex ones.

References
Cajal SR. 1894. The Croonian Lecture: la ﬁ ne structure des centres 

nerveux. Proceedings of the Royal Society, London 55:344–468.

Konorski  J.  1948.  Conditioned  Reﬂ exes  and  Neuron  Organization. 

Cambridge, MA: University Press.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   873
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   873

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

874

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 Strengthening Synapses 
 Consideration  of  neural  network  models,  such  as  the  one  shown  in 
Figure  25.4,  indicates  that  both  increases  and  decreases  in  synaptic 
weights  can  shift  neuronal  selectivity  and  store  information.  We  begin 
our  discussion  of  how  this  synaptic  plasticity  occurs  with   long-term 
potentiation (LTP) , originally discovered in the hippocampus, a brain 
region critical for memory formation. (LTP was also discussed in the con-
text of brain development in Chapter 23.) 

 Anatomy  of  the  Hippocampus.  The  hippocampus  consists  of  two  thin 
sheets of neurons folded onto each other. One sheet is called the  dentate 
gyrus , and the other  Ammon’s horn . Of the four divisions of Ammon’s 
horn, we will focus on two:  CA3  and  CA1  (CA stands for  cornu Ammonis , 
Latin for “Ammon’s horn”). 

 Recall  from  Chapter  24  that  a  major  input  to  the  hippocampus  is 
the   entorhinal  cortex .  The  entorhinal  cortex  sends  information  to  the 
 hippocampus  by  way  of  a  bundle  of  axons  called  the   perforant  path . 
Perforant path axons synapse on neurons of the dentate gyrus. Dentate 
gyrus neurons give rise to axons (called mossy ﬁ bers) that synapse on cells 
in CA3. The CA3 cells give rise to axons that branch. One branch leaves 
the hippocampus via the fornix. The other branch, called the  Schaffer 
collateral ,  forms  synapses  on  the  neurons  of  CA1.  These  connections, 
summarized in Figure 25.5, are sometimes called the  trisynaptic circuit , 
because three sets of synaptic connections are involved: 
 1. Entorhinal cortex → dentate gyrus (perforant path) synapses 
 2. Dentate gyrus → CA3 (mossy ﬁ ber) synapses 
 3. CA3 → CA1 (Schaffer collateral) synapses 

 Because of its very simple architecture and organization, the hippocam-
pus is an ideal place to study synaptic transmission in the mammalian 
brain.  In  the  late  1960s,  researchers  discovered  that  the  hippocampus 

Fornix

CA3

3

Dentate
gyrus

2

1

Entorhinal
cortex

▲ FIGURE 25.5
Some microcircuits of the hippocampus.  ① Informa-
tion flows from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant 
path to the dentate gyrus. ② The dentate gyrus granule 
cells emit axons called mossy fibers that synapse upon 
pyramidal neurons in area CA3. ③ Axons from the CA3 
neurons, called the Schaffer collaterals, synapse upon 
pyramidal neurons in area CA1.

CA1

Rhinal fissure

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   874
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   874

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

875

could actually be removed from the brain (usually in experimental ani-
mals) and cut up like a loaf of bread, and that the resulting slices could be 
kept alive  in vitro  for many hours. In such a  brain slice preparation , ﬁ ber 
tracts  can  be  stimulated  electrically  and  synaptic  responses  recorded. 
Because cells in the slice can be observed, stimulating and recording elec-
trodes can be positioned with the precision previously available only in 
invertebrate preparations. This brain slice preparation has greatly facili-
tated the study of LTP. 

 Properties  of  LTP  in  CA1.  In  1973,  an  important  discovery  was  made 
in the hippocampus by Timothy Bliss and Terje Lømo, working together 
in Norway. They found that brief, high-frequency electrical stimulation 
of the perforant path synapses on the neurons of the dentate gyrus pro-
duced LTP. It was subsequently shown that most excitatory (and many 
inhibitory)  synapses  support  LTP,  and  that  the  mechanisms  can  vary 
from one synapse type to another. However, the most sophisticated un-
derstanding of LTP has come from studying the Schaffer collateral syn-
apses  on  the  CA1  pyramidal  neurons  in  brain  slice  preparations. This 
will be our focus. 

 In a typical experiment, the effectiveness of the Schaffer collateral syn-
apse is monitored by giving a bundle of presynaptic axons a brief electrical 
stimulus, then measuring the size of the resulting EPSP in a postsynaptic 
CA1 neuron (Figure 25.6). Usually such a test stimulation is given every 
minute or so for 15–30 minutes to ensure that the baseline response is 
stable. Next, to induce LTP, the same axons are given a  tetanus , a brief 
burst of high-frequency stimulation (typically 50–100 stimuli at a rate of 

EPSP
magnitude in 
response to
test stimulation
of input 1

Baseline responses

LTP

Input 1

Input 2

CA1 neuron

5

10

15

0
(b)  

20

25
Time (min) 

30

35

40

45

EPSP
magnitude in 
response to
test stimulation
of input 2

Record
EPSP

Baseline responses

(a)  

5

10

15

0
(c)  

20

25
Time (min) 

30

35

40

45

▲ FIGURE 25.6
Long-term potentiation in CA1.  (a) The response of a CA1 neuron is monitored 
as two inputs are alternately stimulated. LTP is induced in input 1 by giving this 
input a tetanus. (b) The graph shows a record of the experiment. The tetanus 
to input 1 (arrow) yields a potentiated response to stimulation of this input. 
(c) LTP is input-specific, so there is no change in the response to input 2 after a 
tetanus to input 1.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   875
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   875

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

876

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

High-frequency
stimulation

140

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
P
S
P
E

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
%

(

120

100

80

0

60

120

180

240

300

360

Time (days)

▲ FIGURE 25.7
LTP can last a long, long time.  In this experiment, LTP was induced with tetanic 
stimulation using electrodes implanted into the hippocampus of an awake rat. 
Each data point is the amplitude of the EPSP evoked with electrical stimulation of 
the synapses that had been tetanized. The LTP was still evident a year later. 
(Source: Adapted from Abraham et al., 2002.)

100/sec). Usually this tetanus induces LTP, and subsequent test stimula-
tion evokes an EPSP that is much greater than it was during the initial 
baseline period. In other words, the tetanus has caused a modiﬁ cation of 
the stimulated synapses so they are more effective. Other synaptic inputs 
onto the same neuron that did not receive tetanic stimulation do not show 
LTP. This property, that only the active inputs show the synaptic plastic-
ity, is called  input speciﬁ city . 

 One remarkable feature of this plasticity is that it can be induced by 
a brief tetanus, lasting less than a second, consisting of stimulation at 
frequencies well within the range of normal axon ﬁ ring. A second remark-
able feature of LTP is its longevity. LTP induced in CA1 of awake  animals 
can last many weeks, possibly even a lifetime (Figure 25.7). No wonder 
this  form  of  synaptic  plasticity  has  attracted  interest  as  a  candidate 
mechanism for declarative memory. 

 Subsequent  research  has  shown  that  high-frequency  stimulation  is 
not  an  absolute  requirement  for  LTP.  Rather,  what  is  required  is  that 
 synapses be active at the same time that the postsynaptic CA1 neuron is 
strongly  depolarized .  In  order  to  achieve  the  necessary  depolarization 
with  a  tetanus,  (1)  synapses  must  be  stimulated  at  frequencies  high 
enough to cause temporal summation of the EPSPs, and (2) enough syn-
apses must be active simultaneously to cause signiﬁ cant spatial summa-
tion of EPSPs. This second requirement is called  cooperativity,  because 
coactive  synapses  must  cooperate  to  produce  enough  depolarization  to 
cause LTP. 

 Consider for a moment how the cooperativity property of hippocampal 
LTP could be used to form associations. Imagine a hippocampal neuron 
receiving synaptic inputs from three sources: I, II, and III. Initially, no 
single  input  is  strong  enough  to  evoke  an  action  potential  in  the  post-
synaptic neuron. Now imagine that inputs I and II repeatedly ﬁ re at the 
same time. Because of spatial summation, inputs I and II are now capable 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   876
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   876

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

877

of  ﬁ ring  the  postsynaptic  neuron  and  of  causing  LTP.  Only  the  active 
synapses  will  be  potentiated,  and  these,  of  course,  are  those  belonging 
to inputs I and II. Now, because of potentiation of their synapses,  either  
input I  or  input II can ﬁ re the postsynaptic neuron (but not input III). 
Thus, LTP has caused an association of inputs I and II. In this way, the 
sight of a duck could be associated with the quack of a duck (they often 
occur at the same time), but never with the bark of a dog. 

 Speaking of associations, remember the idea of a Hebb synapse, intro-
duced in Chapter 23, to account for aspects of visual development? LTP in 
CA1 is Hebbian: Inputs that ﬁ re together wire together. 

 Mechanisms of LTP in CA1. Excitatory synaptic transmission in the hip-
pocampus is mediated by glutamate receptors. Na ⫹  ions passing through 
the AMPA subclass of glutamate receptor cause the EPSP at the Schaffer 
collateral–CA1 pyramidal cell synapse. However, CA1 neurons also have 
postsynaptic   NMDA  receptors .  Recall  that  these  glutamate  receptors 
have the unusual property that they conduct Ca 2  ⫹  ions, but only when 
glutamate binds  and  the postsynaptic membrane is depolarized enough 
to displace Mg 2  ⫹  ions that clog the channel (Figure 25.8). Thus, Ca 2  ⫹  entry 
through  the  NMDA  receptor  speciﬁ cally  signals  when  presynaptic  and 
postsynaptic elements are active at the same time (Box 25.2). 

 Considerable evidence now links this rise in postsynaptic [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  to the 
induction of LTP. For example, LTP induction is prevented if NMDA re-
ceptors are pharmacologically inhibited, or if rises in postsynaptic [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  

(a)  

resting 

(b)  

depolarized 

▲ FIGURE 25.8
NMDA receptors activated by simultaneous presynaptic and postsynaptic 
 activity.  (a) Presynaptic activation causes the release of glutamate, which acts 
on postsynaptic AMPA receptors and NMDA receptors. At the negative resting 
membrane potential, the NMDA receptors pass little ionic current because they 
are blocked with Mg2⫹. (b) When glutamate  release coincides with depolariza-
tion sufficient to displace the Mg2⫹, then Ca2⫹  enters the postsynaptic neuron 
via the NMDA  receptor.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   877
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   877

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

878

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

BOX 25.2

B R A I N   F O O D

Synaptic Plasticity: Timing Is Everything

When enough synapses are active at the same time, the 

postsynaptic neuron will be depolarized sufﬁ ciently to ﬁ re an 
action potential. Donald Hebb proposed that each individual 
synapse grows a little stronger when it successfully partici-
pates in the ﬁ ring of the postsynaptic neuron. The phenom-
enon  of  LTP  comes  close  to  satisfying  Hebb’s  ideal.  The 
synapse gets stronger when the glutamate released by the 
presynaptic  terminal  binds  to  postsynaptic  NMDA  recep-
tors and the postsynaptic membrane is depolarized strongly 
enough to displace Mg2⫹ from the NMDA receptor channel.

Is  there  a  role  for  postsynaptic  action  potentials  in  this 
“strong”  depolarization?  The  ﬁ rst  evidence  that  appropriate 
timing of a postsynaptic action potential might be important 
for LTP was obtained in the early 1980s by William Levy and 
Oswald Steward at the University of Virginia. They found that 
LTP occurred if a postsynaptic action potential occurred si-
multaneously  with,  or  slightly  after,  presynaptic  release  of 
glutamate.  However,  action  potentials  are  generated  in  the 
soma in response to depolarization of the membrane beyond 
threshold. Because this happens far away from the synapses 
located out on the dendritic tree, it was assumed for a time 
that the actual occurrence of the spike was not important for 
the mechanism of synaptic potentiation. The important thing 
was the strong depolarization in the dendrite, due to summed 
synaptic currents, which, coincidentally, was also usually suf-
ﬁ cient to evoke a postsynaptic action potential.

While it remains true that the key is strong postsynaptic 
depolarization, researchers took another look at the role of 

the  postsynaptic  spike  in  LTP.  This  new  attention  resulted 
from  the  discovery  that  action  potentials  generated  in  the 
soma  can  actually  “back-propagate”  into  the  dendrites  of 
some cells. Thus, Henry Markram, Bert Sakmann, and their 
colleagues at the Max Planck Institute investigated what hap-
pens  when  a  postsynaptic  spike  is  generated  (via  a  micro-
electrode) at various time intervals before or after an EPSP. 
Remarkably, they found that if a postsynaptic action potential 
follows  the  EPSP  within  about  50  msec,  the  synapse  po-
tentiates.  Nothing  happens  in  response  to  the  spike  or  the 
EPSP  alone;  LTP  results  speciﬁ cally  from  the  precise  tim-
ing of EPSP and spike, just as Hebb suggested! In addition, 
the timing requirements for LTP in these studies agreed very 
well with those originally reported by Levy and Steward. This 
is  an  example  of  what  is  now  referred  to  as  spike  timing– 
dependent plasticity.

What accounts for the LTP-promoting effect of a back-
propagating  action  potential?  The  answer,  of  course,  is 
strong depolarization. NMDA receptors have a very high af-
ﬁ nity for glutamate, so the transmitter remains bound to the 
receptor for many tens of milliseconds. However, this bound 
glutamate does nothing if the postsynaptic membrane is not 
depolarized strongly, because the channel is clogged with 
Mg2⫹. The timely occurrence of the action potential is suf-
ﬁ cient  to  awaken  these  dormant  channels  by  ejecting  the 
Mg2⫹. Then, as long as glutamate is still bound to the re-
ceptor, Ca2⫹ will enter the cell and trigger the mechanism 
of LTP.

are  prevented  by  the  injection  of  a  Ca 2  ⫹   chelator  into  the  postsynaptic 
neuron. The rise in [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  activates two protein kinases:  protein kinase 
C   and   calcium-calmodulin-dependent  protein  kinase  II ,  also  known  as 
CaMKII  (pronounced  “cam-K-two”).  Recall  from  Chapters  5  and  6  that 
protein  kinases  regulate  other  proteins  by  phosphorylating  (attaching 
phosphate groups to) them. 

 Following  the  rise  in  postsynaptic  [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i   and  the  activation  of  the 
kinases,  the  molecular  trail  that  leads  to  a  potentiated  synapse  gets 
harder to follow. Current research suggests that this trail may actually 
branch  (Figure  25.9).  One  path  appears  to  lead  toward  an  increased 
effectiveness of existing postsynaptic AMPA receptors by way of phos-
phorylation. Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor, by either protein 
kinase  C  or  CaMKII,  leads  to  a  change  in  the  protein  that  increases 
the ionic conductance of the channel. The other path leads to the inser-
tion of entirely new AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane. 
According to a current model, vesicular organelles studded with AMPA 
receptors  lie  in  wait  near  the  postsynaptic  membrane.  In  response  to 
CaMKII activation, the vesicle membrane fuses with the postsynaptic 
membrane, and the new AMPA receptors are thereby delivered to the 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   878
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   878

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

879

Presynaptic

Glutamate

AMPA 
receptor

NMDA 
receptor

PO4

1

Ca2+

2

Kinases 

Dendritic
spine

Postsynaptic

▲ FIGURE 25.9
Routes for the expression of LTP in 
CA1. Ca2⫹ entering through the NMDA 
receptor activates protein kinases. This 
can cause LTP by ① changing the effec-
tiveness of existing postsynaptic AMPA 
receptors or ② stimulating the insertion 
of new AMPA receptors.

synapse.  This  addition  of  new  membrane  causes  the  spines  to  swell 
(Figure 25.10). 

 Evidence  also  indicates  that  synaptic  structure  changes  following 
LTP.  In  particular,  postsynaptic  dendritic  spines  appear  to  bud  and 
form new synaptic contacts with axons. Thus, following LTP, a single 
axon  can  make  multiple  synapses  on  the  same  postsynaptic  neuron, 
which is not the normal pattern in CA1. This sprouting of synapses not 
only  increases  the  responsive  postsynaptic  surface  but  also  increases 
the probability that an action potential in the axon will trigger presyn-
aptic glutamate release. 

-1 min

0 min

1 min

2 min

7 min

30 min

60 min

Dendritic spines

1 µm

▲ FIGURE 25.10
The growth of spines following LTP. A segment of dendrite was filled with a flu-
orescent dye and imaged in living tissue using a special microscope. After LTP, 
the spines grew and sometimes sprouted to accommodate new synapses. Each 
frame is a snapshot of the dendrite at a different time, indicated in the upper-right 
corner (in minutes). At the time marked 0 min, the yellow dot indicates that this 
spine was repetitively activated with glutamate to induce LTP. After LTP, the spine 
grew to accommodate more AMPA receptors. (Photos courtesy of Dr. Miquel 
Bosch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   879
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   879

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

880

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Weakening Synapses 
 We have seen from our simple neural network model in Figure 25.4 that 
information  can  be  stored  as  both  decreases  and  increases  in  synaptic 
effectiveness. Recall Hebb’s theory that a synapse grows stronger, or po-
tentiates,  when  the  activity  of  that  synapse  correlates  with  the  strong 
activation of the postsynaptic neuron by other converging inputs. An ex-
tension  of  Hebb’s  theory,  designed  to  account  for  bidirectional  (up  and 
down) regulation of synaptic strength, is called the  BCM theory , named 
for its authors, Elie Bienenstock, Leon Cooper, and Paul Munro, working 
at Brown University. 

 After sharing the 1972 Nobel Prize in Physics for his development of 
a theory of superconductivity, Cooper became interested in the problem 
of memory storage by large networks of neurons (Box 25.3). He and his 
students Bienenstock and Munro recognized that experience-dependent 
changes  in  neuronal  stimulus  selectivity  reﬂ ect  the  synaptic  modiﬁ ca-
tions that store memory in neural networks, and they devised a synaptic 
“learning rule” to account for how synapses potentiate and depress as the 

BOX 25.3

P A T H   O F   D I S C O V E R Y

Memories of Memory
by Leon Cooper

I have been asked many times: “What led you from physics 

to neuroscience?” The best I can come up with is to repeat 
Humphrey Bogart’s response to Claude Rains in Casablanca: 
“I  was  misinformed.”  After  the  publication  of  our  theory  on 
superconductivity, I worked on other “many-electron” prob-
lems.  I  came  to  believe  that  the  mathematical  techniques 
used  there  could  be  applied  to  “many-neuron”  problems. 
While some of them did prove useful, for the most part they 
were irrelevant. But what was most useful, perhaps, was my 
conviction that theory, essential in the physical sciences, is 
essential in neuroscience as well.

So when I strayed from the lofty realm of theoretical phys-
ics to the earthy problem of the brain, my ﬁ rst effort was to 
attempt to construct networks of neurons that would display 
some of the qualitative features associated with what I called 
animal memory. Initial success was the seduction that lured 
me further into this exotic domain. It is this journey that I will 
describe.

We realized in the early 1970s that networks of neurons 
can  form  distributed  representations  of  the  world  that  are 
“associative” (recollection of one memory can lead to the rec-
ollection of another linked to it by experience) and “content 
addressable” (memories are accessed by content rather than 
by a physical address in the network). Such representations 
are resistant to the loss of individual neurons and synapses 
and thus provide a candidate substrate for memory storage 
in  the  animal  brain.  But  how  can  these  representations  be 

constructed  in  networks  of  neurons?  That  is,  how  can  the 
strengths of the vast numbers of synapses that make up neu-
ronal networks be adjusted to obtain a mapping that corre-
sponds to an appropriate memory?

This might result if synaptic modiﬁ cation (or learning) fol-
lows the famous Hebbian rule. But Hebbian synaptic modiﬁ -
cation needs stabilization. Elie Bienenstock, Paul Munro, and 
I therefore proposed in 1982 a form of bidirectional synaptic 
modiﬁ cation that combines Hebbian modiﬁ cation—synaptic 
potentiation that occurs when pre- and postsynaptic neurons 
are  both  strongly  activated—with  “anti-Hebbian”  synaptic 
weakening  that  occurs  when  presynaptic  activity  happens 
in the absence of a strong postsynaptic response. We fur-
ther proposed that the critical level of postsynaptic response 
at which the polarity of synaptic modiﬁ cation changes from 
weakening to strengthening, called the “modiﬁ cation thresh-
old,” varies according to the history of postsynaptic cell ac-
tivity. Together, these assumptions lead to stabilization and 
various  other  desirable  properties.  The  resulting  theory  has 
become known as BCM synaptic modiﬁ cation.

In the late 1980s I began a long and very fruitful collabo-
ration  with  Mark  Bear  who  was  then  also  at  Brown.  Mark 
and his students performed experiments to test the validity 
of BCM assumptions at excitatory glutamatergic synapses in 
the cerebral cortex. The shape of the BCM synaptic modiﬁ ca-
tion function was ﬁ rst conﬁ rmed by Dudek and Bear (1992) 
in hippocampus, and Kirkwood and Bear (1994) showed that 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   880
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   880

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

881

sensory environment is changed. A key assumption of the BCM theory, 
published in 1982, is that synapses will undergo synaptic weakening in-
stead of LTP when they are active at the same time the postsynaptic cell 
is only weakly depolarized by other inputs. This idea inspired a search 
for long-term synaptic depression in hippocampal area CA1, using stim-
uli that were designed to evoke a modest postsynaptic response. In 1992 
Serena  Dudek  and  Mark  Bear,  working  together  at  Brown  University, 
showed  that  tetanic  stimulation  of  the  Schaffer  collaterals  at  low  fre-
quencies  (1–5  Hz)  indeed  produces  synaptic  weakening  (Figure  25.11). 
Because it occurs only at the stimulated synapses, it is often referred to 
as  homosynaptic   long-term depression (LTD) . 

 It has now been established experimentally that bidirectional plastic-

ity of many cortical synapses is indeed governed by two simple rules: 

 1. Synaptic transmission occurring at the same time as strong depolar-
ization of the postsynaptic neuron causes LTP of the active synapses. 
 2.  Synaptic transmission occurring at the same time as weak or modest de-
polarization of the postsynaptic neuron causes LTD of the active synapses. 

the  result  was  the  same  in  visual  cortex.  Since  then,  simi-
lar ﬁ ndings have been conﬁ rmed in many different regions of 
neocortex in many species of both young and old animals. Of 
particular interest are data showing that the same principles 
of synaptic plasticity apply in the human inferotemporal cor-
tex, a region believed to be a repository of visual memories. 
Together, the data support the idea that very similar princi-
ples guide synaptic plasticity in many species in widely differ-
ent regions of the brain.

According to BCM, the modiﬁ cation threshold,  ␪m, must 
vary depending on the history of postsynaptic cortical activ-
ity. An experimental test of this hypothesis was ﬁ rst reported 
by Kirkwood, Marc Rioult, and Bear (1996). They compared 
the synaptic modiﬁ cation function in the visual cortex of nor-
mal animals with that in the visual cortex of animals reared in 
complete darkness and found a shift of this function in accor-
dance with the theoretical postulate. Elizabeth Quinlan, Ben 
Philpot,  and  Bear,  in  collaboration  with  Richard  Huganir  at 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, went on to show in 1999 
that the ratio of two distinct subunits of the cortical NMDA re-
ceptor is set according to the activation history of the cortex, 
providing a potential mechanism for the sliding modiﬁ cation 
threshold.

Consequences of BCM synaptic modiﬁ cation in networks 
modeled after visual cortex have been shown by my students 
Nathan  Intrator,  Harel  Shouval,  Brian  Blais,  and  many  oth-
ers, using analysis and simulations, to be in agreement with 
experimental observations on the shifts in neuronal selectivity 
that have been observed by rearing animals in various visual 
environments. Thus, the BCM theory provides a bridge be-
tween  the  molecular  mechanisms  of  synaptic  modiﬁ cation 
and  the  systems-level  properties  of  distributed  information 
storage.

Given  the  level  of  skepticism  displayed  when  synaptic 
 modiﬁ cation  ideas  were  discussed  40  years  ago,  I  think  it  is 
reasonable to say that we have made considerable progress. 
Our initial aim to build a theoretical structure relevant to a fun-
damental brain process that was sufﬁ ciently concrete so that 
it could be tested by experiment has been accomplished. It is 
particularly gratifying that theory has inspired experiments that, 
in addition to conﬁ rming the various postulates and predictions 
of  our  theory,  have  led  to  the  discovery  of  new  phenomena 
such as homosynaptic long-term depression and metaplastic-
ity. Possibly most important, we have an excellent example of 
the fruitful interaction of theory with experiment in neuroscience.

References
Bienenstock EL, Cooper LN, Munro PW. 1982. Theory for the devel-
opment of neuron selectivity: orientation speciﬁ city and binocular 
interaction in visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 2:32–48.

Blais B, Cooper LN, Shouval H. 2000. Formation of direction selectivity 
in natural scene environments. Neural Computation 12:1057–1066.
Blais BS, Intrator N, Shouval HZ, Cooper LN. 1998. Receptive ﬁ eld 
formation in natural scene environments: comparison of single-cell 
learning rules. Neural Computation 10:1797–1813.

Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1992. Homosynaptic long-term depression in 
area  CA1  of  hippocampus  and  effects  of  N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor  blockade.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences USA 89:4363–4367.

Kirkwood A, Bear MF. 1994. Homosynaptic long-term depression in 

the visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 14:3404–3412.

Kirkwood A, Rioult MC, Bear MF. 1996. Experience-dependent mod-
iﬁ cation of synaptic plasticity in visual cortex. Nature 381:526–528.
Quinlan EM, Philpot BD, Huganir RL, Bear MF. 1999. Rapid, experi-
ence-dependent expression of synaptic NMDA receptors in visual 
cortex in vivo. Nature Neuroscience 2:352–357.

Shouval H, Intrator N, Cooper LN. 1997. BCM network develops ori-
entation selectivity and ocular dominance in natural scene environ-
ment. Vision Research 37:3339–3342.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   881
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   881

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

882

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Baseline responses

LTD

EPSP
magnitude in 
response to
test stimulation
of input 1

Input 1

Input 2

CA1 neuron

0

(b)  

10

20

30

40

Time (min)

EPSP
magnitude in 
response to
test stimulation
of input 2

Record
EPSP

Baseline responses

0
(c)  

10

20

30

40

Time (min) 

▲ FIGURE 25.11
Homosynaptic LTD in the hippocampus. (a) The response of a CA1 neuron is 
monitored as two inputs are alternately stimulated. LTD is induced in input 1 by 
giving this input a 1 Hz tetanus. (b) The graph shows a record of the experiment. 
The low-frequency tetanus to input 1 (arrow) yields a depressed response to 
stimulation of this input. (c) LTD is input-specific, so there is no change in the 
 response to input 2 after a tetanus to input 1.

 Although these rules apply to many cortical synapses, it is important 
to appreciate that LTD is a widespread form of synaptic plasticity. The 
properties  and  mechanisms  of  LTD  vary  from  one  synapse  type  to  the 
next (Box 25.4). At some synapses, the timing of pre- and postsynaptic 
actions potentials is a key variable. As discussed in Box 25.2, LTP can 
result when the EPSP caused by synaptic glutamate release  precedes  an 
action potential in the postsynaptic neuron; this is an example of  spike 
timing–dependent plasticity . At many of these same synapses, LTD 
can result instead when the EPSP caused by glutamate release  follows  a 
postsynaptic action potential (Figure 25.12). 

 As is the case for LTP, we know most about the mechanism of ho-
mosynaptic LTD in area CA1 of the hippocampus, so this will be our 
focus. 

 Mechanisms of LTD in CA1. At the Schaffer collateral–CA1 synapse, two 
distinct forms of homosynaptic LTD have been described. The ﬁ rst one 
to be discovered depends on activation of the NMDA receptor. The sec-
ond form, discovered a few years later, requires activation of G-protein 
coupled  metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs).  Here we will focus 
on NMDA receptor-dependent LTD. 

 Because  NMDA  receptors  admit  Ca 2  ⫹   to  the  postsynaptic  neuron,  it 
came as no surprise that a rise in postsynaptic [Ca 2  ⫹ ] is necessary to trig-
ger LTD. But how can the same signal, Ca 2  ⫹  entry through the NMDA 
receptor, trigger  both  LTP  and  LTD? The key difference lies in the  level  of 

(a)  

+

Change
in synaptic
strength

0

LTP

LTD

_

Post then pre

Pre then post

-100

0

100

Time difference between post-
and pre-synaptic spiking (ms)

▲ FIGURE 25.12
Spike timing–dependent 
 plasticity. When postsynaptic spikes 
consistently follow the EPSPs induced 
by presynaptic spiking, the synapse 
grows stronger. However, when the post-
synaptic spikes consistently precede the 
EPSPs, the synapse grows weaker. This 
graph relates the change in synaptic 
strength to the relative timing difference.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   882
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   882

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

883

BOX 25.4

B R A I N   F O O D

The Wide World of Long-Term Synaptic Depression

We  saw  in  Chapter  14  that  the  cerebellum  is  important 

for learning and remembering motor skills. The unusual cir-
cuitry  of  the  cerebellar  cortex  suggested  to  David  Marr  at 
the University of Cambridge how this learning might occur. 
The output of the cerebellar cortex arises from large neurons 
called Purkinje cells, and these cells receive two converging 
inputs. Each Purkinje cell receives input from a single climb-
ing ﬁ ber that arises from a nucleus in the medulla called the 
inferior olive. The climbing ﬁ ber synapses are very powerful 
and always cause the Purkinje cell to ﬁ re action potentials. 
Parallel  ﬁ bers  arising  from  cerebellar  granule  cells  provide 
the second input, and the organization is very different. Each 
Purkinje  cell  receives  weak  parallel  ﬁ ber  synapses  from  as 
many as 100,000 different granule cells. Marr proposed that 
this unusual convergence of parallel and climbing ﬁ ber inputs 
onto  Purkinje  cell  dendrites  serves  motor  learning.  He  pro-
posed  that  (1)  the  climbing  ﬁ ber  input  carries  error  signals 
indicating a movement has failed to meet expectations, and 
(2) corrections are made by adjusting the effectiveness of the 
parallel ﬁ ber inputs to the Purkinje cell. The theory was modi-
ﬁ ed by James Albus at the Goddard Space Flight Center in 
Greenbelt, Maryland, to explicitly predict LTD of the parallel 
ﬁ ber synapse if it is active at the same time as the climbing 
ﬁ ber input to the postsynaptic Purkinje cell.

Masao Ito and his colleagues at the University of Tokyo 
tested this idea by pairing electrical stimulation of the climb-
ing ﬁ bers with stimulation of the parallel ﬁ bers. Remarkably, 
they found that after this pairing procedure, activation of the 
parallel  ﬁ bers  alone  resulted  in  a  smaller  postsynaptic  re-
sponse in the Purkinje cell (Figure A). It is now understood 

that  the  requirements  for  induction  of  this  form  of  LTD  are 
a large surge in postsynaptic [Ca2⫹] caused by activation of 
the climbing ﬁ ber, coincident with activation of metabotropic 
glutamate   receptor  1  (mGluR1)  by  the  parallel  ﬁ bers.  This 
conjunction  triggers  the  internalization  of  AMPA  receptors 
and  the  depression  of  synaptic  transmission  at  the  paral-
lel ﬁ ber synapses. A mechanistically similar form of mGluR- 
dependent  LTD  was  later  discovered  in  the  hippocampus, 
although it does not require a Ca2⫹ surge.

At other synapses in the brain, activation of mGluRs trig-
gers LTD by a different mechanism altogether. For example, 
in the nucleus accumbens, activation of postsynaptic mGluR5 
stimulates  the  synthesis  of  endocannabinoids,  which  travel 
retrogradely  to  the  presynaptic  terminal  and  cause  a  per-
sistent depression of glutamate release. (Endocannabinoids 
were introduced in Chapter 6; see Box 6.2.)

Yet another LTD variant has been observed in the neocor-
tex.  Endocannabinoids  in  some  neocortical  pyramidal  neu-
rons are released in response to dendritic action potentials. 
If  these  endocannabinoids  impinge  on  glutamatergic  axon 
terminals  at  the  same  time  they  are  releasing  glutamate, 
then  these  synapses  will  be  depressed.  This  mechanism 
yields a timing requirement on LTD, such that it is induced 
when a postsynaptic spike (causing the release of endocan-
nabinoids) precedes the presynaptic spike by a few tens of 
 milliseconds.

Each mechanism for LTD imposes different rules on the 
patterns of activity that yield synaptic plasticity. We can spec-
ulate that these have evolved to optimize the contribution of 
synaptic plasticity to the functions of different brain circuits.

Stimulate
parallel fibers

Record Purkinje cell
response to parallel
fiber stimulation

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
l
l

j

e
c
 
e
n
k
r
u
P

i

g
n
n
o

i

i
t
i

d
n
o
C

(a)  

Stimulate
climbing fiber

–15

–10

–5

0

5

10

15

Time from pairing of climbing fiber and

parallel fiber stimulation (min)

(b)  

Figure A Cerebellar LTD. 
 (a) The experimental arrangement for 
demonstrating LTD. The magnitude of 
the Purkinje cell response to stimulation 
of a “beam” of parallel ﬁ bers is moni-
tored. Conditioning involves pairing par-
allel ﬁ ber stimulation with climbing ﬁ ber 
stimulation. (b) A graph of an experiment 
performed in this way. After the pairing, 
LTD of the  response to parallel ﬁ ber 
stimulation results.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   883
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   883

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

884

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Long-term
change in 
synaptic
strength

+

0

_

LTP

LTD

Amount of NMDA
receptor activation

during tetanic stimulation

▲ FIGURE 25.13
NMDA receptor activation and bidirec-
tional synaptic plasticity. The long-term 
change in synaptic transmission is 
graphed as a function of the level of 
NMDA receptor activation during condi-
tioning stimulation. The level of NMDA 
receptor activation at which the polarity 
of synaptic modification switches from 
LTD to LTP is called the modification 
threshold.

NMDA receptor activation (Figure 25.13). When the postsynaptic neuron 
is  only  weakly  depolarized,  the  partial  blocking  of  the  NMDA  receptor 
channels by Mg 2  ⫹  prevents all but a trickle of Ca 2  ⫹  into the postsynaptic 
neuron.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  postsynaptic  neuron  is  strongly 
depolarized,  the  Mg 2  ⫹   block  is  displaced  entirely,  and  Ca 2  ⫹   ﬂ oods  into 
the  postsynaptic  neuron.  These  different  types  of  Ca 2  ⫹   response  selec-
tively  activate  different  types  of  enzymes.  Instead  of  the  kinases  that 
are activated by high [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i , modest and prolonged elevations in [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  
activate  protein phosphatases , enzymes that pluck phosphate groups off 
proteins. Therefore, if LTP is putting phosphate groups on, LTD appar-
ently is taking them off. Indeed, biochemical evidence now indicates that 
AMPA  receptors  are  dephosphorylated  in  response  to  stimulation  that 
induces LTD (Figure 25.14). Moreover, the induction of hippocampal LTD 
can also be associated with the internalization of AMPA receptors at the 
synapse. Thus, LTP and LTD appear to reﬂ ect the bidirectional regula-
tion of both the phosphorylation and the number of postsynaptic AMPA 
receptors. 

 Glutamate  Receptor  Trafﬁ cking.  Besides  revealing  much  about  the 
likely synaptic basis for learning and memory, studies of LTP and LTD 
have led to a much deeper understanding of how synaptic transmission is 
maintained in the brain. Current research suggests that AMPA receptors 
in the postsynaptic membrane are continually being added and removed 
even in the absence of synaptic activity. Researchers estimate that half 
the synaptic AMPA receptors are replaced every 15 minutes! However, de-
spite this remarkable turnover, synaptic transmission will remain stable 
as long as one receptor is added whenever one receptor is removed. LTP 
and LTD disrupt this equilibrium, leading to a net increase or decrease in 
the capacity of the synaptic membrane for AMPA receptors. 

 The capacity of the postsynaptic membrane is determined by the size 
of a scaffold of what has been termed  slot proteins . Imagine the scaffold is 
like an egg carton, and the slot proteins form each of the egg cups. AMPA 
receptors are the eggs that ﬁ ll the carton. As long as the size of the carton 
doesn’t change, synaptic transmission is stable even if the individual eggs 
are continually replaced (Figure 25.15). 

 Stable LTP requires increasing the size of the carton and providing new 
eggs. The details of how this occurs at a molecular level remain an active 

Presynaptic

Postsynaptic

Ca2+ influx
via NMDA
receptors

CaCa2+2+Ca2+

NMDA
receptor

[Ca2+] > 5 μM

Protein kinase

S

F

H

LF

S

Calcium 
flux
200 msec

Unphosphorylated
synaptic protein
yields LTD

Phosphorylated
synaptic protein
yields LTP

[Ca2+]  1 μM

Protein 

phosphatase

▲ FIGURE 25.14
A model for how Ca2⫹ can trigger both LTP and LTD in the hippocam-
pus. High-frequency stimulation (HFS) yields LTP by causing a large elevation of 
[Ca2⫹]. Low-frequency stimulation (LFS) yields LTD by causing a smaller elevation 
of [Ca2⫹]. (Source: Adapted from Bear and Malenka, 1994, Fig. 1.)

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   884
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   884

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

885

(a)

Initial steady state

= AMPA receptor
   lacking GluR1

= AMPA receptor
   containing GluR1

= Slot protein

(b) LTP

(d)

LTD

(c) New steady state

(e) New steady state

▲ FIGURE 25.15
An egg carton model of AMPA receptor trafficking at the synapse. Each egg 
represents an AMPA receptor, and the carton represents the capacity of the syn-
apse for receptors, which might be determined by the amount of PSD-95. 
(a) The initial steady state. Each AMPA receptor that is removed is replaced with 
a new receptor. (b) LTP. More PSD-95 is added, increasing the synaptic capacity 
for AMPA receptors. The new receptors (blue) contain the GluR1 subunit. (c) The 
new steady state. Over time, ongoing turnover of receptors replaces those with 
GluR1. (d) LTD. Some PSD-95 is destroyed, decreasing the synaptic capacity for 
AMPA receptors. (e) The new steady state following LTD.

area of research, and today’s conclusions may be overturned by tomorrow’s 
experiments.  However,  there  is  evidence  that  a  protein  called      PSD-95  
(a postsynaptic density protein with a molecular weight of 95 kilodaltons) 
may  comprise  the  egg  carton.  Increasing  the  expression  of  PSD-95  in 
neurons increases the synaptic capacity for AMPA receptors. In addition, 
there is evidence that the new eggs may be AMPA receptors that contain a 
distinctive subunit called  GluR1 . LTP can selectively increase in the num-
ber  of  GluR1-containing  AMPA  receptors  in  the  membrane.  Over  time, 
these receptors are replaced by those that lack GluR1. By analogy, imag-
ine the neuron contains a stash of blue Easter eggs that can be delivered 
to the carton in response to LTP-inducing stimulation. Over time, the blue 
eggs are replaced by uncolored eggs. But because the size of the carton is 
increased, there continues to be a net increase in the number of eggs. 

 Conversely, stable LTD requires reducing the size of the egg carton, 
which  reduces  the  capacity  for  eggs.  Indeed,  research  has  shown  that 
LTD-inducing stimulation leads to both destruction of PSD-95 and a net 
loss of AMPA receptors from the postsynaptic membrane. 

 LTP, LTD, and Memory 
 LTP and LTD have attracted a lot of interest because theoretical work 
shows  that  these  mechanisms  of  synaptic  plasticity  can  contribute  to 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   885
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   885

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

886

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

Record

1   m m

Layer III
Layer IV

Stimulate
layer IV   

Inferotemporal
cortex (area IT)

.1

1

10

100 Hz

)

%

(
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
m
o
r
f
 
e
g
n
a
h
C

25

15

5

0

–5

–15

–25

Frequency of conditioning stimulation

▲ FIGURE 25.16
Bidirectional synaptic modifications in human area IT. Slices of human tem-
poral cortex, removed during the course of surgery to gain access to deeper 
structures, were maintained in vitro. Synaptic responses were monitored follow-
ing  various types of tetanic stimulation. As in rat CA1, stimulation of 1 Hz pro-
duced LTD, while 100 Hz stimulation produced LTP. (Source: Adapted from 
Chen et al., 1996.)

the  formation  of  declarative  memories.  Recent  research  indicates  that 
the  types  of  NMDA  receptor-dependent  synaptic  plasticity  that  have 
been  characterized  in  the  hippocampus  also  occur  throughout  the  neo-
cortex, including area IT where memories of familiar faces are created 
(Figure 25.16). It appears that plasticity at many synapses in the cerebral 
cortex may be governed by similar rules and might use similar mecha-
nisms. (But remember, there are many exceptions to these “rules,” and 
they do not apply to all synapses, even within a single structure.) 

 LTP  and  LTD  are  clearly  appealing  models,  but  what  evidence  links 
them to memory? So far, all we’ve described is a possible neural basis for 
a memory of having one’s brain electrically stimulated! One approach has 
been to insert stimulating and recording electrodes in the hippocampus and 
use these to monitor the state of synaptic transmission during learning. 
Because of the distributed nature of memory, success with this approach 
required the use of a particularly robust type of learning called  inhibitory 
avoidance . In this experiment, a rat learns to associate a place (the dark 
side of a box) with an aversive experience (a foot shock) (Figure 25.17a). 
Animals of all types (from ﬂ ies to humans) will learn to avoid the place 
they received the shock after only one trial (depending, of course, on the 
strength of the shock). This type of learning is not subtle, and neither are the 
patterns of hippocampal activation it produces. The widespread  activation 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   886
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   886

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

887

Light side

Dark side

Stimulate

Record

Door opens

CA3

CA1

Shock delivered

Delay

)
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
%

(
 
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
m
P
S
P
E

 

140

120

100

80

-35

IA training

0

30

Time from training (min)

(b)

(a)
▲ FIGURE 25.17
LTP in CA1 induced by learning. In this experiment, electrodes were implanted 
in the rat’s hippocampus to monitor the strength of synaptic transmission before 
and after inhibitory avoidance training. (a) The rat is placed in a box divided by a 
closed door that separates the light side from the dark side. When the door is 
opened, the rat scurries into the dark side to avoid the light. On the dark side, a 
foot shock is delivered to the rat. To test for the creation of a memory trace, one 
can measure the time it takes for the rat to re-enter the dark side at various time 
points after the initial experience. (b) Recordings of synaptic transmission in area 
CA1 showed evidence of LTP when this type of memory was formed. (Source: 
Adapted from Whitlock et al., 2006.)

of the hippocampus after inhibitory avoidance training gave researchers 
the opportunity to detect changes in synaptic transmission at Schaffer col-
lateral–CA1 synapses, and  voilà! —LTP was observed (Figure 25.17b). In 
other  experiments,  exposing  animals  to  a  novel  environment  without  a 
foot shock caused LTD instead. These experiments tell us that learning 
does indeed induce LTP and LTD at hippocampal synapses. 

 Another approach has been to see whether the molecules involved in 
LTP and LTD are also involved in learning and memory. For example, 
both  forms  of  synaptic  plasticity  require  activation  the  of  NMDA  re-
ceptors. To assess the possible role of hippocampal NMDA receptors in 
learning,  researchers  injected  an  NMDA  receptor  blocker  into  the  hip-
pocampus of rats undergoing inhibitory avoidance training. This treat-
ment prevented formation of a memory of the aversive experience. These 
experiments built on pioneering studies performed by Richard Morris in 
the late 1980s at the University of Edinburgh, in which NMDA receptor 
blockers were infused into the hippocampus of rats while they were being 
trained in a water maze (see Figure 24.20). Unlike normal animals, these 
rats  failed  to  learn  the  rules  of  the  game  or  the  location  of  the  escape 
platform. This ﬁ nding provided the ﬁ rst evidence that NMDA-receptor-
dependent processes play a role in memory. 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   887
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   887

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

888

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

 A revolutionary new approach to the molecular basis of learning and 
memory  was  introduced  by  Susumu  Tonegawa  at  the  Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Tonegawa, who switched to neuroscience after 
winning  the  1987  Nobel  Prize  for  his  research  in  immunology,  recog-
nized that molecules and behavior could be connected by manipulating 
the genes of experimental animals. This approach had already been tried 
with  success  in  simple  organisms  like  fruit  ﬂ ies  (Box  25.5),  but  not  in 
mammals. In their ﬁ rst experiment in mice, Tonegawa, Alcino Silva, and 
their colleagues “knocked out” (deleted) the gene for one subunit ( ␣ ) of 
CaMKII,  and  found  parallel  deﬁ cits  in  hippocampal  LTP  and  memory. 
Since then, many genes have been manipulated in mice, with the aim of 
assessing the role of LTP and LTD mechanisms in learning. LTP, LTD, 
and learning clearly have many common requirements. 

 Despite the power of this genetic approach, it has some serious limitations. 
Loss of a function, like LTP or learning, might be a secondary consequence 
of developmental abnormalities caused by growing up without a particular 
protein. Moreover, since the protein is missing in all cells that normally ex-
press it, pinpointing where and how a molecule contributes to learning can 
be difﬁ cult. For these reasons, researchers have attempted to devise ways to 
restrict their genetic manipulations to speciﬁ c times and speciﬁ c locations. 
In one interesting example of this approach, Tonegawa and his colleagues 

BOX 25.5

O F   S P E C I A L   I N T E R E S T

Memory Mutants

Of  the  several  hundred  thousand  proteins  manufactured 

by a neuron, some may be more important than others when 
it comes to learning. It is even possible that some proteins 
are  uniquely  involved  in  learning  and  memory.  Needless  to 
say, we could gain considerable insight about the molecular 
basis of learning and learning disorders if such hypothetical 
“memory molecules” could be identiﬁ ed.

Recall that each protein molecule is the readout of a gene. 
One  way  to  identify  a  “memory  protein”  is  to  delete  genes 
one at a time and see if speciﬁ c learning deﬁ cits result. This is 
precisely the strategy that Seymour Benzer, Yadin Dudai, and 
their colleagues at the California Institute of Technology tried 
using  the  fruit  ﬂ y  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Drosophila  has 
long been a favorite species of geneticists, but one might rea-
sonably question to what extent a fruit ﬂ y learns. Fortunately, 
Drosophila  can  perform  the  same  tricks  that  other  inverte-
brate species like Aplysia have mastered. For example, fruit 
ﬂ ies can learn that a particular odor predicts a shock. They 
demonstrate this memory after training by ﬂ ying away when 
the odor is presented. The strategy is to produce mutant ﬂ ies 
by exposing them to chemicals or X-rays. They are then bred 
and their offspring are screened for behavioral deﬁ cits. The 
ﬁ rst mutant displaying a fairly speciﬁ c learning deﬁ cit was de-
scribed  in  1976  and  called  Dunce.  Other  memory-deﬁ cient 
mutants  were  later  described  and  given  vegetable  names, 
such as Rutabaga and Cabbage. The next challenge was to 
identify  exactly  which  proteins  had  been  deleted.  It  turned 

out that all three of these memory mutants lacked particular 
enzymes in intracellular signaling pathways.

In these early Drosophila studies, the mutations that were 
induced occurred at random, followed by extensive screen-
ing, ﬁ rst to ﬁ nd a learning deﬁ cit and then to determine exactly 
which gene was missing. More recently, however, genetic en-
gineering techniques have made it possible to make very spe-
ciﬁ c deletions of known genes, not only in Drosophila but also 
in mammals. Thus, for example, in 1992 Susumu Tonegawa, 
Alcino  Silva,  and  their  colleagues  at  the  Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology were able to isolate and delete one 
subunit (␣) of the calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein ki-
nase II in mice. Experiments had already suggested that this 
enzyme is critical for the induction of long-term potentiation. 
Sure  enough,  these  mice  had  a  clear  deﬁ cit  in  LTP  in  the 
hippocampus  and  the  neocortex.  And,  when  tested  in  the 
Morris water maze, they were found to have a severe memory 
deﬁ cit. Thus, these mice were memory mutants, just like their 
distant cousins Dunce, Rutabaga, and Cabbage.

Are we to conclude that the missing proteins in these mu-
tants are the elusive “memory molecules”? No. All the mutants 
displayed other behavioral deﬁ cits in addition to memory. We 
can only conclude, at present, that animals growing up with-
out these proteins are unusually poor learners. However, the 
studies do underscore the critical importance of speciﬁ c sec-
ond messenger pathways in translating a ﬂ eeting experience 
into a lasting memory.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   888
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   888

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

889

found a way to restrict the genetic deletion of NMDA receptors to the CA1 
region in mice, starting at about 3 weeks of age. These animals showed a 
striking deﬁ cit in LTP, LTD, and water maze performance, thus revealing 
an essential role for CA1 NMDA receptors in this type of learning. 

 If too little hippocampal NMDA receptor activation is bad for learning 
and  memory,  what  would  happen  if  we  boosted  the  number  of  NMDA 
receptors? Amazingly, animals engineered to produce more than the nor-
mal number of NMDA receptors show  enhanced  learning ability in some 
tasks. Taken together, the pharmacological and genetic studies show that 
hippocampal NMDA receptors play a key role not only in synaptic modiﬁ -
cation, such as LTP and LTD, but also in learning and memory. 

 Synaptic Homeostasis 
 Synaptic plasticity is widespread in the brain, and analysis by theoretical 
neuroscientists has revealed that this can present a problem. To illustrate, 
let’s consider Hebbian synaptic strengthening. Synapses potentiate when 
they are active at the same time as their postsynaptic target neuron. As 
they undergo LTP, these synapses exert more inﬂ uence on the postsyn-
aptic cell, making it more likely to respond and thereby causing further 
potentiation of all synapses that are active at the same time. Computer 
simulations show that eventually all synapses on the neuron will potenti-
ate, and stimulus selectivity (and memory) will be lost. A similar problem 
can arise with synaptic weakening: By reducing postsynaptic activity, LTD 
makes synapses more likely to be weakened until they eventually disap-
pear altogether. Unchecked synaptic plasticity can therefore lead to un-
stable neuronal responses. As we learned in Chapter 15,  homeostasis  is the 
term used to describe regulatory processes that maintain the internal en-
vironment of the body within a narrow physiological range. There must be 
homeostatic mechanisms that provide stability and keep synaptic weights 
within a useful dynamic range. We will discuss two such mechanisms here. 

 Metaplasticity. Consider again the graph in Figure 25.13. It shows that 
weak NMDA receptor activation causes LTD and strong NMDA receptor 
activation causes LTP. At some level of moderate NMDA receptor activa-
tion, between that required for LTD and for LTP, there is no net change. 
This value is called the  synaptic modiﬁ cation threshold . The BCM theory 
proposed that the value of the modiﬁ cation threshold adjusts depending 
on the history of integrated postsynaptic activity. Therefore, when activity 
rises, due perhaps to too much LTP, the modiﬁ cation threshold slides up, 
making LTP more difﬁ cult to produce. Conversely, if activity levels fall, 
due  perhaps  to  too  much  LTD,  the  modiﬁ cation  threshold  slides  down, 
making LTD less likely and LTP easier to produce. This general concept, 
that the rules of synaptic plasticity change depending on the history of 
synaptic  or  cellular  activity,  is  called   metaplasticity .  Computer  simu-
lations show that ongoing adjustments of the value of the modiﬁ cation 
threshold ensure that synaptic modiﬁ cations are constrained to maintain 
neuronal stimulus selectivity and memory. 

 Research inspired by the BCM theory has conﬁ rmed the existence of 
metaplasticity.  Although  many  different  mechanisms  contribute  to  the 
sliding modiﬁ cation threshold, one appears to be adjustments in the mo-
lecular  composition  of  NMDA  receptors  themselves.  NMDA  receptors 
are composed of four subunits: two NR1 subunits and two NR2 subunits. 
At many synapses in the cerebral cortex, two types of NR2 subunits are 
used to construct the receptor: NR2A and NR2B. The ratio of NR2A to 
NR2B subunits determines the properties of the receptor, including how 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   889
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   889

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

890

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

much Ca 2  ⫹  can pass and what intracellular enzymes are activated. LTP 
is  favored  when  more  NR2B-containing  receptors  are  expressed  at  the 
synapse,  whereas  LTD  is  favored  when  more  NR2A-containing  recep-
tors are expressed. The ratio of NR2A- to NR2B-containing receptors de-
pends in part on the relative abundance of these proteins in the neuron. 
Research has shown that after a period of high cortical activity, NR2A 
levels increase and NR2B levels decrease, promoting LTD over LTP. On 
the other hand, NR2B levels increase and NR2A levels decrease after a 
period of low cortical activity, promoting LTP over LTD (Figure 25.18). 

Presynaptic
axon terminal

NMDA 
receptor

NMDA 
receptor

Ca2+

Ca2+

Postsynaptic
dendritic spine

High cortical activity

NR2B

NR2B

Low cortical activity

NR2B

NR2A

P
S
P
E
n

 

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
C

+

0

–

After deprivation
NR2B > NR2A

LTD

LTP

After experience
NR2A > NR2B

Postsynaptic response 

▲ FIGURE 25.18
The sliding modification threshold. Experiments in which cortical activity is re-
duced for several days reveal a shift in the curve that relates stimulation fre-
quency to LTD and LTP. Lowering activity favors LTP over LTD, whereas raising 
activity favors LTD over LTP. This shift is accounted for in part by changes in the 
subunit composition of NMDA receptors. NMDA receptors with more NR2B admit 
more Ca2⫹. (Source: Adapted from Bear, 2003.)

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   890
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   890

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

891

These  changes  in  NMDA  receptor  subunit  composition  occur  relatively 
slowly, over the course of hours, presumably because they depend on the 
synthesis of new protein subunits. 

 Synaptic Scaling. In a classic series of experiments dating back to the 
1930s, the eminent physiologist Walter Cannon (introduced in Chapter 18) 
showed that cutting the nerve to a muscle leads to an increase in the elec-
trical excitability and sensitivity of the muscle to ACh, the neurotransmit-
ter of the neuromuscular junction. This phenomenon, called  denervation 
supersensitivity , was later shown to be a widespread response of neurons 
to the loss of synaptic input. Denervation is not necessary to induce su-
persensitivity, however. A similar response occurs if the neurotransmit-
ter receptors are blocked pharmacologically or if muscles or neurons are 
electrically silenced with tetrodotoxin (TTX). Cannon suggested this was 
likely to represent a homeostatic response of excitable cells to the loss of 
input. 

 An analogous phenomenon occurs in cortical neurons after manipula-
tions of overall synaptic input. When cortical neurons are silenced with 
TTX, their electrical excitability increases, as does the strength of excit-
atory synapses that impinge on them. But what does this gross adjust-
ment  of  overall  synaptic  strength  do  to  the  carefully  tuned  patterns  of 
synaptic  weights  that  have  stored  memories?  Gina  Turrigiano  and  her 
colleagues at Brandeis University discovered that  relative differences  in 
the  strengths  of  synapses  on  a  neuron  are  unchanged,  even  as  the  ab-
solute levels go up or down; that is, the neuron adjusts by multiplying 
(or dividing) the values of all synaptic weights by the same number. This 
adjustment of absolute synaptic effectiveness that preserves the relative 
distribution of synaptic weights is called  synaptic scaling . 

 As  with  metaplasticity,  multiple  mechanisms  contribute  to  synaptic 
scaling. One appears to use Ca 2  ⫹  entering the soma through voltage-gated 
Ca 2  ⫹  channels and activation of calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase IV 
(CaMKIV, a close relative of CaMKII) to regulate gene expression. A pe-
riod of elevated activity increases CaMKIV-dependent gene expression, 
whereas  a  period  of  inactivity  decreases  it.  The  ultimate  consequence 
of these changes in gene expression is the cellwide removal or insertion 
of  glutamate  receptors  at  synapses  (both  NMDA  receptors  and  AMPA 
receptors). Like metaplasticity, scaling occurs over a longer time period 
(hours to days) than does the induction of LTP or LTD (seconds to min-
utes). This time is necessary for the synthesis (or degradation) of proteins 
required to adjust the strengths of the thousands of synapses impinging 
on the neuron. 

 With  metaplasticity  and  scaling,  the  neuron  keeps  a  lid  on  the  roil-
ing boil of ongoing synaptic plasticity. When activity is too high for too 
long, these mechanisms kick in to promote LTD and scale down synap-
tic  weights.  When  activity  is  too  low,  they  promote  LTP  and  scale  up 
 synaptic weights. Proper neuronal function, experience-dependent shifts 
in selectivity, and learning and memory all require the appropriate bal-
ance of synaptic change and stability. 

MEMORY CONSOLIDATION 
MEMMORY CCONSOLIDATION 

 We have seen that memory can result from experience-dependent altera-
tions in synaptic transmission. In most examples of synaptic plasticity, 
transmission is initially modiﬁ ed as a result of changing the number of 
phosphate groups that are attached to proteins in the synaptic membrane. 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   891
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   891

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

892

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

In the case of LTD and LTP, this occurs at the postsynaptic AMPA recep-
tor and at proteins regulating AMPA receptor number at the synapse. 

 Adding phosphate groups to a protein can change synaptic effective-
ness and form a memory, but only as long as the phosphate groups re-
main attached to that protein. Phosphorylation as a long-term memory 
consolidation mechanism is problematic for two reasons: 
 1. Phosphorylation of a protein is not permanent. Over time, the phos-

phate groups are removed, thereby erasing the memory. 

 2. Protein molecules themselves are not permanent. Most proteins in the 
brain have a lifespan of less than 2 weeks and are undergoing a con-
tinual process of replacement. Memories tied to changes in individual 
protein molecules would not be expected to survive this rate of molecu-
lar turnover. 
 Thus, we need to consider mechanisms that might convert what ini-
tially is a change in synaptic protein phosphorylation to a form that can 
last a lifetime. 

 Persistently Active Protein Kinases 
 Phosphorylation of synaptic proteins, and memory, could be maintained 
if  the  kinases,  the  enzymes  that  attach  phosphate  groups  to  proteins, 
were made to stay “on” all the time. Normally the kinases are tightly reg-
ulated and are “on” only in the presence of a second messenger. But what 
if learning changed these kinases so they no longer required the second 
messenger? The relevant synaptic proteins would remain phosphorylated 
all the time. 

 Recent evidence suggests that some kinases can become independent 
of their second messengers. Let’s consider as examples the changes that 
occur in two protein kinases during LTP in the hippocampus. 

 CaMKII.  Recall  that  the  entry  of  Ca 2  ⫹   into  the  postsynaptic  cell  and 
the activation of CaMKII are required for the induction of LTP in CA1. 
Research has shown that CaMKII stays “on” long after [Ca 2  ⫹ ] i  has fallen 
back to a low level. 

 CaMKII consists of ten subunits arranged in a rosette pattern. Each 
subunit catalyzes the phosphorylation of substrate proteins in response to 
a rise in Ca 2  ⫹ -calmodulin. How might CaMKII be switched permanently 
on? The answer requires some knowledge of how this enzyme is normally 
regulated (Figure 25.19). Each subunit is built like a pocket knife, with 
two parts connected by a hinge. One part, the  catalytic   region , performs 
the phosphorylation reaction. The other part is called the  regulatory   re-
gion . Normally, in the absence of the appropriate second messenger, the 
knife is closed and the catalytic region is covered by the regulatory region. 
This keeps the enzyme “off.” The normal action of the second messenger 
(Ca 2  ⫹ -calmodulin) is to pry the knife open, but only as long as the mes-
senger is present. When the messenger is removed, the molecule usually 
snaps shut, and the kinase turns off again. After LTP, however, it appears 
that the knife fails to close completely in the  ␣  subunits of CaMKII. The 
exposed catalytic region continues to phosphorylate CaMKII substrates. 
 How is the hinge of the protein kinase molecule kept open? The answer 
lies in the fact that CaMKII is an  autophosphorylating protein kinase ; each 
subunit within the CaMKII molecule can be phosphorylated by a neigh-
boring subunit. The consequence of subunit phosphorylation is that the 
hinge stays open. If the initial activation of CaMKII by Ca 2  ⫹ -calmodulin 
is sufﬁ ciently strong, autophosphorylation will occur at a faster rate than 

Regulatory

Catalytic

Second
messenger
(Ca2+- calmodulin)

Phosphorylation 
of proteins

P

Phosphorylation 
of proteins

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 25.19
The regulation of CaMKII. (a) The 
 hingelike subunit of CaMKII is normally 
“off” when the catalytic region is cov-
ered by the regulatory region. (b) The 
hinge opens upon activation of the mol-
ecule by Ca2⫹-bound calmodulin, freeing 
the catalytic region to add phosphate 
groups to other proteins. (c) A large 
 elevation of Ca2⫹ can cause phosphory-
lation (P) of one subunit by another 
( autophosphorylation), which enables the 
catalytic region to stay “on”  permanently.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   892
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   892

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

893

dephosphorylation, and the molecule will be switched on. Persistent ac-
tivity of CaMKII could contribute to the maintenance of synaptic poten-
tiation, for example, by keeping the postsynaptic AMPA receptors phos-
phorylated. The general idea that an autophosphorylating kinase could 
store information at the synapse, initially proposed by John Lisman at 
Brandeis University, is called the  molecular switch hypothesis . 

 Protein  Kinase  M  Zeta.  Recent  research  has  implicated  a  new  player 
in the maintenance of LTP and certain forms of memory,  protein kinase 
M  zeta    (PKM  ␨  ) .  Excitement  about  the  role  of  this  protein  kinase  origi-
nates with the work of Todd Sacktor at the State University of New York 
Downstate  Medical  Center.  Sacktor  and  his  colleagues  showed  that  an 
intracerebral injection of a small peptide called ZIP, designed to speciﬁ -
cally inhibit PKM ␨ , can erase LTP and memories established many days 
before the injection. Simply put, ZIP zaps memories. This intriguing ﬁ nd-
ing suggests that persistent PKM ␨  activity maintains changes in synaptic 
strength by continuing to phosphorylate its substrates. ZIP, by temporar-
ily inhibiting the kinase, allows these substrates to become dephosphory-
lated, thus erasing the memory trace. 

 How does PKM ␨  become persistently active in response to synaptic ac-
tivity? A current model suggests that the mRNA for this kinase exists at 
synapses but is normally not translated into protein. Strong synaptic ac-
tivation, and the corresponding rise in [Ca 2  ⫹ ], trigger a burst of synaptic 
protein synthesis and the birth of new PKM ␨  molecules. PKM ␨  phosphor-
ylates synaptic proteins involved in regulating AMPA receptor number 
and, in addition, proteins involved in the regulation of mRNA translation 
at  the  synapse.  By  switching  translation  on  in  the  absence  of  elevated 
[Ca 2  ⫹ ], PKM ␨  levels can be replenished in the face of ongoing degradation 
of the kinase molecules. 

 The erasure of memory by ZIP has been reproduced by several laborato-
ries, but at this point it is unclear if it acts speciﬁ cally by inhibiting PKM ␨ . 
It is certain, however, that unlocking the mystery of how ZIP works will 
reap great rewards in our understanding of memory mechanisms. 

 Protein Synthesis and Memory Consolidation 
 The  idea  that  protein  synthesis  is  important  for  memory  consolidation 
is not new. It has been investigated extensively since the introduction of 
drugs in the 1960s that selectively inhibit the assembly of protein from 
messenger  RNA.  Protein  synthesis  inhibitors  can  be  injected  into  the 
brains of experimental animals as they are trained to perform a task, and 
deﬁ cits  in  learning  and  memory  can  be  assessed.  These  studies  reveal 
that  if  brain  protein  synthesis  is  inhibited  at  the  time  of  training,  the 
animals learn normally but fail to remember when tested days later. A 
deﬁ cit in long-term memory is also often observed if the inhibitors are in-
jected shortly after training. However, the memories become increasingly 
resistant to the inhibition of protein synthesis as the interval between the 
training and the injection of inhibitor is increased. These ﬁ ndings indi-
cate a requirement for new protein synthesis during the period of memory 
consolidation,  when  short-term  memories  are  converted  into  long-term 
ones. 

 Consider  the  example  of 

(see 
Figure 25.17a). As we discussed, the memory is created in a single trial 
and  can  be  measured  by  how  much  a  rat  avoids  the  location  where  it 
received a foot shock (usually the dark side of a box with two rooms sepa-
rated by a door). Normally, this memory is very stable and lasts a long 

inhibitory  avoidance  memory 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   893
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   893

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

894

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

time (days to weeks depending on the strength of the shock). If the animal 
is injected with a protein synthesis inhibitor shortly before the training, 
learning occurs normally, as measured by the animal’s immediate avoid-
ance of the dark side. However, this memory fades within a day without 
new protein synthesis. Similarly, inhibiting protein synthesis at the time 
of a tetanus has no effect on the induction of LTP in the hippocampus, 
but instead of lasting days to months, the synaptic potentiation gradually 
disappears over a few hours. 

 Synaptic Tagging and Capture. From what we have learned so far, mem-
ory  formation  appears  initially  to  involve  the  rapid  modiﬁ cation  of  ex-
isting  synaptic  proteins. These  modiﬁ cations,  perhaps  with  the  help  of 
persistently active kinases, work against the factors that would erase a 
memory (such as molecular turnover). It’s a losing battle, unless a new 
protein  arrives  at  the  modiﬁ ed  synapse  and  converts  the  temporary 
change  in  the  synapse  to  a  more  permanent  one.  But  how  do  the  pro-
teins required for consolidating synaptic changes and memories ﬁ nd the 
modiﬁ ed synapses? An answer is suggested by a clever series of experi-
ments  performed  collaboratively  in  the  late  1990s  by  Julietta  Frey  in 
Magdeburg, Germany, and Richard Morris in Edinburgh, Scotland. 

 Frey  had  shown  previously  that  LTP  caused  by  “weak”  tetanic 
 stimulation, which activates brieﬂ y only a small number of synapses, de-
cays back to baseline over the course of an hour or two because it fails to 
trigger protein synthesis. On the other hand, repeated episodes of “strong” 
stimulation, recruiting a larger number of synapses, induces long-lasting 
LTP because it stimulates new protein synthesis (Figure 25.20a,b). Frey 
and Morris asked if the newly synthesized proteins acted only on the syn-
apses whose activity triggered their synthesis. They found that the wave 
of protein synthesis triggered by strong stimulation of one synaptic input 
to a hippocampal neuron would also consolidate the LTP caused by the 
weak stimulation of a second input (Figure 25.20c). It appeared that the 
weak stimulation endows synapses with a  tag  that enables them to  cap-
ture  the newly synthesized proteins that consolidate LTP. By varying the 
interval between the weak and strong stimulation of the two inputs, Frey 
and Morris were able to determine that the tag lasts about 2 hours. In this 
way, a trivial event that would otherwise be forgotten, like last Tuesday’s 
dinner, might be seared into long-term memory if it occurs within 2 hours 
of a momentous event that triggers a wave of new protein synthesis, like 
the ﬁ rst kiss of the love of your life. The molecular mechanism for synap-
tic tagging has not been fully elucidated, but it should come as no surprise 
that it is believed to involve phosphorylation of synaptic proteins by vari-
ous kinases, including CaMKII and PKM ␨ . 

 CREB and Memory. What regulates the protein synthesis that is required 
for memory consolidation? Recall that the very ﬁ rst step in protein syn-
thesis is the generation of an mRNA transcript of a gene (see Figure 2.9). 
This process of gene expression is regulated by  transcription factors  in 
the nucleus. One transcription factor is called the  cyclic AMP response 
element binding protein (CREB) . CREB is a protein that binds to spe-
ciﬁ c segments of DNA, called  cyclic AMP response elements   (CREs) , and 
functions to regulate the expression of neighboring genes (Figure 25.21). 
There are two forms of CREB: CREB-2 represses gene expression when 
it binds to the CRE; CREB-1 activates transcription, but only when it is 
phosphorylated by protein kinase A. In a seminal study published in 1994, 
Tim Tully and Jerry Yin at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory showed that 
CREB regulates the gene expression required for memory consolidation 
in the fruit ﬂ y  Drosophila melanogaster  (see Box 25.5). 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   894
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   894

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

895

Weak stimulation 

Strong stimulation

EPSP
magnitude in
response to
test stimulation

Protein synthesis

0
(a)  

1

2

3

4

5

7

8

9

Strong stimulation

Time (hours) 

Weak stimulation of input 1

EPSP
magnitude in
response to
test stimulation
of input 1

EPSP
magnitude in
response to
test stimulation
of input 2

Input 1

Input 2

CA1 neuron

Record
EPSP

Protein synthesis

Strong stimulation of input 2

Protein synthesis

(b)  

0

1

2

3

4

Time (hours) 

▲ FIGURE 25.20
Synaptic tagging and capture. (a) The persistence of LTP depends on whether 
synaptic stimulation is strong enough to trigger protein synthesis in the postsyn-
aptic neuron. Weak stimulation induces LTP of the EPSP that rapidly decays. 
Strong stimulation induces LTP and stimulates the protein synthesis that converts 
a temporary synaptic change into a long-lasting one. (b) Two inputs to the same 
neuron are stimulated in alternation. Weak stimulation of input 1 induces LTP that 
would normally fade, but if it is followed an hour later by strong stimulation of in-
put 2, the wave of new proteins can be captured by synapses tagged by the 
weak stimulation of input 1. The timely arrival of new protein converts the short-
lasting LTP into long-lasting LTP.

 In their ﬁ rst series of experiments, Tully and Yin bred  Drosophila  that 
would make extra copies of the ﬂ y’s version of CREB-2 (called dCREBb) 
when the animal was warmed up (a miracle of ﬂ y genetic engineering that 
is  not  possible  in  mammals).  This  manipulation  repressed  all  gene  ex-
pression that is regulated by the CREs, and also blocked memory consoli-
dation in a simple memory task. Thus, CREB-regulated gene expression 
is critical for memory consolidation in fruit ﬂ ies. More interesting, how-
ever, is what they found when they generated ﬂ ies that could make extra 
copies of ﬂ y CREB-1 (called dCREBa). Now, tasks that would take normal 
ﬂ ies  many  trials  to  learn  could  be  remembered  after  a  single   training 
trial.  These  mutant  ﬂ ies  had  a  “photographic”  memory!  And  these  re-
sults are not peculiar to ﬂ ies; CREB has been implicated in regulating the 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   895
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   895

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

896

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

CREB-2

No transcription

DNA

CRE

GENE

CREB-1

CREB-2

CRE

GENE

Phosphorylated

CREB-1

P

P

CRE

GENE

Transcription

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

▲ FIGURE 25.21
The regulation of gene expression by CREB. Shown here is a piece of DNA con-
taining a gene whose expression is regulated by the interaction of a CREB protein 
with a CRE on the DNA. (a) CREB-2 functions as a repressor of gene expression. 
(b) CREB-1, an activator of gene expression, can displace CREB-2. (c) When CREB-1 
is phosphorylated by protein kinase A (and other kinases), transcription can ensue.

consolidation of sensitization in  Aplysia , as well as long-term potentia-
tion and spatial memory in mice. 

 As we have discussed, not all experiences are remembered equally. Some 
are seared permanently into our memories. Others remain with us only 
brieﬂ y and then fade away. The modulation of gene expression by CREB 
provides a molecular mechanism that can control the strength of a memory. 
 A failure of memories to consolidate is a feature of numerous brain dis-
orders as well as the aging process. The recent understanding of how con-
solidation is regulated has spawned a new industry focused on developing 
memory-enhancing  drugs.  Such  drugs  could  greatly  improve  the  qual-
ity of life for individuals with neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer’s. 
However, there is also the allure of performance enhancement in healthy 
people. By analogy, consider the widespread use of such drugs as Viagra 
introduced to treat male erectile dysfunction. “Viagra for the brain,” as 
such  memory  enhancers  have  been  whimsically  called,  continues  to  be 
pursued. Although compounds have been discovered that boost memory 
consolidation,  their  side  effects  have  thus  far  prevented  their  develop-
ment  into  drugs.  As  was  the  case  for  drugs  that  enhance  athletic  per-
formance, the ethics of using memory boosters in the absence of a clear 
medical justiﬁ cation are certain to be hotly debated. 

 Structural Plasticity and Memory. How does the synapse make use of the 
timely occurrence of gene expression and the arrival of a new protein? 
One possibility is that newly synthesized proteins (such as PKM ␨ ) switch 
local synaptic protein synthesis on in order to maintain a synaptic change. 
However, to account for the fact that blocking protein synthesis fails to 
disrupt memories that have already been consolidated, we would have to 
further posit that these newly synthesized proteins have a lifespan that 
is long enough to survive the temporary inhibition of protein synthesis. 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   896
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   896

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

897

New synapse

formed

Old synapse
eliminated

New synapse
strengthened

New synapse retained

but weakened

New synapse
strengthened

Axon

Dendrite

Synapses

Axons

(a)  

Original
situation

(b)  

New experience/

(c)  

Prolonged experience/

(d)  

learning

training

Experience
removed

(e)  

Repeated experience/

relearning

▲ FIGURE 25.22
Synaptic remodeling in the cerebral cortex during learning and memory. This 
illustration summarizes some of the structural changes that have been observed 
in the neocortex when mice are exposed to new sensory environments that are 
encoded as memory. (Source: Adapted from Hofer and Bonhoeffer, 2010, Fig. 1.)

 Another possibility is that the lasting imprint of new protein synthesis 
is the construction (or demolition) of synapses. Work on the invertebrate 
Aplysia  has shown that some types of long-term (but not short-term) mem-
ory can cause a  doubling  of the number of synapses made by some neurons! 
 Do similar structural changes occur in the mammalian nervous system 
after learning? This is a difﬁ cult problem to solve experimentally because 
of the complexity of the mammalian brain and the distributed nature of 
memory. One approach has been to compare brain structure in animals 
that have had ample opportunity to learn with that of animals that have 
had little chance to learn. For example, putting a laboratory rat in a “com-
plex”  environment  ﬁ lled  with  toys  and  playmates  (other  rats)  has  been 
shown to increase the number of synapses per neuron in the occipital cor-
tex by about 25%. Very recently, advances in microscopy and methods for 
cell labeling (see Box 2.1) have made it possible for researchers to image 
the same neuron in living mice over the course of many days. Altering the 
visual or tactile environment stimulates the  formation of  new dendritic 
spines, important sites of excitatory synaptic transmission, in the visual 
and somatosensory cortex, respectively (Figure 25.22). As exposure to this 
new environment is increased, these new synapses grow larger and other 
synapses on the same dendrites are eliminated, as would be expected if the 
mechanisms of LTP and LTD are at work to encode a memory. The new 
spines may shrink if the animal is returned to the original environment 
but do not disappear, consistent with the interpretation that these persis-
tent spines contribute to a long-term memory of the altered environment. 
 It is important to recognize that there are limits to structural plasticity 
in the adult brain. As we discussed in Chapter 23, large changes in brain 
circuitry are generally conﬁ ned to critical periods of early life. The growth 
and retraction of most axons in the adult central nervous system (CNS) are 
restricted to no more than a few tens of micrometers. But it is now very clear 
that the end of a critical period does not necessarily signify an end to changes 
in the structure of axon terminals or the effectiveness of their synapses. 

 CONCLUDING REMARKS 
CONCCLUDIING REMARKS

 Learning and memory can occur at synapses. Regardless of the species, 
brain  location,  and  memory  type,  many  of  the  underlying  mechanisms 
appear  to  be  universal.  Events  are  represented  ﬁ rst  as  changes  in  the 

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   897
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   897

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

898

PART FOUR    THE CHANGING BRAIN

electrical activity of the brain, then as intracellular second messengers, 
and next as modiﬁ cations of existing synaptic proteins. These temporary 
changes are converted to permanent ones, and long-term memories, by 
altering the structure of the synapse. In many forms of memory, this in-
volves new protein synthesis and the assembly of new microcircuits. In 
other forms of memory, existing circuits may be disassembled. In either 
case, learning requires many of the same mechanisms that were used to 
reﬁ ne brain circuitry during development. 

 One universal feature is the involvement of Ca 2  ⫹ . Clearly, calcium does 
far more than build strong bones and teeth. Not only is it critical for neu-
rotransmitter secretion and muscle contraction, but it is also involved in 
nearly every form of synaptic plasticity. Because it is a charge-carrying 
ion  on  the  one  hand  and  a  potent  second  messenger  substance  on  the 
other, Ca 2  ⫹  has a unique ability to directly couple electrical activity with 
long-term changes in the brain. 

 Can  basic  neuroscience  research  take  us  from  ions  to  intelligence? 
From calcium to cognition? If you remember what you have learned in 
this textbook, and if synaptic plasticity truly is the basis of declarative 
memory, it would appear that the answer is yes. 

K E Y   T E R M S

Memory Acquisition
memory consolidation (p. 867)
distributed memory (p. 869)
long-term potentiation (LTP) 

(p. 874)

dentate gyrus (p. 874)
Ammon’s horn (p. 874)
CA3 (p. 874)
CA1 (p. 874)
perforant path (p. 874)

Schaffer collateral (p. 874)
tetanus (p. 875)
input speciﬁ city (p. 876)
cooperativity (p. 876)
BCM theory (p. 880)
long-term depression (LTD) 

(p. 881)

spike timing–dependent 

 plasticity (p. 882)

metaplasticity (p. 889)
synaptic scaling (p. 891)

Memory Consolidation
molecular switch hypothesis 

(p. 893)

cyclic AMP response element 

binding protein (CREB) 
(p. 894)

R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.  What is the most common cellular correlate of memory formation in the cerebral cortex? What 

does this say about how memories are stored?

2.  How does one account for the graceful degradation of memory as neurons die over the lifespan?
3.  How can LTD contribute to memory?
4.  Sketch the trisynaptic circuit of the hippocampus.
5.  How can the mechanisms of LTP serve associative memory?
6.  What property of the NMDA receptor makes it well suited to detect coincident presynaptic and 
postsynaptic  activity?  How  could  Ca2⫹  entering  through  the  NMDA  receptor  possibly  trigger 
both LTP and LTD in CA1 and the neocortex?

7.  Compare and contrast metaplasticity and synaptic scaling.
8.  In H.M and R.B. (see Chapter 24), destruction of the hippocampus appears to have impaired the 
mechanism that “ﬁ xes” new memories in the neocortex. Propose a mechanism involving CREB 
explaining why this might be true.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   898
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   898

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

CHAPTER 25    MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF LEARNING AND MEMORY

899

F U R T H E R   R E A D I N G   

Abraham WC, Robins A. 2005. Memory reten-
tion: the synaptic stability versus plasticity 
dilemma. Trends in Neuroscience 28:73–78.

Kandel ER. 2006. In Search of Memory: The 
Emergence of a New Science of Mind. New 
York: Norton.

Bear MF. 1996. A synaptic basis for memory stor-

age in the neocortex. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 93:13453–13459.
Cooper LN, Bear MF. 2012. The BCM theory 
of synapse modiﬁ cation at 30: interaction 
of theory and experiment. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 13:798–810.

Kessels HW, Malinow R. 2009. Synaptic AMPA 

receptor plasticity and behavior. Neuron 
61:340–350.

Malenka RC, Bear MF. 2004. LTP and LTD: an 

embarrassment of riches. Neuron 44:5–21.

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   899
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   899

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   900
865-900_Bear_25_revised_final.indd   900

12/20/14   6:30 AM
12/20/14   6:30 AM

  5-HT     See  serotonin. 

  A1     See  primary auditory cortex. 
  absolute refractory period    The period of time, 
measured from the onset of an action potential, 
during which another action potential cannot be 
triggered. 

  accommodation    The focusing of light by changing 

the shape of the eye’s lens. 

  acetylcholine (ACh)    An amine that serves as a 

neurotransmitter at many synapses in the periph-
eral and central nervous systems, including the 
 neuromuscular junction. 

  ACh     See  acetylcholine. 
  ACTH     See  adrenocorticotropic hormone. 
  actin    A cytoskeletal protein in all cells and the major 

thin ﬁ lament protein in a skeletal muscle ﬁ ber; 
causes muscle contraction by speciﬁ c chemical 
 interactions with myosin. 

  action potential    A brief ﬂ uctuation in membrane 
potential caused by the rapid opening and closing 
of voltage-gated ion channels; also known as spike, 
nerve impulse, or discharge. Action potentials sweep 
like a wave along axons to transfer information from 
one place to another in the nervous system. 

  activational effect    The ability of a hormone to 

activate reproductive processes or behaviors in the 
mature organism. 

that is the site of neurotransmitter release. 

  adenosine triphosphate (ATP)    The molecule that 

is the cell’s energy source. The hydrolysis of ATP 
to produce adenosine diphosphate (ADP) releases 
energy that fuels most of the biochemical reactions 
of the neuron. ADP is converted back to ATP in the 
mitochondria. 

  adenylyl cyclase    An enzyme that catalyzes the 
conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), a second 
 messenger. 

  adrenal cortex    The outer segment of the adrenal 

gland; releases cortisol when stimulated by the 
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone. 

  adrenal medulla    The inner segment of the adrenal 

gland, innervated by preganglionic sympathetic 
ﬁ bers; releases epinephrine. 

  adrenaline    A catecholamine neurotransmit-

ter synthesized from norepinephrine; also called 
 epinephrine. 

 GLOSSARY 

  adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)    A hor-

mone released by the anterior pituitary in response 
to corticotropin-releasing hormone; stimulates the 
release of cortisol from the adrenal gland. 

  affective aggression    A threatening or defensive 
form of aggression accompanied by vocalizations 
and a high level of ANS activity. 

  affective disorder    A psychiatric condition charac-
terized by disordered emotions; also called mood 
disorder. Examples are major depression and 
 bipolar disorder. 

  affective neuroscience    The study of the neural 

basis of mood and emotion. 

  afferent    An axon coursing toward and innervating a 

given structure.  See also  efferent. 

  after-hyperpolarization    The hyperpolarization 

that follows strong depolarization of the membrane; 
the last part of an action potential, also called 
undershoot. 

  agnosia    The inability to recognize objects, even 

though simple sensory skills appear to be normal; 
most commonly caused by damage to posterior 
 parietal areas of the brain. 

  agoraphobia    A mental disorder characterized by 
severe anxiety about being in situations in which 
escape might be difﬁ cult or embarrassing. 

  alpha motor neuron    A neuron that innervates the 

extrafusal ﬁ bers of skeletal muscle. 

projects neurites laterally in the inner plexiform 
layer. 

  amino acid    A chemical building block of protein 
molecules, containing a central carbon atom, an 
amino group, a carboxyl group, and a variable R 
group. 

  Ammon’s horn    A layer of neurons in the hippocam-

pus that sends axons into the fornix. 

  amnesia    A severe loss of memory or the ability to 
learn.  See also  anterograde amnesia, retrograde 
amnesia. 

  AMPA receptor    A subtype of glutamate receptor; a 

glutamate-gated ion channel that is permeable to 
Na ⫹  and K ⫹ . 

  ampulla    The bulge along a semicircular canal, 

which contains the hair cells that transduce 
rotation. 

  amygdala    An almond-shaped nucleus in the anterior 
temporal lobe thought to be involved in emotion and 
certain types of learning and memory. 

  active zone    A presynaptic membrane differentiation 

  amacrine cell    A neuron in the retina of the eye that 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   901
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   901

901901

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

902

GLOSSARY

  anterograde transport    Axoplasmic transport from 

energy to a sensory stimulus. 

  anabolism    The biosynthesis of organic molecules 

from nutritive precursors; also called anabolic 
 metabolism.  See also  catabolism. 

  analgesia    The absence of normal sensations of pain. 
  androgens    Male sex steroidal hormones, the most 

important of which is testosterone. 

  anion    A negatively charged ion.  See also  cation. 
  anomia    The inability to ﬁ nd words. 
  anorectic peptide    A neuroactive peptide that acts 

to inhibit feeding behavior; examples are chole-
cystokinin (CCK), alpha-melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone ( ␣ MSH), and cocaine- and amphetamine-
regulated transcript peptide (CART). 

  anorexia    A state of negative energy balance in 

which energy expenditure exceeds energy intake. 
  anorexia nervosa    A psychiatric disorder charac-
terized by an obsession with food, an intense fear 
of gaining weight, and voluntary maintenance of 
weight at below-normal levels. 

  ANS     See  autonomic nervous system. 
  antagonist muscle    A muscle that acts against 

 another at the same joint. 

  anterior    An anatomical reference meaning toward 

the nose or rostral. 

  anterior cingulate cortex    Region of the cerebral 
cortex, just anterior to the descending limb of the 
corpus callosum, which has been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of mood disorders. 

  anterograde amnesia    The inability to form new 

memories. 

a neuron’s soma to the axon terminal. 

  antidepressant drug    A drug that treats the symp-

toms of depression by elevating brain levels of mono-
amine neurotransmitters; examples are tricyclics, 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, and SSRIs. 

  antidiuretic hormone (ADH)     See  vasopressin. 
  anxiety disorder    One of a group of mental disorders 
characterized by irrational or inappropriate expres-
sions of fear, including panic disorder, agoraphobia, 
and OCD. 

  anxiolytic drug    A medication that reduces anxiety; 

examples are benzodiazepines and SSRIs. 

  aphasia    A partial or complete loss of language 

abilities following brain damage.  See also  Broca’s 
 aphasia, conduction aphasia, Wernicke’s aphasia. 

  apoptosis    A mechanism of orderly, genetically 

 programmed cell death. 

  aqueous humor    The ﬂ uid between the cornea and 

the lens of the eye. 

  arachnoid membrane    The middle of the three me-
ninges, the three membranes that cover the surface 
of the central nervous system. 

  arcuate nucleus    A nucleus in the periventricular 

area of the hypothalamus containing a large number 
of neurons sensitive to changes in leptin levels, con-
tributing to the regulation of energy balance. 

  area 17    Primary visual cortex. 
  area IT    An area of neocortex, on the inferior surface 

of the temporal lobe, that is part of the ventral 
visual processing stream; contains neurons with 
responses to complex objects, including faces, and 
appears to be involved in visual memory. 
  area LIP     See  lateral intraparietal cortex. 
  area MT    An area of neocortex, at the junction of 

the parietal and temporal lobes, that receives 
input from primary visual cortex and appears to be 
specialized for the processing of object motion; also 
called V5. 

  area V4    An area of neocortex, anterior to striate 
cortex, that is in the ventral visual processing 
stream and appears to be important for both shape 
 perception and color perception. 

  aspinous neuron    A neuron lacking dendritic spines. 
  associative learning    The learning of associations 

between events; two types are usually distin-
guished: classical conditioning and instrumental 
conditioning. 

  astrocyte    A glial cell in the brain that supports 

neurons and regulates the extracellular ionic and 
chemical environment. 

  ataxia    Abnormally uncoordinated and inaccu-

rate movements, often associated with cerebellar 
 dysfunction. 

  atonia    The absence of muscle tone. 
  ATP     See  adenosine triphosphate. 
  attention    The state of selectively allocating mental 

  attention-deﬁ cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)   
 A behavioral condition characterized by inattention, 
hyperactivity, and impulsiveness. 

  attenuation reﬂ ex    The contraction of muscles in 

the middle ear, resulting in a reduction in auditory 
sensitivity. 

  audition    The sense of hearing. 
  auditory canal    A channel leading from the pinna 

to the tympanic membrane; the entrance to the 
internal ear. 

  auditory–vestibular nerve    Cranial nerve VIII, con-
sisting of axons projecting from the spiral ganglion 
to the cochlear nuclei. 

  autonomic ganglia    Peripheral ganglia of the 

sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the 
autonomic nervous system. 

  autonomic nervous system (ANS)    A system of 

central and peripheral nerves that innervates the 
internal organs, cardiovascular system, and glands; 
also called visceral PNS. The ANS consists of sym-
pathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric divisions. 

  autoradiography    A method for visualizing sites of 

radioactive emissions in tissue sections. 

  autoreceptor    A receptor in the membrane of a 

presynaptic axon terminal that is sensitive to the 
neurotransmitter released by that terminal. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   902
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   902

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  axial muscle    A muscle that controls movements of 

the trunk of the body. 

  axon    A neurite specialized to conduct nerve impulses, 

or action potentials, normally away from the soma. 

  axon collateral    A branch of an axon. 
  axon hillock    A swelling of the axon where it joins 

the soma. 

  axon terminal    The end region of an axon, usually a 
site of synaptic contact with another cell; also called 
terminal bouton or presynaptic terminal. 

  axoplasmic transport    The process of transporting 

materials down an axon. 

  ballism    A movement disorder caused by damage to 
the subthalamus, characterized by violent, ﬂ inging 
movements of the extremities. 

  barbiturate    A class of drugs with sedative, general 
anesthetic, and anticonvulsant effects; barbiturates 
act in part by binding to GABAA receptors and 
 prolonging their inhibitory actions. 

  basal forebrain complex    Several cholinergic nuclei 

of the telencephalon, including the medial septal 
nuclei and basal nucleus of Meynert. 

  basal ganglia    A collection of associated cell groups 

in the basal forebrain, including the caudate nu-
cleus, putamen, globus pallidus, and subthalamus. 
  basal telencephalon    The region of the telencepha-

lon lying deep in the cerebral hemispheres. 

  basic emotions    A small set of emotions thought to 
be unique indivisible experiences that are innate 
and universal across cultures. 

  basic theories of emotion    Explanations of emo-

tions based on the principle that there are a small 
set of hard-wired emotions that are universal across 
cultures. 

  basilar membrane    A membrane separating the 

scala tympani and scala media in the cochlea in the 
inner ear. 

  BCM theory    A theory proposing that synapses are 

bidirectionally modiﬁ able. Synaptic potentiation 
results when presynaptic activity correlates with a 
strong postsynaptic response, and synaptic depres-
sion results when presynaptic activity correlates 
with a weak postsynaptic response. An extension of 
the Hebb synapse concept, proposed by Bienenstock, 
Cooper, and Munro at Brown University.  See also  
Hebb synapse, Hebbian modiﬁ cation. 

  benzodiazepine    A class of drugs with antianxi-

ety, sedative, muscle-relaxing, and anticonvulsant 
effects; acts by binding to GABAA receptors and 
prolonging their inhibitory actions. 

  binocular competition    A process believed to 

occur during the development of the visual system 
whereby the inputs from the two eyes actively com-
pete to innervate the same cells. 

  binocular receptive ﬁ eld    The receptive ﬁ eld of a 
neuron that responds to stimulation of either eye. 

GLOSSARY

903

  binocular rivalry    Perception that alternates in 

time between the image seen by one eye and a dis-
similar image seen by the other eye. 

  binocular visual ﬁ eld    The portion of the visual 

ﬁ eld viewed by both eyes. 

  bipolar cell    In the retina, a cell that connects photo-

receptors to ganglion cells. 

  bipolar disorder    A psychiatric affective disorder 

characterized by episodes of mania, sometimes 
interspersed with episodes of depression; also called 
manic-depressive disorder. 

  bipolar neuron    A neuron with two neurites. 
  blob    A collection of cells, mainly in primary visual 
cortical layers II and III, characterized by a high 
level of the enzyme cytochrome oxidase. 

  blob pathway    A visual information-processing 

pathway that passes through the parvocellular and 
koniocellular layers of the LGN and converges on 
the blobs of striate cortical layer III; believed to 
process information about object color. 

  blood–brain barrier    A specialization of the walls 

of brain capillaries that limits the movement of 
bloodborne substances into the extracellular ﬂ uid of 
the brain. 

  bottom-up attention    Attention reﬂ exively directed 
to a salient external stimulus; also called exogenous 
attention. 

  brain    The part of the central nervous system con-

tained in the skull, consisting of the cerebrum, 
cerebellum, brain stem, and retinas. 

  brain stem    The diencephalon, midbrain, pons, and 

medulla. (Some anatomists exclude the diencephalon.) 

  Broca’s aphasia    A language disturbance in which 

a person has difﬁ culty speaking or repeating words 
but can understand language; also known as motor 
or nonﬂ uent aphasia. 

  Broca’s area    A region of the frontal lobe associated 

with Broca’s (motor) aphasia when damaged. 

  bulimia nervosa    A psychiatric disorder character-

ized by large, uncontrolled eating binges followed by 
compensatory behavior, such as forced vomiting. 

  bundle    A collection of axons that run together 

but do not necessarily have the same origin and 
destination. 

  CA1    A region of Ammon’s horn in the hippocampus 

that receives input from the neurons of CA3. 

  CA3    A region of Ammon’s horn in the hippocampus 
that receives input from the neurons of the dentate 
gyrus. 

  calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 

(CaMK)    A protein kinase activated by elevations of 
internal Ca 2  ⫹  concentration. 

  calcium pump    An ion pump that removes cytosolic 

Ca 2  ⫹ . 

  CAM     See  cell-adhesion molecule. 
  cAMP     See  cyclic adenosine monophosphate. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   903
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   903

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

904

GLOSSARY

  Cannon–Bard theory    A theory of emotion propos-

ing that emotional experience is independent of 
emotional expression and is determined by the 
 pattern of thalamic activation. 

  capsule    A collection of axons that connect the cere-

brum with the brain stem. 

  cardiac muscle    A type of striated muscle found only 

in the heart; it contracts rhythmically even in the 
absence of innervation. 

  catabolism    The breaking down of complex nutrient 
molecules into simpler molecules; also called cata-
bolic metabolism.  See also  anabolism. 

  catecholamines    The neurotransmitters dopamine, 

norepinephrine, and epinephrine. 

  cation    A positively charged ion.  See also  anion. 
  caudal    An anatomical reference meaning toward the 

tail, or posterior. 

  caudate nucleus    A part of the basal ganglia in the 

basal forebrain, involved in motor control. 

  CCK     See  cholecystokinin. 
  cell-adhesion molecule (CAM)    A molecule on 

the cell surface that causes cells to adhere to one 
another. 

  cell assembly    A group of simultaneously active neu-

rons that represents an object held in memory. 

  cell body    The central region of the neuron contain-

ing the nucleus; also called soma or perikaryon. 

  center-surround receptive ﬁ eld    A visual receptive 

ﬁ eld with a circular center region and a surround 
region forming a ring around the center; stimula-
tion of the center produces a response opposite that 
generated by stimulation of the surround. 

  central nervous system (CNS)    The brain (includ-

ing the retinas) and spinal cord.  See also  peripheral 
nervous system. 

  central pattern generator    A neural circuit that 

gives rise to rhythmic motor activity. 

  central sulcus    The sulcus in the cerebrum that 
divides the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe. 

  cerebellar cortex    A sheet of gray matter lying just 

under the pial surface of the cerebellum. 

cortex that receives input from mossy ﬁ bers and 
gives rise to parallel ﬁ bers that innervate Purkinje 
cells. Plasticity of the synapses between granule 
cells and Purkinje cells is believed to be important 
for motor learning. 

  cerebellar hemispheres    The lateral regions of the 

cerebellum. 

  cerebellum    A structure derived from the rhomben-

cephalon, attached to the brain stem at the pons; an 
important movement control center. 

  cerebral aqueduct    A canal ﬁ lled with cerebrospinal 

ﬂ uid within the midbrain. 

  cerebral cortex    The layer of gray matter that lies 

just under the surface of the cerebrum. 

  cerebral hemispheres    The two sides of the ce-
rebrum, derived from the paired telencephalic 
vesicles. 

  cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF)    In the central nervous 

system, the ﬂ uid produced by the choroid plexus 
that ﬂ ows through the ventricular system to the 
subarachnoid space. 

  cerebrum    The largest part of the forebrain; also 

called telencephalon. 

  cGMP     See  cyclic guanosine monophosphate. 
  channelopathy    A human genetic disease caused by al-
terations in the structure and function of ion channels. 

  channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2)    A light-sensitive 

cation channel, originally isolated from green algae, 
which can be expressed in neurons and used to con-
trol their activity using light. 

  characteristic frequency    The sound frequency 

to which a neuron in the auditory system gives its 
greatest response. 

  chemical synapse    A synapse in which presynaptic 

activity stimulates the release of neurotransmit-
ter, which activates receptors in the postsynaptic 
membrane. 

  chemoafﬁ nity hypothesis    The hypothesis that chem-

ical markers on growing axons are matched with 
complementary chemical markers on their targets. 
  chemoattractant    A diffusible molecule that acts 

over a distance to attract growing axons. 

  chemoreceptor    Any sensory receptor selective for 

chemicals. 

  chemorepellent    A diffusible molecule that acts over 

a distance to repel growing axons. 

  cholecystokinin (CCK)    A peptide found within 
some neurons of the central and peripheral ner-
vous systems and in some endothelial cells lining 
the upper gastrointestinal tract; a satiety signal 
that inhibits feeding behavior, in part, by acting 
on axons of the vagus nerve that respond to gastric 
 distension. 

  cholinergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 

produce and release acetylcholine. 

ing a single linear thread of DNA. 

  ciliary muscle    A muscle that controls the shape of 

the eye’s lens. 

about 1 day. 

  circadian rhythm    Any rhythm with a period of 

  classical conditioning    A learning procedure in 
which a stimulus that evokes a measurable re-
sponse is associated with another stimulus that 
normally does not evoke this response. 

  climbing ﬁ ber    An axon of an inferior olive neuron 
that innervates a Purkinje cell of the cerebellum. 
Climbing ﬁ ber activity is an important trigger for 
LTD, a form of synaptic plasticity believed to be 
important for motor learning. 

  cerebellar granule cell    A neuron in the cerebellar 

  chromosome    A structure in the cell nucleus contain-

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   904
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   904

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  clock gene    A gene that is critically involved in the 

molecular mechanism of the circadian rhythm; clock 
genes are translated into proteins that regulate 
their own transcription, and their expression rises 
and falls over a cycle of about 24 hours. 

  CNS     See  central nervous system. 
  cochlea    A spiral bony structure in the inner ear that 

contains the hair cells that transduce sound. 

  cochlear ampliﬁ er    Outer hair cells, including the 

motor proteins in the outer hair cell membrane, 
that amplify displacements of the basilar membrane 
in the cochlea. 

  cochlear nucleus     See  dorsal cochlear nucleus, ven-

tral cochlear nucleus. 

  cognitive map theory    The idea that the hippo-

campus is specialized to form a spatial map of the 
environment. 

  color-opponent cell    A cell in the visual system with 
an excitatory response to wavelengths of light of one 
color and an inhibitory response to wavelengths of 
another color; the color pairs that cancel each other 
are red–green and blue–yellow. 

  commissure    Any collection of axons that connect 

one side of the brain with the other side. 

  complex cell    A type of visual cortical neuron that 

has an orientation-selective receptive ﬁ eld without 
distinct ON and OFF subregions. 

  concentration gradient    A difference in concentra-

tion from one region to another. Ionic concentra-
tion gradients across the neuronal membrane help 
determine the membrane potential. 

  conductance     See  electrical conductance. 
  conduction aphasia    A type of aphasia associated 

with damage to the arcuate fasciculus, charac-
terized by good comprehension and speech but 
 difﬁ culty repeating words. 

  cone photoreceptor    A photoreceptor in the retina 

containing one of three photopigments that are 
maximally sensitive to different wavelengths of 
light. Cones are concentrated in the fovea, special-
ized for daytime vision, and responsible for all color 
vision.  See also  rod photoreceptor. 

  conjunctiva    The membrane that folds back from the 

eyelids and attaches to the sclera of the eye. 

  connectome    A detailed wiring diagram of how neu-

rons connect with one another via synapses. 

  consciousness    Awareness of external stimuli and 

internal thoughts and feelings. 

  contralateral    An anatomical reference meaning on 

the opposite side of the midline. 

  cooperativity    The property of long-term potentia-

tion, reﬂ ecting the requirement that many inputs be 
active at the same time during a tetanus to induce 
LTP.  See also  long-term potentiation. 

  cornea    The transparent external surface of the 

GLOSSARY

905

  coronal plane    An anatomical plane of section 

that divides the nervous system into anterior and 
 posterior parts. 

  corpus callosum    The great cerebral commissure, 

consisting of axons connecting the cortex of the two 
cerebral hemispheres. 

  cortex    Any collection of neurons that forms a thin 

sheet, usually at the brain’s surface. 

  cortical module    The unit of cerebral cortex that 

is necessary and sufﬁ cient to analyze one discrete 
point in a sensory surface. 

  cortical plate    A cell layer of the immature cerebral 

cortex containing undifferentiated neurons. 

  cortical white matter    A collection of axons lying 

just below the cerebral cortex. 

  corticospinal tract    The tract that originates in the 

neocortex and terminates in the spinal cord; in-
volved in the control of voluntary movement. 

  corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)    A hor-
mone released by neurons in the paraventricular 
nucleus of the hypothalamus; stimulates the release 
of ACTH from the anterior pituitary. 

  cortisol    A steroid hormone released by the adrenal 
cortex; mobilizes energy reserves, suppresses the 
immune system, and has direct actions on some 
CNS neurons. 

  co-transmitter    One of two or more different neu-

rotransmitters that are released from a single 
presynaptic nerve terminal. 

  cranial nerves    Twelve pairs of nerves that arise 
from each side of the brain stem, numbered from 
anterior to posterior. Cranial nerve I is actually 
the olfactory tract, and cranial nerve II is the optic 
nerve; both are parts of the central nervous system. 
Cranial nerves III–XII, which are in the peripheral 
nervous system, perform many diverse functions. 

  CRH     See  corticotropin-releasing hormone. 
  critical period    A limited period of time when a par-
ticular aspect of brain development is sensitive to a 
change in the external environment. 

  CSF     See  cerebrospinal ﬂ uid. 
  cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)    A sec-

ond messenger formed from adenosine triphosphate 
by the action of the enzyme adenylyl cyclase. 

  cyclic AMP response element binding protein 

(CREB)    A protein that binds to speciﬁ c regions of 
DNA (cyclic AMP response elements) and functions 
to regulate gene transcription; a key regulator of 
protein synthesis–dependent memory consolidation. 
  cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)    A sec-
ond messenger formed from guanosine triphosphate 
by the action of the enzyme guanylyl cyclase. 

  cytoarchitectural map    A map, usually of the cere-
bral cortex, based on cytoarchitectural differences. 
  cytoarchitecture    The arrangement of neuronal cell 

bodies in various parts of the brain. 

eye. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   905
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   905

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

906

GLOSSARY

  cytochrome oxidase    A mitochondrial enzyme 

concentrated in cells that form the blobs in primary 
visual cortex. 

  cytoplasm    Cellular material contained by the cell 
membrane, including the organelles but excluding 
the nucleus. 

  cytoskeleton    The internal scaffolding that gives a 

cell its characteristic shape; consists of microtu-
bules, neuroﬁ laments, and microﬁ laments. 

  cytosol    The watery ﬂ uid inside a cell. 

  DA     See  dopamine. 
  DAG     See  diacylglycerol. 
  Dale’s principle    The idea that a neuron has a 

unique identity with respect to neurotransmitter. 
  dark adaptation    The process by which the retina 

becomes more sensitive to light in dim light. 

  dark current    The inward sodium current that oc-

curs in photoreceptors in the dark. 

  declarative memory    Memory for facts and events. 
  default mode network    An interconnected group of 

brain areas that are consistently more active when the 
brain is at rest than during active behavioral tasks. 
  delayed non-match to sample (DNMS)    A behav-
ioral task in which animals are trained to displace 
one of two alternative objects that does not match a 
previously seen sample object. 

  dendrite    A neurite specialized to receive synaptic 

inputs from other neurons. 

  dendritic spine    A small sac of membrane that pro-

trudes from the dendrites of some cells and receives 
synaptic input. 

  dendritic tree    All the dendrites of a single neuron. 
  dense-core vesicle     See  secretory granule. 
  dentate gyrus    A layer of neurons in the hippocam-
pus that receives input from the entorhinal cortex. 

  deoxyribonucleic acid     See  DNA. 
  depolarization    A change in membrane potential, 
taking it from the value at rest (e.g., –65 mV) to a 
less negative value (e.g., 0 mV). 

  dermatome    A region of skin innervated by the pair 

of dorsal roots from one spinal segment. 

  diacylglycerol (DAG)    A second messenger molecule 
formed by the action of phospholipase C on the mem-
brane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol-4, 5-bispho-
sphate. DAG activates the enzyme protein kinase C. 

  diathesis–stress hypothesis of mood disorders   
 A hypothesis suggesting that depression is caused 
by a combination of genetic predisposition and 
 environmental stress. 

  diencephalon    A region of the brain stem derived 

from the prosencephalon (forebrain). Diencephalic 
structures include the thalamus and hypothalamus. 
  differentiation    During embryonic development, the 

process by which structures become more complex 
and functionally specialized. 

  diffuse modulatory system    One of several systems 

of CNS neurons that project widely and diffusely 
onto large areas of the brain and use modulatory 
neurotransmitters, including dopamine, norepi-
nephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine. 

  diffusion    The temperature-dependent movement of 
molecules from regions of high concentration to re-
gions of low concentration, resulting in a more even 
distribution. 

  dimensional theories of emotion    Explanations 
of emotions in which each emotion is built from 
emotional components such as level of arousal and 
emotional strength. 

  diopter    A unit of measurement for the refractive 

power of the eye; the reciprocal of the focal distance. 

  direction selectivity    The property of cells in the 

visual system that respond only when stimuli move 
within a limited range of directions. 

  distal muscle    A muscle that controls the hands, 

feet, or digits. 

  distributed memory    The concept that memories 

are encoded by widespread synaptic modiﬁ cations of 
many neurons, not by a single synapse or cell. 

  DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)    A double-stranded 
molecule constructed from four nucleic acids that 
contains the genetic instructions for a cell. 

  DNMS     See  delayed non-match to sample. 
  dopa    A chemical precursor of dopamine and the 

  dopamine (DA)    A catecholamine neurotransmitter 

other catecholamines. 

synthesized from dopa. 

  dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia    A hy-

pothesis suggesting that schizophrenia is caused by 
excessive activation of D2 receptors in the mesocor-
ticolimbic dopamine system in the brain. 

  dorsal    An anatomical reference meaning toward the 

back. 

  dorsal cochlear nucleus    A nucleus in the medulla 
that receives afferents from the spiral ganglion in 
the cochlea of the inner ear. 

  dorsal column    A white matter tract on the dorsal 
side of the spinal cord, carrying touch and proprio-
ceptive axons to the brain stem. 

  dorsal column–medial lemniscal pathway    An 

ascending somatic sensory pathway that mediates 
information about touch, pressure, vibration, and 
limb proprioception. 

  dorsal column nucleus    One of a pair of nuclei 

located in the posterior medulla; target of dorsal 
column axons, mediating touch and proprioceptive 
input from the limbs and trunk. 

  dorsal horn    The dorsal region of the spinal cord 

containing neuronal cell bodies. 

  dorsal longitudinal fasciculus    A bundle of axons 
reciprocally connecting the hypothalamus and mid-
brain periaqueductal gray matter. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   906
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   906

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  dorsal root    A bundle of sensory neuron axons that 

emerges from a spinal nerve and attaches to the dor-
sal side of the spinal cord. Dorsal root axons bring in-
formation into the spinal cord.  See also  ventral root. 
  dorsal root ganglion    A collection of cell bodies of the 

sensory neurons that are part of the somatic PNS. 
There is one dorsal root ganglion for each spinal nerve. 
  duplex theory of sound localization    The principle 

that two schemes function in sound localization: 
interaural time delay at low frequencies and inter-
aural intensity difference at high frequencies. 

  dura mater    The outermost of the three meninges, 

the membranes that cover the surface of the central 
nervous system. 

  dyslexia    Difﬁ culty learning to read despite normal 

intelligence and training. 

  easy problems of consciousness    Phenomena 

related to consciousness that can be studied by sci-
entiﬁ c methods; not the hard problem of the neural 
basis of conscious experience. 
  EEG     See  electroencephalogram. 
  efferent    An axon originating in and coursing away 

from a given structure.  See also  afferent. 

  electrical conductance    The relative ability of an 

electrical charge to migrate from one point to another, 
represented by the symbol g and measured in siemens 
(S). Conductance is the inverse of resistance and is 
related to electrical current and voltage by Ohm’s law. 

  electrical current    The rate of movement of elec-

trical charge, represented by the symbol I and 
 measured in amperes (amp). 

  electrical potential    The force exerted on an electri-
cally charged particle, represented by the symbol V 
and measured in volts; also called voltage or poten-
tial difference. 

  electrical resistance    The relative inability of an 

electrical charge to migrate from one point to another, 
represented by the symbol R and measured in ohms 
(⍀). Resistance is the inverse of conductance and is 
related to electrical current and voltage by Ohm’s law. 

  electrical self-stimulation    Electrical stimulation 
that an animal can voluntarily deliver to a portion 
of its brain. 

  electrical synapse    A synapse in which electrical 

current ﬂ ows directly from one cell to another via a 
gap junction. 

  electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)    A treatment for 

major depression that involves eliciting electrical 
seizure activity in the brain. 

  electroencephalogram (EEG)    A measurement 
of electrical activity generated by the brain and 
recorded from the scalp. 

  endocannabinoid    A natural (endogenous) chemi-
cal that binds to, and activates, cannabinoid (CB) 
receptors. 

GLOSSARY

907

  endocochlear potential    The voltage difference be-

tween the endolymph and the perilymph, about 80 mV. 

  endocytosis    The process by which a bit of the cell 

membrane is pinched off, internalized, and con-
verted to an intracellular vesicle.  See also  exocytosis. 

  endogenous attention    Attention voluntarily di-

rected by the brain to serve a behavioral goal; also 
called top–down attention. 

  endolymph    The ﬂ uid that ﬁ lls the scala media in 

the cochlea of the inner ear, containing high K ⫹  and 
low Na ⫹  concentrations. 

  endorphin    One of many endogenous opioid peptides 

with actions similar to those of morphine; present 
in many brain structures, particularly those related 
to pain. 

  engram    The physical representation or location of a 

memory; also called memory trace. 

  enteric division    A division of the autonomic ner-

vous system that innervates the digestive organs; 
consists of the myenteric and submucous plexuses. 

  entorhinal cortex    A cortical region in the medial 

temporal lobe that occupies the medial bank of the 
rhinal sulcus; provides input to the hippocampus. 

  ependymal cell    A type of glial cell that provides the 

lining of the brain’s ventricular system. 

  ephrin    A protein secreted by neurons in many parts 
of the developing nervous system that helps estab-
lish topographic axonal connections. 

  epilepsy    A chronic brain disorder characterized by 

recurrent seizures. 

  epinephrine    A catecholamine neurotransmit-

ter synthesized from norepinephrine; also called 
adrenaline. 

  EPSP     See  excitatory postsynaptic potential. 
  EPSP summation    A simple form of synaptic in-

tegration whereby excitatory postsynaptic poten-
tials combine to produce a larger postsynaptic 
depolarization. 

  equilibrium potential     See  ionic equilibrium potential. 
  estrogens    Female steroidal hormones, the most im-

portant of which are estradiol and progesterone. 

  estrous cycle    The female reproductive cycle in most 

nonprimate mammals in which there are periodic 
episodes of estrus or “heat.” 

  eustachian tube    An air-ﬁ lled tube connecting the 

middle ear to the nasal cavities. 

  excitable membrane    Any membrane capable of 
generating action potentials. The membrane of 
axons and muscle cells is excitable. 

  excitation–contraction coupling    The physiologi-
cal process by which the excitation of a muscle cell 
leads to its contraction. 

  excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)   
 Depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane 
potential by the action of a synaptically released 
neurotransmitter. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   907
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   907

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

908

GLOSSARY

  exocytosis    The process whereby material is released 

from an intracellular vesicle into the extracellular 
space by fusion of the vesicle membrane with the 
cell membrane.  See also   endocytosis. 

  exogenous attention    Attention reﬂ exively directed 
to an external stimulus because of its salience; also 
called bottom-up attention. 

  extension    The direction of movement that opens a joint. 
  extensor    A muscle that causes extension when it 

contracts. 

  extracellular matrix    The network of ﬁ brous pro-

teins deposited in the space between cells. 

  extrafusal ﬁ ber    A muscle ﬁ ber in skeletal muscle 

that lies outside muscle spindles and receives inner-
vation from alpha motor neurons. 

  extraocular muscle    A muscle that moves the eye in 

the orbit. 

  falling phase    The part of an action potential charac-
terized by a rapid fall of membrane potential from 
positive to negative. 

  fasciculation    A process in which axons growing 

together stick to one another. 

  fast motor unit    A motor unit with a large alpha 

motor neuron innervating rapidly contracting and 
rapidly fatiguing white muscle ﬁ bers. 

  ﬂ exion    The direction of movement that closes a joint. 
  ﬂ exor    A muscle that causes ﬂ exion when it contracts. 
  follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)    A hormone 
secreted by the anterior pituitary; its diverse roles 
include the growth of follicles in the ovaries and the 
maturation of sperm in the testes. 

  forebrain    The region of the brain derived from the 

rostral primary embryonic brain vesicle; also called 
prosencephalon. Forebrain structures include the 
telencephalon and the diencephalon. 

  fornix    A bundle of axons that originates in the hip-
pocampal formation, loops around the thalamus, 
and terminates in the diencephalon. 

  fourth ventricle    The CSF-ﬁ lled space within the 

hindbrain. 

  fovea    The pit or depression in the retina at the 

center of the macula; in humans, the fovea contains 
only cone photoreceptors and is specialized for high-
acuity vision. 

  frequency    The number of sound waves or other dis-

crete events per second, expressed in hertz (Hz). 

  frontal eye ﬁ eld (FEF)    A cortical area in the frontal 

lobe involved in the generation of saccadic eye 
movements. 

  frontal lobe    The region of the cerebrum lying an-

terior to the central sulcus under the frontal bone. 

  frontoparietal attention network    A group of in-

terconnected brain areas involved in guiding visual 
attention. 

  FSH     See  follicle-stimulating hormone. 

  GABA     See  gamma-aminobutyric acid. 
  GABAergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 
produce and release gamma-aminobutyric acid. 

  gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)    An amino acid 

synthesized from glutamate; the major inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. 

  gamma motor neuron    A motor neuron that inner-

vates intrafusal muscle ﬁ bers. 

  ganglion    A collection of neurons in the peripheral 

nervous system. Plural: ganglia. 

  ganglion cell    A cell in the retina that receives input 

from bipolar cells and sends an axon into the optic 
nerve. 

  ganglion cell layer    A layer of the retina closest to 

the center of the eye, containing ganglion cells. 

  gap junction    A specialized junction where a narrow 

gap between two cells is spanned by protein chan-
nels (connexons) that allow ions to pass directly 
from one cell to another. 

  gating    A property of many ion channels, making 

them open or closed in response to speciﬁ c sig-
nals, such as membrane voltage or the presence of 
 neurotransmitters. 

  gender identity    A person’s perception of his or her 

maleness or femaleness. 

  gene    A unit of heredity; a sequence of DNA that 

encodes a single polypeptide or protein. 

  gene expression    The process of transcribing the in-
formation from a gene into messenger RNA; a gene 
is a segment of DNA carrying the instructions for a 
single protein. 

  generalized seizure    Pathologically large and synchro-

nous neural activity that spreads to encompass the 
entire cerebral hemispheres.  See also  partial seizure. 

  genetic engineering    The manipulation of an 

 organism’s genome by inserting or deleting DNA. 
  genetic sex    The sex of an animal or person based 

  genome    The total content of an organism’s genetic 

solely on genotype. 

material. 

  genotype    The genetic makeup of an animal or person. 
  ghrelin    A peptide secreted by cells in the stomach 
that stimulates appetite by activating orexigenic 
neurons in the hypothalamus. 

  glial cell    A support cell in the nervous system. 

Glia are classiﬁ ed into four categories: astrocytes, 
oligodendroglia, Schwann cells, and microglia. 
Astrocytes regulate the extracellular environment 
of the brain, oligodendroglia and Schwann cells pro-
vide myelin, and microglia scavenge debris. 

  globus pallidus    A part of the basal ganglia in the 

basal forebrain; consists of external (GPe) and inter-
nal (GPi) segments. It is involved in motor control. 

  glomerulus    A cluster of neurons in the olfactory 
bulb that receives input from olfactory receptor 
neurons. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   908
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   908

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  glucocorticoid receptor    A receptor activated by 

cortisol released from the adrenal gland. 

  glutamate (Glu)    An amino acid; the major excit-

atory neurotransmitter in the central nervous 
system. 

  glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia    A hy-

pothesis suggesting that schizophrenia is caused by 
the reduced activation of NMDA receptors in the 
brain. 

  glutamatergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 

produce and release glutamate. 

  glycine (Gly)    An amino acid; an inhibitory neu-
rotransmitter at some locations in the central 
nervous system. 

  GnRH    See gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 
  Goldman equation    A mathematical relationship 
used to predict membrane potential from the con-
centrations and membrane permeabilities of ions. 

  Golgi apparatus    An organelle that sorts and chemi-
cally modiﬁ es proteins that are destined for delivery 
to different parts of the cell. 

  Golgi stain    A method of staining brain tissue that 

shows neurons and all of their neurites; named 
for its discoverer, Italian histologist Camillo Golgi 
(1843–1926). 

  Golgi tendon organ    A specialized structure within 
the tendons of skeletal muscle that senses muscle 
tension. 

  gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)    A hy-
pophysiotropic hormone secreted by the hypothala-
mus; regulates the release of luteinizing hormone 
and follicle-stimulating hormone from the anterior 
pituitary. 

  gonadotropins    Hormones secreted by the anterior 

pituitary that regulate the release of androgens and 
estrogens from the testes and ovaries. 

  G-protein    A membrane-enclosed protein that binds 
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) when activated by a 
membrane receptor. Active G-proteins can stimu-
late or inhibit other membrane-enclosed proteins. 

  G-protein-coupled receptor    A membrane pro-

tein that activates G-proteins when it binds 
 neurotransmitter. 

  gray matter    A generic term for a collection of 

neuronal cell bodies in the central nervous system. 
When a freshly dissected brain is cut open, neurons 
appear gray.  See also  white matter. 

  green ﬂ uorescent protein (GFP)    A jellyﬁ sh pro-
tein that can be expressed in mammalian neurons 
by genetic engineering, causing these neurons to 
ﬂ uoresce bright green when illuminated by the ap-
propriate wavelength of light. 

  grid cell    Neurons in the entorhinal cortex that have 
multiple place ﬁ elds arranged in a hexagonal grid. 

  growth cone    The specialized tip of a growing 

neurite. 

GLOSSARY

909

  gustation    The sense of taste. 
  gustatory nucleus    A nucleus in the brain stem that 

receives primary taste input. 

  gyrus    A bump or bulge lying between the sulci of the 

cerebrum. Plural: gyri. 

  habituation    A type of nonassociative learning lead-
ing to decreased behavioral responses to repeated 
stimulation. 

  hair cell    An auditory cell that transduces sound into 
a change in membrane potential or a vestibular cell 
that transduces head movements into a change in 
membrane potential. 

  hard problem of consciousness    Why and how 

subjective conscious experiences arise from physical 
processes. 

  Hebb synapse    A synapse that exhibits Hebbian 

modiﬁ cations. 

  Hebbian modiﬁ cation    An increase in the effec-
tiveness of a synapse caused by the simultane-
ous activation of presynaptic and postsynaptic 
neurons. 

  helicotrema    A hole at the apex of the cochlea in the 

inner ear that connects the scala tympani to the 
scala vestibuli. 

  hertz (Hz)    The unit of sound frequency equivalent to 

cycles per second. 

  hindbrain    The region of the brain derived from the 
caudal primary embryonic brain vesicle; also called 
rhombencephalon. Hindbrain structures include the 
cerebellum, pons, and medulla. 

  hippocampus    A region of the cerebral cortex lying 
adjacent and medial to the olfactory cortex. In hu-
mans, the hippocampus is in the temporal lobe and 
plays important roles in learning and memory and 
the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. 
  histology    The microscopic study of the structure of 

tissues. 

  homeostasis    The balanced functioning of physio-

logical processes and maintenance of an organism’s 
internal environment within a narrow range. 

  horizontal cell    A cell in the retina of the eye that 
projects neurites laterally in the outer plexiform 
layer. 

  horizontal plane    An anatomical plane of section 
that divides the nervous system into dorsal and 
ventral parts. 

  HPA axis     See  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. 
Huntington’s disease    A hereditary, progressive, 

inevitably fatal condition characterized by dyskine-
sias, dementia, and personality disorders; associ-
ated with profound degeneration of neurons in the 
basal ganglia and cerebral cortex. 

  hyperalgesia    A reduced threshold for pain, an in-
creased response to painful stimuli, or a spontane-
ous pain that follows localized injury. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   909
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   909

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

910

GLOSSARY

  hypophysiotropic hormone    A peptide hormone, 
such as corticotropin-releasing hormone or gonado-
tropin-releasing hormone, released into the blood by 
the parvocellular neurosecretory cells of the hypo-
thalamus; stimulates or inhibits the secretion of 
hormones from the anterior pituitary. 

  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis    A 
system of CNS neurons and endocrine cells that 
regulates the release of cortisol from the adrenal 
gland. Dysfunction of the HPA system has been im-
plicated in anxiety disorders and affective disorders. 

  hypothalamo-pituitary portal circulation    A sys-
tem of blood vessels that carries hypophysiotropic 
hormones from the hypothalamus to the anterior 
pituitary. 

  hypothalamus    The ventral part of the diencephalon, 

involved in the control of the autonomic nervous 
system and the pituitary gland. 

  immunocytochemistry    An anatomical method that 

uses antibodies to study the location of molecules 
within cells. 

  incus    An ossicle in the middle ear whose shape 

somewhat resembles an anvil. 

  induced pluripotent stem cells    Stem cells with 

the potential to differentiate into any cell type, 
including neurons, that are chemically transformed 
from mature cells derived from a person. 

  inferior colliculus    A nucleus in the midbrain from 
which all ascending auditory signals project to the 
medial geniculate nucleus. 

  inferior olive    A nucleus of the medulla that gives 

rise to climbing ﬁ ber input to the cerebellar cortex. 
Climbing ﬁ ber activity is an important trigger for 
LTD, a form of synaptic plasticity believed to be 
important for motor learning. 

  inﬂ ammation    A natural protective response of 

tissues to harmful stimuli. The cardinal signs of in-
ﬂ ammation in skin include heat, redness,  swelling, 
and pain. 

  inhibitor    A drug or toxin that blocks the normal 

 action of a protein or a biochemical process. 

  inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP)    A 

change in the postsynaptic membrane potential by 
the action of a synaptically released neurotransmit-
ter, making the postsynaptic neuron less likely to 
ﬁ re action potentials. 

  inner ear    The cochlea, which is part of the audi-

tory system, plus the labyrinth, which is part of the 
vestibular system. 

  inner hair cell    An auditory cell located between the 

modiolus and the rods of Corti; the primary trans-
ducer of sound into an electrochemical signal. 

  inner nuclear layer    A layer of the retina of the eye 
containing the cell bodies of bipolar, horizontal, and 
amacrine cells. 

or collection of cells. 

  inositol-1, 4, 5-triphosphate (IP3)    A second 
messenger molecule formed by the action of 
phospholipase C on the membrane phospholipid 
 phosphatidylinositol-4, 5-bisphosphate. IP3 causes 
the release of Ca 2  ⫹  from intracellular stores. 

  input speciﬁ city    A property of synapse plasticity 
that ensures that modiﬁ cations induced by stimu-
lation of one input onto a neuron do not spread to 
other unstimulated inputs on the same neuron. 

  in situ   hybridization    A method for localizing 

strands of messenger RNA within cells. 

  instrumental conditioning    A learning procedure 
in which a response, such as a motor act, is associ-
ated with a stimulus reward, such as food. 

  insula    Cerebral cortex, also known as insular cor-

tex, that lies within the lateral sulcus between the 
 temporal and parietal lobes. 

  insulin    A hormone released by the ␤ cells of the pan-
creas; regulates blood glucose levels by controlling 
the expression of glucose transporters in the plasma 
membrane of non-neuronal cells. 

  intensity    The amplitude of a sound wave. Sound in-

  inner plexiform layer    A layer of the retina of the 

eye, located between the ganglion cell layer and 
the inner nuclear layer; contains the neurites and 
synapses between bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and 
ganglion cells. 

  innervation    The provision of synaptic input to a cell 

tensity is the amplitude of the pressure differences in 
a sound wave that perceptually determines loudness. 

  internal capsule    A large collection of axons that 

connects the telencephalon with the diencephalon. 
  internal resistance    The resistance to electrical cur-

rent ﬂ ows longitudinally down a cable or neurite, 
represented by the symbol r i . 

  interneuron    Any neuron that is not a sensory or 

motor neuron; also describes a CNS neuron whose 
axon does not leave the structure in which it resides. 
  interstitial nuclei of the anterior hypothalamus 
(INAH)    Four neuron clusters in the preoptic area 
of the anterior hypothalamus in humans, some of 
which may be sexually dimorphic. 

  intrafusal ﬁ ber    A specialized muscle ﬁ ber within a 

muscle spindle that receives motor innervation from 
gamma motor neurons. 

  intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion 

cells    Light-sensitive neurons in the ganglion cell 
layer of the retina that transduce light with the 
photopigment melanopsin. 

  ion    An atom or molecule that has a net electrical 
charge because of a difference in the number of 
electrons and protons. 

  ion channel    A membrane-spanning protein that 
forms a pore that allows the passage of ions from 
one side of the membrane to the other. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   910
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   910

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  ion pump    A protein that transports ions across a 

membrane at the expense of metabolic energy. 

  ion selectivity    A property of ion channels that are 

selectively permeable to some ions and not to others. 
  ionic driving force    The difference between the real 
membrane potential, V m , and the ionic equilibrium 
potential, E ion . 

  ionic equilibrium potential    The electrical poten-
tial difference that exactly balances an ionic con-
centration gradient, represented by the symbol E ion ; 
also known as equilibrium potential. 

  IP3     See  inositol-1, 4, 5-triphosphate. 
  ipsilateral    An anatomical reference meaning on the 

same side of the midline. 

  IPSP     See  inhibitory postsynaptic potential. 
  iris    The circular, pigmented muscle that controls the 

size of the pupil in the eye. 

  James–Lange theory    A theory proposing that the 

subjective experience of emotion is a consequence of 
physiological changes in the body. 

  kainate receptor    A subtype of glutamate receptor; 
a glutamate-gated ion channel that is permeable to 
Na ⫹  and K ⫹ . 

  Klüver–Bucy syndrome    A constellation of symp-

toms resulting from bilateral temporal lobectomy in 
humans and monkeys that includes decreased fear 
and aggression (ﬂ attened emotions), the tendency 
to identify objects by oral examination rather than 
visual inspection, and altered sexual behavior. 
  knock-in mice    Mice in which a gene has been 

replaced by another gene engineered to function 
differently. 

  knockout mice    Mice in which a gene of interest has 

been silenced or deleted by genetic engineering. 
  koniocellular LGN layer    A layer of the lateral ge-

niculate nucleus containing very small cells, lying just 
ventral to each magnocellular and parvocellular layer. 

  Korsakoff’s syndrome    A neurological syndrome 

resulting from chronic alcoholism, characterized by 
confusion, confabulations, apathy, and amnesia. 

  language    A system for communicating information 

that uses words or signs combined according to 
grammatical rules. 

  language acquisition    The process by which hu-
mans learn to understand language and speak. 

  lateral    An anatomical reference meaning away from 

the midline. 

  lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)    A thalamic 

nucleus that relays information from the retina to 
the primary visual cortex. 

  lateral hypothalamic area    A poorly deﬁ ned region 
of the hypothalamus that has been implicated in the 
motivation of behavior. 

GLOSSARY

911

  lateral hypothalamic syndrome    Anorexia associ-
ated with lesions of the lateral hypothalamic area. 

  lateral intraparietal cortex (area LIP)    A corti-
cal area buried in the intraparietal sulcus that is 
involved in guiding eye movements; the responses 
of LIP neurons suggest that they are involved in 
 working memory. 

  lateral pathway    Axons in the lateral column of the 
spinal cord that are involved in the control of volun-
tary movements of the distal musculature and are 
under direct cortical control. 

  lateral ventricle    The CSF-ﬁ lled space within each 

cerebral hemisphere. 

  layer of photoreceptor outer segments    A layer 

of the retina farthest from the center of the eye 
containing the light-sensitive elements of the 
photoreceptors. 

  learning    The acquisition of new knowledge or skills. 
  lemniscus    A tract that meanders through the brain 

like a ribbon. 

  length constant    A parameter used to describe 

how far changes in membrane potential can pas-
sively spread down a cable such as an axon or a 
dendrite, represented by the symbol ␭. The length 
constant ␭ is the distance at which the depolariza-
tion falls to 37% of its original value; it depends on 
the ratio of membrane resistance (r m ) to internal 
resistance (r i ). 

  lens    The transparent structure lying between the 
aqueous humor and the vitreous humor that en-
ables the eye to adjust its focus to different viewing 
distances. 

  leptin    A protein hormone released by adipocytes (fat 

cells) that communicates with neurons of the arcu-
ate nucleus of the hypothalamus. 

  LGN     See  lateral geniculate nucleus. 
  ligand-binding method    A method that uses radio-
active receptor ligands (agonists or antagonists) to 
locate neurotransmitter receptors. 

  light adaptation    The process by which the retina 

becomes less sensitive to light in bright light 
conditions. 

  limbic lobe    The hippocampus and cortical areas 

bordering the brain stem in mammals, which Broca 
proposed as a distinct lobe of the brain. 

  limbic system    A group of structures, including those 

in the limbic lobe and Papez circuit, that are ana-
tomically interconnected and are probably involved 
in emotion, learning, and memory. 

  lipostatic hypothesis    A hypothesis proposing that 
body fat is maintained homeostatically at a speciﬁ c 
level. 

  lithium    An element, existing in solution as a mono-
valent cation, that is effective in the treatment of 
bipolar disorder. 

  locus    A small, well-deﬁ ned group of cells. Plural: loci. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   911
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   911

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

912

GLOSSARY

  locus coeruleus    A small nucleus located bilaterally 
in the pons; using NE as their neurotransmitter, its 
neurons project widely to all levels of the CNS. 

  long-term depression (LTD)    A long-lasting decrease 
in the effectiveness of synaptic transmission that fol-
lows certain types of conditioning stimulation. 

  long-term memory    Information storage that is 

relatively permanent and does not require continual 
rehearsal. 

  long-term potentiation (LTP)    A long-lasting 

enhancement of the effectiveness of synaptic trans-
mission that follows certain types of conditioning 
stimulation. 

  LTD     See  long-term depression. 
  LTP     See  long-term potentiation. 
  luteinizing hormone (LH)    A hormone secreted by 
the anterior pituitary; its diverse roles include the 
stimulation of testosterone production in males and 
the facilitation of follicle development and ovulation 
in females. 

  M1    Primary motor cortex, area 4. 
  macula    (1) In the eye, a yellowish spot in the middle 

of the retina with relatively few large blood ves-
sels; contains the fovea. (2) In the ear, a sensory 
epithelium in the otolith organs whose hair cells 
 transduce head tilt and acceleration. 

  magnetoencephalography (MEG)    A measure-

ment of electrical activity generated by the brain 
and recorded by detecting associated magnetic ﬁ eld 
ﬂ uctuations with sensors surrounding the scalp. 
  magnocellular LGN layer    A layer of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus receiving synaptic input from 
M-type retinal ganglion cells. 

  magnocellular neurosecretory cell    A large neuron 

of the periventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the 
hypothalamus that projects to the posterior pituitary 
and secretes oxytocin or vasopressin into the blood. 

  magnocellular pathway    A visual information-

processing pathway that begins with M-type reti-
nal ganglion cells and leads to layer IVB of striate 
cortex; believed to process information about object 
motion and motor actions. 

  major depression    An affective disorder character-

ized by prolonged, severe impairment of mood; 
may include anxiety, sleep disturbances, and other 
physiological disturbances. 

  malleus    An ossicle in the middle ear attached to 

the tympanic membrane; shaped somewhat like a 
 hammer. 

  mania    An elevated, expansive, or irritable mood that 

is characteristic of bipolar disorder. 

  Marr–Albus theory of motor learning    The theory 

that parallel ﬁ ber synapses on Purkinje cells are 
modiﬁ ed when their activity coincides with climbing 
ﬁ ber activity. 

  mechanoreceptor    Any sensory receptor selective 

for mechanical stimuli, such as hair cells of the 
inner ear, various receptors of the skin, and stretch 
receptors of skeletal muscle. 

  medial    An anatomical reference meaning toward the 

midline. 

  medial forebrain bundle    A large bundle of axons 

coursing through the hypothalamus carrying ef-
ferents from the dopaminergic, noradrenergic, and 
serotonergic neurons in the brain stem and ﬁ bers 
interconnecting the hypothalamus, limbic struc-
tures, and midbrain tegmental area. 

  medial geniculate nucleus (MGN)    A relay nucleus 

in the thalamus through which all auditory infor-
mation passes on its way from the inferior colliculus 
to the auditory cortex. 

  medial lemniscus    A white matter tract of the 

somatic sensory system carrying axons from dorsal 
column nuclei to the thalamus. 

  medulla oblongata    The part of the hindbrain 
caudal to the pons and cerebellum; also called 
medulla. 

  medullary reticulospinal tract    A tract originating 

in the medullary reticular formation and terminat-
ing in the spinal cord; involved in the control of 
movement. 

  membrane differentiation    A dense accumulation 
of protein adjacent to and within the membrane on 
either side of a synaptic cleft. 

  membrane potential    The voltage across a cell 

membrane; represented by the symbol Vm. 

  membrane resistance    The resistance to electrical 

current ﬂ ow across a membrane; represented by the 
symbol rm. 

  memory    The retention of learned information. 
  memory consolidation    The process by which short-
term memories lasting hours to days are converted 
into long-term memories lasting weeks to years. 

  memory trace    The physical representation or loca-

tion of a memory; also known as an engram. 

  meninges    Three membranes that cover the surface 

of the central nervous system: the dura mater, 
arachnoid membrane, and pia mater. Singular: 
meninx. 

  menstrual cycle    The female reproductive cycle in 

primates. 

  messenger RNA (mRNA)    A molecule constructed 

from four nucleic acids that carries the genetic 
instructions for the assembly of a protein from the 
nucleus to the cytoplasm. 

  metabotropic receptor    A G-protein-coupled recep-
tor whose primary action is to stimulate an intracel-
lular biochemical response. 

  metaplasticity    Activity-dependent modiﬁ cation of 

the rules of synaptic plasticity. 

  MGN     See  medial geniculate nucleus. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   912
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   912

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  microelectrode    A probe used to measure the electri-
cal activity of cells. Microelectrodes have a very ﬁ ne 
tip and can be fashioned from etched metal or glass 
pipettes ﬁ lled with electrically conductive solutions. 
  microﬁ lament    A polymer of the protein actin, form-
ing a braided strand 5 nm in diameter; a component 
of the cytoskeleton. 

  microglial cell    A type of cell that functions as a 

phagocyte in the nervous system to remove debris 
left by dead or dying neurons and glia. 

  microionophoresis    A method of applying drugs and 
neurotransmitters in very small quantities to cells. 

  microtubule    A polymer of the protein tubulin, 

forming a straight, hollow tube 20 nm in diameter. 
Microtubules, a component of the cytoskeleton, play 
an important role in axoplasmic transport. 

  midbrain    The region of the brain derived from the 

middle primary embryonic brain vesicle; also called 
mesencephalon. Midbrain structures include the 
tectum and the tegmentum. 

  middle ear    The tympanic membrane plus the 

ossicles. 

  midline    An invisible line that bisects the nervous 

system into right and left halves. 

  midsagittal plane    An anatomical plane of section 
through the midline that is perpendicular to the 
ground. A section in the midsagittal plane divides 
the nervous system into right and left halves. 

  miniature postsynaptic potential    A change in 
postsynaptic membrane potential caused by the 
action of neurotransmitter released from a single 
synaptic vesicle. 

  mirror neuron    A neuron of the cerebral cortex that 

ﬁ res when an animal performs a motor act and 
when the animal merely observes the same act per-
formed by another. 

  mitochondrion    An organelle responsible for cel-

lular respiration. Mitochondria generate adenosine 
triphosphate using the energy produced by the 
 oxidation of food. 

  modulation    A term used to describe the actions of 
neurotransmitters that do not directly evoke post-
synaptic potentials but modify the cellular response 
to excitatory postsynaptic potentials and inhibitory 
postsynaptic potentials generated by other synapses. 
  molecular medicine    The approach of using genetic 

information to develop medical treatments for 
disease. 

  molecular switch hypothesis    The idea that pro-

tein kinases can be switched “on” by autophosphory-
lation to a state in which they no longer require 
the presence of a speciﬁ c second messenger to be 
active. Such persistently active kinases may hold 
the memory of an episode of strong synaptic activa-
tion. Initially proposed by John Lisman at Brandeis 
University. 

GLOSSARY

913

  monoamine hypothesis of mood disorders    A 
hypothesis suggesting that depression is a conse-
quence of a reduction in the levels of monoamine 
neurotransmitters, particularly serotonin and 
 norepinephrine, in the brain. 

  monocular deprivation    An experimental manipu-

lation that deprives one eye of normal vision. 

  monogamy    Mating behavior in which two individu-
als form a tightly bound relationship that includes 
exclusive or nearly exclusive mating with each 
other. 

  Morris water maze    A task used to assess spatial 
memory in which a rodent must swim to a hidden 
platform below the surface of a pool of water. 

  mossy ﬁ ber    An axon of a pontine neuron that inner-
vates cerebellar granule cells. This term is also used 
to describe the axons from dentate gyrus granule 
cells that innervate area CA3 of the hippocampus. 

  motivated behavior    Behavior that is incited to 

achieve a goal. 

  motor cortex    Cortical areas 4 and 6, which are di-

rectly involved in the control of voluntary movement. 
  motor end-plate    The postsynaptic membrane at the 

neuromuscular junction. 

  motor neuron    A neuron that synapses on a muscle 

cell and causes muscle contraction. 

  motor neuron pool    All the alpha motor neurons in-

nervating the ﬁ bers of a single skeletal muscle. 
  motor strip    A name for area 4 on the precentral 

gyrus; also called primary motor cortex. 

  motor system    All skeletal muscles and the parts of 

the central nervous system that control them. 
  motor unit    One alpha motor neuron and all the 

skeletal muscle ﬁ bers it innervates. 

  mRNA     See  messenger RNA. 
  M-type ganglion cell    A type of ganglion cell in the 

retina characterized by a large cell body and den-
dritic arbor, a transient response to light, and no 
sensitivity to different wavelengths of light; also 
called M cell. 

  multiple trace model of consolidation    An alter-
native to the standard model of memory consolida-
tion in which the hippocampus participates indeﬁ -
nitely in memory storage along with the neocortex; 
in this model, each time an episodic memory is 
recalled in a new context, an additional memory 
trace is formed. 

  multipolar neuron    A neuron with three or more 

neurites. 

  muscarinic ACh receptor    A subtype of acetylcho-

line receptor that is G-protein-coupled. 

  muscle ﬁ ber    A multinucleated skeletal muscle cell. 
  muscle spindle    A specialized structure within skel-

etal muscles that senses muscle length; provides 
sensory information to neurons in the spinal cord 
via group Ia axons; also called stretch receptor. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   913
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   913

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  myelin    A membranous wrapping, or sheath, around 

  neuromuscular junction    A chemical synapse 

914

GLOSSARY

axons provided by oligodendroglia in the central 
nervous system and Schwann cells in the peripheral 
nervous system. 

  myoﬁ bril    A cylindrical structure within a skeletal 

muscle ﬁ ber that contracts in response to an action 
potential. 

  myosin    A cytoskeletal protein in all cells and the 
major thick ﬁ lament protein in a skeletal muscle 
ﬁ ber; causes muscle contraction by chemical 
 interaction with actin. 

  myotatic reﬂ ex    A reﬂ ex that leads to muscle contrac-

tion in response to muscle stretch, mediated by the 
monosynaptic connection between group Ia axons 
from a muscle spindle and an alpha motor neuron in-
nervating the same muscle; also called stretch reﬂ ex. 

  NE     See  norepinephrine. 
  neglect syndrome    A neurological disorder in which 

a part of the body or a part of the visual ﬁ eld is 
ignored or suppressed; most commonly associated 
with damage to posterior parietal areas of the brain. 

  neocortex    The cerebral cortex, with six or more 

 layers of neurons, found only in mammals. 

  Nernst equation    A mathematical relationship used 

to calculate an ionic equilibrium potential. 

  nerve    A bundle of axons in the peripheral nervous 

between a spinal motor neuron axon and a skeletal 
muscle ﬁ ber. 

  neuron    The information-processing cell of the ner-
vous system; also called nerve cell. Most neurons 
use action potentials to send signals over a distance, 
and all neurons communicate with one another 
using synaptic transmission. 

  neuron doctrine    The concept that the neuron is the 

elementary functional unit of the brain and that 
neurons communicate with each other by contact, 
not continuity. 

  neuronal membrane    The barrier, about 5 nm 

thick, that separates the inside of a nerve cell from 
the outside; consists of a phospholipid bilayer with 
proteins embedded in it; encloses the intracellular 
organelles and vesicles. 

  neuropharmacology    The study of the effects of 

drugs on nervous system tissue. 

  neurotransmitter    A chemical released by a pre-

synaptic element upon stimulation that activates 
postsynaptic receptors. 

  neurotrophin    A member of a family of related neu-
ronal trophic factors, including nerve growth factor 
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. 

  neurulation    The formation of the neural tube from 

the neural ectoderm during embryonic development. 

  NGF     See  nerve growth factor. 
  nicotinic ACh receptor    A class of acetylcholine-

gated ion channel found in various locations, 
 notably at the neuromuscular junction. 

  Nissl stain    A class of basic dyes that stain the so-

mata of neurons; named for its discoverer, German 
histologist Franz Nissl (1860–1919). 

  nitric oxide (NO)    A gas produced from the amino acid 

arginine that serves as an intercellular messenger. 

  NMDA receptor    A subtype of glutamate receptor; a glu-
tamate-gated ion channel that is permeable to Na ⫹ , K ⫹ , 
and Ca 2  ⫹ . Inward ionic current through the  N -methyl-
D-aspartate receptor is voltage dependent because of a 
magnesium block at negative membrane potentials. 
  nociceptor    Any receptor selective for potentially 
harmful stimuli; may induce sensations of pain. 

  node of Ranvier    A space between two consecutive 

myelin sheaths where an axon comes in contact 
with the extracellular ﬂ uid. 

  nonassociative learning    A change in the behav-
ioral response that occurs over time in response 
to a single type of stimulus; the two types are 
 habituation and sensitization. 

  nondeclarative memory    Memory for skills, habits, 

emotional responses, and some reﬂ exes. 

  nonM–nonP ganglion cell    A ganglion cell in the 

retina that is not of the M type or P type, based on 
cell morphology and response properties. Of the va-
riety of cell types in this category, some are known 
to be sensitive to the wavelength of light. 

system. 

  nerve growth factor (NGF)    A neurotrophin re-

quired for survival of the cells of the sympathetic 
division of the ANS; also important for aspects of 
CNS development. 

  netrin    An axonal guidance module; a protein se-

creted by cells in speciﬁ c locations in the developing 
CNS that can act as either an axonal attractant or 
a repellent, depending on the type of netrin receptor 
expressed on the growing axon. 

  neural correlates of consciousness    The minimal 

neuronal events sufﬁ cient for a speciﬁ c conscious 
percept. 

  neural crest    The primitive embryonic peripheral 

nervous system, consisting of neural ectoderm that 
pinches off laterally as the neural tube forms. 

  neural precursor cell    An immature neuron before 

cell differentiation. 

  neural tube    The primitive embryonic central ner-

vous system, consisting of a tube of neural ectoderm. 

  neurite    A thin tube extending from a neuronal cell 

body; the two types are axons and dendrites. 

  neuroﬁ lament    A type of intermediate ﬁ lament 

found in neurons, 10 nm in diameter; an important 
component of the neuronal cytoskeleton. 

  neurohormone    A hormone released by neurons into 

the bloodstream. 

  neuroleptic drug    An antipsychotic drug used to 

treat schizophrenia by blocking dopamine receptors; 
examples are chlorpromazine and clozapine. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   914
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   914

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  non-REM sleep    A stage of sleep characterized by 
large, slow EEG waves, a paucity of dreams, and 
some muscle tone.  See also  rapid eye movement 
sleep. 

  noradrenergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 

produce and release norepinephrine. 

  norepinephrine (NE)    A catecholamine neurotrans-

mitter synthesized from dopamine; also called 
noradrenaline. 

  nucleus    (1) The roughly spherical organelle in a 

cell body containing the chromosomes. (2) A clearly 
distinguishable mass of neurons, usually deep in 
the brain. 

  nucleus of the solitary tract    A brain stem nucleus 
that receives sensory input and uses it to coordinate 
autonomic function via its outputs to other brain 
stem and forebrain nuclei and to the hypothalamus. 

  obesity    A state of positive energy balance in which 
energy intake and storage exceed energy expendi-
ture, resulting in an increase in body fat.  See also  
starvation. 

  obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)    A mental 

disorder that includes obsessions (recurrent, in-
trusive thoughts, images, ideas, or impulses that 
are perceived as being inappropriate, grotesque, or 
forbidden) and compulsions (repetitive behaviors or 
mental acts that are performed to reduce the anxi-
ety associated with obsessions). 

  occipital lobe    The region of the cerebrum lying 

under the occipital bone. 

  OCD     See  obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
  ocular dominance column    A region of striate cor-
tex receiving information predominantly from one 
eye. 

  ocular dominance shift    A change in visual cortex 
interconnections that makes neurons more respon-
sive to one eye or the other. 

  OFF bipolar cell    A bipolar cell of the retina that 
depolarizes in response to dark (light OFF) in the 
center of its receptive ﬁ eld. 

  Ohm’s law    The relationship between electrical cur-
rent (I), voltage (V), and conductance (g): I  ⫽  gV. 
Because electrical conductance is the inverse of re-
sistance (R), Ohm’s law may also be written: V  ⫽  IR. 

  olfaction    The sense of smell. 
  olfactory bulb    A bulb-shaped brain structure 

derived from the telencephalon that receives input 
from olfactory receptor neurons. 

  olfactory cortex    The region of the cerebral cortex 
connected to the olfactory bulb and separated from 
the neocortex by the rhinal ﬁ ssure. 

  olfactory epithelium    A sheet of cells lining part of 
the nasal passages that contains olfactory receptor 
neurons. 

  oligodendroglial cell    A glial cell that provides my-

elin in the central nervous system. 

GLOSSARY

915

  ON bipolar cell    A bipolar cell of the retina that 
depolarizes in response to light (light ON) in the 
center of its receptive ﬁ eld.

 opioid receptor   A membrane protein that selectively 

binds natural (e.g., endorphin) and synthetic (e.g., 
morphine) opioid substances. 

  opioids    A class of drugs, including morphine, co-
deine, and heroin, that can produce analgesia as 
well as mood changes, drowsiness, mental clouding, 
nausea, vomiting, and constipation. 

  optic chiasm    The structure in which the right and 
left optic nerves converge and partially decussate 
(cross) to form the optic tracts. 

  optic disk    The location on the retina where optic 

nerve axons leave the eye. 

  optic nerve    The bundle of ganglion cell axons that 

passes from the eye to the optic chiasm. 

  optic radiation    A collection of axons coursing from 
the lateral geniculate nucleus to the visual cortex. 

  optic tectum    A term used to describe the superior col-

liculus, particularly in nonmammalian vertebrates. 

  optic tract    A collection of retinal ganglion cell axons 
stretching from the optic chiasm to the brain stem. 
Important targets of the optic tract are the lateral 
geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus. 

  optogenetics    A method that allows the control of 
neuronal activity, comprising the introduction of 
foreign genes into neurons that express membrane 
ion channels that open in response to light. 

  orexigenic peptide    A neuroactive peptide that 

stimulates feeding behavior; examples are neuro-
peptide Y (NPY), agouti-related peptide (AgRP), 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), and orexin. 
  organ of Corti    An auditory receptor organ that con-
tains hair cells, rods of Corti, and supporting cells. 

  organelle    A membrane-enclosed structure inside 
a cell; examples are the nucleus, mitochondrion, 
 endoplasmic reticulum, and Golgi apparatus. 

  organizational effect    The ability of a hormone to 
inﬂ uence the prenatal development of sex organs 
and the brain. 

  orientation column    A column of visual cortical 
neurons stretching from layer II to layer VI that 
responds best to the same stimulus orientation. 

  orientation selectivity    The property of a cell in the 

visual system that responds to a limited range of 
stimulus orientations. 

  osmometric thirst    The motivation to drink water as 

a result of an increase in blood tonicity. 

  ossicle    One of three small bones in the middle ear. 
  otolith organ    The utricle or the saccule, organs 
of the vestibular labyrinth in the inner ear that 
 transduce head tilt and acceleration. 

  outer ear    The pinna plus the auditory canal. 
  outer hair cell    An auditory receptor cell located 

farther from the modiolus than the rods of Corti in 
the inner ear. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   915
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   915

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

916

GLOSSARY

  outer nuclear layer    A layer of the retina of the eye 

  partial seizure    Pathologically large and syn-

containing the cell bodies of photoreceptors. 

  outer plexiform layer    A layer of the retina of the 
eye between the inner nuclear layer and the outer 
nuclear layer; contains the neurites and synapses 
between photoreceptors, horizontal cells, and 
 bipolar cells. 

  oval window    A hole in the bony cochlea of the inner 

ear, where movement of the ossicles is transferred 
to movement of the ﬂ uids in the cochlea. 

  overshoot    The part of an action potential when the 

membrane potential is more positive than 0 mV. 

  oxytocin    A small peptide hormone released from the 

posterior pituitary by magnocellular neurosecre-
tory cells; stimulates uterine contractions and milk 
letdown from the mammary glands. 

  Pacinian corpuscle    A mechanoreceptor of the deep 

skin, selective for high-frequency vibrations. 

  PAG     See  periaqueductal gray matter. 
  panic disorder    A mental disorder characterized by 
recurring, seemingly unprovoked panic attacks and 
a persistent worry about having further  attacks. 

  Papez circuit    A circuit of structures interconnecting 
the hypothalamus and cortex, proposed by Papez to 
be an emotion system. 

  papilla    A small protuberance on the surface of the 

tongue that contains taste buds. 

  parahippocampal cortex    A cortical region in the 
medial temporal lobe that lies lateral to the rhinal 
sulcus. 

  parallel ﬁ ber    An axon of a cerebellar granule cell 

that innervates Purkinje cells. Plasticity of the syn-
apse between a parallel ﬁ ber and a Purkinje cell is 
believed to be important for motor learning. 

  parallel processing    The idea that different stimu-

lus attributes are processed by the brain in parallel 
using distinct pathways. 

  parasympathetic division    A division of the auto-
nomic nervous system that maintains heart rate 
and respiratory, metabolic, and digestive func-
tions under normal conditions; its peripheral axons 
emerge from the brain stem and sacral spinal cord. 
 See also  sympathetic division. 

  paraventricular nucleus    A region of the hypo-
thalamus involved in the regulation of the au-
tonomic nervous system and in controlling the 
secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone and 
adrenocorticotropic hormone from the anterior 
pituitary. 

  parietal lobe    The region of the cerebrum lying 

under the parietal bone. 

  Parkinson’s disease    A movement disorder caused 

by damage to the substantia nigra, characterized by 
paucity of movement, difﬁ culty in initiating willed 
movement, and resting tremor. 

chronous neural activity that remains localized 
to a relatively small region of the brain.  See also  
 generalized seizure. 

  parvocellular LGN layer    A layer of the lateral 

geniculate nucleus receiving synaptic input from 
P-type retinal ganglion cells. 

  parvocellular neurosecretory cell    A small neuron 

of the medial and periventricular hypothalamus 
that secretes hypophysiotropic peptide hormones 
into the hypothalamo-pituitary portal circulation to 
stimulate or inhibit the release of hormones from 
the anterior pituitary. 

  parvo-interblob pathway    A visual information-

processing pathway that begins with P-type retinal 
ganglion cells and leads to the interblob regions 
of striate cortical layer III; believed to process 
 information about ﬁ ne object shape. 

  patch clamp    A method that enables an investigator 
to hold constant the membrane potential of a patch 
of membrane while current through membrane 
channels is measured. 

  pathophysiology    Abnormal physiology that causes 

the symptoms of disease. 

  PDE     See  phosphodiesterase. 
  peptide bond    The covalent bond between the amino 

group of one amino acid and the carboxyl group of 
another. 

  peptidergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 
produce and release peptide neurotransmitters. 

  perforant path    The axonal pathway from the ento-
rhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus of the hippocam-
pus. Perforant path synapses exhibit LTP and LTD, 
forms of synaptic plasticity believed to be important 
for memory formation. 

  periaqueductal gray matter (PAG)    A region 

surrounding the cerebral aqueduct in the core of 
the midbrain, with descending pathways that can 
inhibit the transmission of pain-causing signals. 
  perikaryon    The central region of the neuron con-
taining the nucleus; also called soma or cell body. 

  perilymph    The ﬂ uid that ﬁ lls the scala vestibuli and 

scala tympani in the cochlea in the inner ear, con-
taining low K ⫹  and high Na ⫹  concentrations. 

  peripheral nervous system (PNS)    The parts of 
the nervous system other than the brain and spi-
nal cord. The PNS includes all the spinal ganglia 
and nerves, cranial nerves III–XII, and the auto-
nomic nervous system.  See also  central nervous 
system. 

  perirhinal cortex    A cortical region in the medial 

temporal lobe that occupies the lateral bank of the 
rhinal sulcus. Lesions to this area in humans pro-
duce profound anterograde amnesia. 

  periventricular zone    A hypothalamic region that 
lies most medially, bordering the third ventricle. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   916
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   916

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  phase locking    The consistent ﬁ ring of an auditory 

neuron at the same phase of a sound wave. 

  pheromone    An olfactory stimulus used for chemical 

communication between individuals. 

  phonemes    The set of distinct sounds used in a  language. 
  phosphodiesterase (PDE)    An enzyme that breaks 

down the cyclic nucleotide second messengers 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic 
 guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). 

  phospholipase C (PLC)    An enzyme that cleaves 

the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol-4, 
5-bisphosphate to form the second messengers diac-
ylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). 
  phospholipid bilayer    The arrangement of phos-

pholipid molecules that forms the basic structure of 
the cell membrane. The core of the bilayer is lipid, 
creating a barrier to water and to water-soluble ions 
and molecules. 

  phosphorylation    A biochemical reaction in which a 

phosphate group (PO 4  2- ) is transferred from ad-
enosine triphosphate (ATP) to another molecule. 
Phosphorylation of proteins by protein kinases 
changes their biological activity. 

  photoreceptor    A specialized cell in the retina that 
transduces light energy into changes in membrane 
potential. 

  pia mater    The innermost of the three meninges, the 

membranes that cover the surface of the central 
nervous system. 

  pinna    The funnel-shaped outer ear, consisting of 

cartilage covered by skin. 

  pitch    The perceptual quality of a sound determined 

by the sound’s frequency. 
  PKA     See  protein kinase A. 
  PKC     See  protein kinase C. 
  place cell    A neuron in the rat hippocampus that re-
sponds only when the animal is in a certain region 
of space. 

  planum temporale    An area on the superior surface 
of the temporal lobe that is frequently larger in the 
left than in the right hemisphere. 

PLC     See  phospholipase C. 
  PNS     See  peripheral nervous system. 
  polyandry    Mating behavior in which one female 

mates with more than one male. 

  polygyny    Mating behavior in which one male mates 

with more than one female. 

  polypeptide    A string of amino acids held together by 

peptide bonds. 

  polyribosome    A collection of several ribosomes ﬂ oat-

ing freely in the cytoplasm. 

  pons    The part of the rostral hindbrain that lies ven-

tral to the cerebellum and the fourth ventricle. 

  pontine nuclei    The clusters of neurons that 

relay information from the cerebral cortex to the 
 cerebellar cortex. 

GLOSSARY

917

  pontine reticulospinal tract    A tract originating in 
the pontine reticular formation and terminating in 
the spinal cord, involved in the control of movement. 

  population coding    The representation of sensory, 
motor, or cognitive information by activity distrib-
uted over a large number of neurons. An example is 
color, which is encoded by the relative activity of the 
types of retinal cones. 

  posterior    An anatomical reference meaning toward 

the tail or caudal. 

  posterior parietal cortex    The posterior region of 
the parietal lobe, mainly Brodmann’s areas 5 and 
7, involved in visual and somatosensory integration 
and attention. 

  postganglionic neuron    A peripheral neuron of 

the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of 
the autonomic nervous system; its cell body lies 
in autonomic ganglia, and its axons terminate on 
 peripheral organs and tissues. 

  postsynaptic density    A postsynaptic membrane differ-
entiation that is the site of neurotransmitter receptors. 

  postsynaptic potential (PSP)    A change in the 

postsynaptic membrane potential by the presynap-
tic action of an electrical synapse or a synaptically 
released neurotransmitter. 

  predatory aggression    Attack behavior, often with 

the goal of obtaining food, accompanied by few 
 vocalizations and low ANS activity. 

  prefrontal cortex    A cortical area at the rostral 

end of the frontal lobe that receives input from the 
 dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus. 

  preganglionic neuron    A neuron of the sympathetic 

and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic 
nervous system; its cell body lies in the CNS (spinal 
cord or brain stem), and its axons extend peripher-
ally to synapse on postganglionic neurons in the 
autonomic ganglia. 

  premotor area (PMA)    The lateral part of cortical 

area 6, involved in the control of voluntary movement. 
  primary auditory cortex    Brodmann’s area 41 on the 
superior surface of the temporal lobe; also called A1. 

  primary gustatory cortex    The area of neocor-

tex that receives taste information from the 
 ventroposterior medial nucleus. 

  primary motor cortex    Brodmann’s area 4, located 

on the precentral gyrus; the region of cortex that, 
when weakly stimulated, elicits localized muscle 
contractions; also called M1. 

  primary sensory neuron    A neuron specialized to 
detect environmental signals at the body’s sensory 
surfaces. 

  primary somatosensory cortex    Brodmann’s area 
3b located in the postcentral gyrus; also called S1. 

  primary visual cortex    Brodmann’s area 17, located 

at the pole of the occipital lobe; also called striate 
cortex and V1. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   917
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   917

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

918

GLOSSARY

  priority map    A map of visual space that shows loca-

tions where attention should be directed based on 
stimulus salience or cognitive input. 

  procedural memory    Memory for skills and 

 behaviors. 

  promoter    A region of DNA that binds RNA poly-

merase to initiate gene transcription. 

  pyramidal tract    A tract running along the ventral 

medulla that carries corticospinal axons. 

  quantal analysis    A method of determining how 
many vesicles release neurotransmitter during 
 normal synaptic transmission. 

  proprioception    The sensation of body position and 

  radial glial cell    A glial cell in the embryonic brain 

movement using sensory signals from muscles, 
joints, and skin. 

  proprioceptor    A sensory receptor from the muscles, 

joints, and skin that contributes to proprioception. 

  protein    A polymer of amino acids strung together by 

peptide bonds. 

  protein kinase    A class of enzyme that phosphory-
lates proteins, a reaction that changes the confor-
mation of the protein and its biological activity. 

  protein kinase A (PKA)    A protein kinase activated 

by the second messenger cAMP. 

  protein kinase C (PKC)    A protein kinase activated 

by the second messenger DAG. 

  protein phosphatase    An enzyme that removes 

phosphate groups from proteins. 

  protein synthesis    The assembly of protein 

 molecules in the cell’s cytoplasm according to 
 genetic instructions. 

  proximal (girdle) muscle    A muscle that controls 

the shoulder or pelvis. 

  psychological constructionist theories of emo-

tion    Explanations of emotions in which each 
emotion is an emergent consequence of combining 
 non-emotional psychological components such as 
body  sensations and attention. 

  psychosurgery    Brain surgery used to treat mental 

or behavioral disorders. 

  P-type ganglion cell    A type of ganglion cell in the ret-

ina characterized by a small cell body and dendritic 
arbor, a sustained response to light, and sensitivity to 
different wavelengths of light; also called P cell. 

  pulvinar nucleus    A mass of neurons in the poste-

rior thalamus that have widespread reciprocal con-
nections with areas across the cerebral cortex. 

  pupil    The opening that allows light to enter the eye 

and strike the retina. 

  pupillary light reﬂ ex    An adjustment by the pupil 

to different levels of ambient light; the pupil’s di-
ameter becomes larger in dim light and smaller in 
bright light, in response to retinal inputs to brain 
stem neurons that control the iris. 

  Purkinje cell    A cell in the cerebellar cortex that 

projects an axon to the deep cerebellar nuclei. 

  putamen    A part of the basal ganglia in the basal 

forebrain; involved in motor control. 

  pyramidal cell    A neuron characterized by a pyra-

mid-shaped cell body and elongated dendritic tree; 
found in the cerebral cortex. 

extending a process from the ventricular zone to 
the surface of the brain; immature neurons and glia 
migrate along this process. 

  raphe nuclei    Clusters of serotonergic neurons that 

lie along the midline of the brain stem from the 
midbrain to the medulla and project diffusely upon 
all levels of the CNS. 

  rapid eye movement sleep (REM sleep)    A stage 

of sleep characterized by low-amplitude, high-
frequency EEG waves, vivid dreams, rapid eye 
 movements, and atonia.  See also  non-REM sleep. 

  rate-limiting step    In the series of biochemical reac-
tions that leads to the production of a chemical, the 
one step that limits the rate of synthesis. 

  receptive ﬁ eld    The region of a sensory surface 

(retina, skin) that, when stimulated, changes the 
membrane potential of a neuron. 

  receptor    (1) A specialized protein that detects 

chemical signals, such as neurotransmitters, and 
initiates a cellular response. (2) A specialized cell 
that detects environmental stimuli and generates 
neural responses. 

  receptor agonist    A drug that binds to a receptor 

and activates it. 

  receptor antagonist    A drug that binds to a receptor 

and inhibits its function. 

  receptor potential    A stimulus-induced change in 

the membrane potential of a sensory receptor. 

  receptor subtype    One of several receptors to which 

a neurotransmitter binds. 

  reciprocal inhibition    The process whereby the 

contraction of one set of muscles is accompanied by 
the relaxation of antagonist muscles. 

  recognition memory    Memory required to perform a 

delayed non-match to sample task. 

  reconsolidation    The process of retrieving, modi-
fying, and storing a memory that was previously 
consolidated. 

  red nucleus    A cell group in the midbrain involved in 

the control of movement. 

  referred pain    Pain that is perceived as coming 

from a site other than its true origin. Nociceptor 
activation within visceral organs is typically 
perceived as pain originating in skin or skeletal 
muscle. 

  refraction    The bending of light rays that can occur 
when they travel from one transparent medium to 
another. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   918
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   918

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  Reissner’s membrane    The cochlear membrane in 

the inner ear that separates the scala vestibuli from 
the scala media. 

  relational memory    A type of memory in which all of 
the events occurring at a given time are stored in a 
manner linking them. 

  relative refractory period    The period of time follow-

ing an action potential during which more depolarizing 
current than usual is required to achieve threshold. 

  REM sleep     See  rapid eye movement sleep. 
  resistance     See  electrical resistance. 
  resting membrane potential    The membrane 

potential, or membrane voltage, maintained by a 
cell when it is not generating action potentials; also 
called resting potential. Neurons have a resting 
membrane potential of about –65 mV. 

  resting state activity    Activity in the brain during 

quiet restful wakefulness. 

  reticular formation    A region of the brain stem ven-

tral to the cerebral aqueduct and fourth ventricle; 
involved in many functions, including the control of 
posture and locomotion. 

  reticular lamina    A thin sheet of tissue in the inner 
ear that holds the tops of hair cells in the organ of 
Corti. 

  retina    A thin layer of cells at the back of the eye that 

transduces light energy into neural activity. 

  retinofugal projection    A neural pathway that car-

ries information away from the eye. 

  retinotectal projection    A neural pathway that 

carries information from the retina to the superior 
colliculus. 

  retinotopy    The topographic organization of visual 
pathways in which neighboring cells on the retina 
send information to neighboring cells in a target 
structure. 

  retrograde amnesia    Memory loss for events before 

an illness or brain trauma. 

  retrograde messenger    Any chemical messenger 

that communicates information from the postsynap-
tic side of a synapse to the presynaptic side. 

  retrograde transport    Axoplasmic transport from 

an axon terminal to the soma. 

  rhodopsin    The photopigment in rod photoreceptors. 
  ribosome    A cellular organelle that assembles new 
proteins from amino acids according to the instruc-
tions carried by messenger RNA. 

  rising phase    The ﬁ rst part of an action potential, 

characterized by a rapid depolarization of the 
membrane. 

  RNA splicing    The process by which introns, the re-

gions of a primary RNA transcript that are not used 
to code protein, are removed. 

  rod photoreceptor    A photoreceptor in the retina 
containing rhodopsin and specialized for low light 
levels.  See also  cone photoreceptor. 

GLOSSARY

919

  rostral    An anatomical reference meaning toward the 

nose or anterior. 

  rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER)    A 

membrane-enclosed cellular organelle with ri-
bosomes attached to its outer surface; a site of 
 synthesis for proteins destined to be inserted into 
membrane or to be enclosed by membrane. 

  round window    A membrane-covered hole in the 
bony cochlea of the inner ear that is continuous 
with the scala tympani in the cochlea. 

  rubrospinal tract    A tract originating in the red 

nucleus and terminating in the spinal cord; involved 
in the control of movement. 

  S1     See  primary somatosensory cortex. 
  sagittal plane    An anatomical plane of section that is 

parallel to the midsagittal plane. 

  salience map    A map of visual space that highlights 

the locations of conspicuous objects. 

  saltatory conduction    The propagation of an action 

potential down a myelinated axon. 

  sarcolemma    The outer cell membrane of a skeletal 

muscle ﬁ ber. 

  sarcomere    The contractile element between Z lines 

in a myoﬁ bril; contains the thick and thin ﬁ la-
ments that slide along one another to cause muscle 
contraction. 

  sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)    An organelle within 

a skeletal muscle ﬁ ber that stores Ca 2  ⫹  and re-
leases it when stimulated by an action potential in 
T tubules. 

  satiety signal    A factor that reduces the drive to eat 
without causing sickness; examples are gastric dis-
tension and cholecystokinin released by the intesti-
nal cells in response to food. 

  scala media    A chamber in the cochlea that lies be-
tween the scala vestibuli and the scala tympani. 

  scala tympani    A chamber in the cochlea that runs 

from the helicotrema to the round window. 

  scala vestibuli    A chamber in the cochlea that runs 

from the oval window to the helicotrema. 

  Schaffer collateral    An axon of a CA3 neuron that 

innervates neurons in CA1 of the hippocampus. 
Schaffer collateral synapses exhibit LTP and LTD, 
forms of synaptic plasticity believed to be important 
for memory formation. 

  schizophrenia    A mental disorder characterized by 

a loss of contact with reality; fragmentation and 
disruption of thought, perception, mood, and move-
ment; delusions; hallucinations; and disordered 
memory. 

  Schwann cell    A glial cell that provides myelin in the 

peripheral nervous system. 

  sclera    The tough outer wall of the eyeball; the white 

of the eye. 

  SCN     See  suprachiasmatic nucleus. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   919
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   919

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

920

GLOSSARY

  second messenger    A short-lived chemical signal in 
the cytosol that can trigger a biochemical response. 
Second messenger formation is usually stimulated 
by a ﬁ rst messenger (a neurotransmitter or hor-
mone) acting at a G-protein-coupled cell surface 
receptor. Examples of second messengers are cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate (cGMP), and inositol-1,4,5-triphos-
phate (IP3). 

  second messenger cascade    A multistep process 

that couples activation of a neurotransmitter recep-
tor to activation of intracellular enzymes. 

  secretory granule    A spherical membrane-enclosed 

vesicle about 100 nm in diameter containing pep-
tides intended for secretion by exocytosis; also 
called dense-core vesicle. 

  semicircular canal    A component of the vestibular 

labyrinth in the inner ear that transduces head 
rotation. 

  sensitization    A type of nonassociative learning lead-

ing to an intensiﬁ ed response to all stimuli. 

  sensory map    A representation of sensory informa-
tion within a neural structure that preserves the 
spatial organization of that information established 
on the sensory organ. Examples are retinotopic 
maps in the superior colliculus, lateral genicu-
late nucleus, and visual cortex, where neurons in 
speciﬁ c places respond selectively to stimulation of 
speciﬁ c parts of the retina. 

  serotonergic    Describing neurons or synapses that 

produce and release serotonin. 

  serotonin (5-HT)    An amine neurotransmitter, 

 5-hydroxytryptamine. 

  serotonin deﬁ ciency hypothesis    The idea that ag-
gression is inversely related to serotonergic activity. 

  serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)   
 A drug, such as ﬂ uoxetine (Prozac), that prolongs 
the actions of synaptically released serotonin by 
preventing reuptake; used to treat depression and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. 

  sex-determining region of the Y chromosome 

(SRY)    A gene on the Y chromosome that codes for 
testis-determining factor; essential for normal male 
development. 

  sexual dimorphism    A sex-related difference in 

structure or behavior. 

  sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN)    A neuron 

cluster in the preoptic area of the anterior hypothal-
amus that in rats is signiﬁ cantly larger in males 
than in females. 

  sham rage    A display of great anger in a situation 

that would not normally cause anger; behavior pro-
duced by brain lesions. 

  short-term memory    Retention of information about 

recent events or facts that is not yet consolidated 
into long-term memory. 

  shunting inhibition    A form of synaptic inhibition 

in which the main effect is to reduce membrane 
resistance, thereby shunting depolarizing current 
generated at excitatory synapses. 

  simple cell    A neuron found in primary visual cortex 

that has an elongated orientation-selective recep-
tive ﬁ eld with distinct ON and OFF subregions. 

  skeletal muscle    A type of striated muscle that is under 

voluntary control and that functions to move bones 
around joints; derived from mesodermal somites. 

  slow motor unit    A motor unit with a small alpha 
motor neuron innervating slowly contracting and 
slowly fatiguing red muscle ﬁ bers. 
  SMA     See  supplementary motor area. 
  smooth endoplasmic reticulum (smooth ER)   
 A membrane-enclosed cellular organelle that is 
heterogeneous and performs different functions in 
different locations. 

  smooth muscle    A type of muscle in the digestive 
tract, arteries, and related structures; innervated 
by the autonomic nervous system and not under 
 voluntary control. 

  sodium-potassium pump    An ion pump that re-

moves intracellular Na ⫹  and concentrates intracel-
lular K ⫹ , using adenosine triphosphate as its energy 
source. 

  soma    The central region of the neuron containing the 

nucleus; also called cell body or perikaryon. 

  somatic motor system    The skeletal muscles and 

the parts of the nervous system that control them; 
the system that generates behavior. 

  somatic PNS    The part of the peripheral nervous 

system that innervates the skin, joints, and skeletal 
muscles. 

  somatic sensation    The senses of touch, tempera-

ture, body position, and pain. 

  somatotopy    The topographic organization of somatic 
sensory pathways in which neighboring receptors in 
the skin feed information to neighboring cells in a 
target structure. 

  spatial summation    The combining of excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials generated at more than 
one synapse on the same cell.  See also  temporal 
 summation. 

  speciﬁ c language impairment    A delay in the mas-

tery of language in the absence of hearing loss or 
more general developmental delays. 

  speech    Spoken language. 
  spike-initiation zone    A region of the neuronal 

membrane where action potentials are normally 
initiated, characterized by a high density of 
 voltage-gated sodium channels. 

  spike timing–dependent plasticity    Bidirectional 
modiﬁ cation of synaptic strength induced by vary-
ing the relative timing of the presynaptic and 
 postsynaptic spikes. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   920
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   920

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  spinal canal    The CSF-ﬁ lled space within the spinal 

cord. 

  spinal cord    The part of the central nervous system 

in the vertebral column. 

  spinal nerve    A nerve attached to the spinal cord 

that innervates the body. 

  spinal segment    One set of dorsal and ventral roots 

plus the portion of spinal cord related to them. 
  spinothalamic pathway    An ascending somatic 

sensory pathway traveling from the spinal cord to 
the thalamus via the lateral spinothalamic columns; 
mediates information about pain, temperature, and 
some forms of touch. 

  spiny neuron    A neuron with dendritic spines. 
  spiral ganglion    A collection of neurons in the mo-
diolus of the cochlea that receives input from hair 
cells and sends output to the cochlear nuclei in the 
medulla via the auditory nerve. 

  split-brain study    An examination of behavior in an-
imals or humans whose cerebral hemispheres have 
been disconnected by cutting the corpus callosum. 

  spotlight of attention    The ability of visual at-

tention to shift to different objects like the way a 
 spotlight moves to explore a dark room. 

  SRY     See  sex-determining region of the Y chromosome. 
  SSRI     See  serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitor. 
  standard model of memory consolidation    An 

explanation of memory formation in which sensory 
information is processed by the hippocampus and 
later transferred to neocortex for permanent storage. 

stapes   An ossicle in the middle ear attached to the 
oval window that somewhat resembles a stirrup. 

  starvation    A state of negative energy balance in 

which energy intake fails to meet the body’s demands, 
resulting in a loss of fat tissue.  See also  obesity. 

  stellate cell    A neuron characterized by a radial, 

star-like distribution of dendrites. 

  stereocilium    A hairlike cilium attached to the top of 

a hair cell in the inner ear. 

  strabismus    A condition in which the eyes are not 

perfectly aligned.

 striate cortex    Primary visual cortex, Brodmann’s 

area 17; also called V1. 

  striated muscle    A type of muscle with a striated, or 
striped, appearance; the two types are skeletal and 
cardiac. 

  striatum    A collective term for the caudate nucleus and 

putamen; involved in the initiation of willed move-
ments of the body; plays a role in procedural memory. 

  stria vascularis    A specialized endothelium lining 

one wall of the scala media and responsible for 
secreting endolymph. 

  subplate    A layer of cortical neurons lying below the 
cortical plate early in development; when the corti-
cal plate has differentiated into the six layers of the 
neocortex, the subplate disappears. 

GLOSSARY

921

  substantia    A group of related neurons deep within 
the brain, usually with less distinct borders than 
those of nuclei. 

  substantia gelatinosa    A thin dorsal part of the dor-
sal horn of the spinal cord that receives input from 
unmyelinated C ﬁ bers; important in the transmis-
sion of nociceptive signals. 

  substantia nigra    A cell group in the midbrain 
that uses dopamine as a neurotransmitter and 
 innervates the striatum. 

  subthalamic nucleus    A part of the basal ganglia in 

the basal forebrain; involved in motor control. 

  sulcus    A groove in the surface of the cerebrum run-

ning between neighboring gyri. Plural: sulci. 

  superior colliculus    A structure in the tectum of 

the midbrain that receives direct retinal input and 
controls saccadic eye movements. 

  superior olive    A nucleus in the caudate pons that 

receives afferents from the cochlear nuclei and 
sends efferents to the inferior colliculus; also called 
superior olivary nucleus. 

  supplementary motor area (SMA)    The medial 
part of cortical area 6; involved in the control of 
voluntary movement. 

  suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)    A small nucleus 

of the hypothalamus just above the optic chiasm 
that receives retinal innervation and synchronizes 
circadian rhythms with the daily light–dark cycle. 

  sympathetic chain    A series of interconnected 

sympathetic ganglia of the autonomic nervous sys-
tem, adjacent to the vertebral column, that receive 
input from preganglionic sympathetic ﬁ bers and 
project postganglionic ﬁ bers to target organs and 
tissues. 

  sympathetic division    A division of the autonomic 

nervous system that in ﬁ ght-or-ﬂ ight situations 
activates physiological responses, including in-
creased heart rate, respiration, blood pressure, and 
energy mobilization and decreased digestive and 
 reproductive functions; its peripheral axons emerge 
from the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord.  See also  
parasympathetic division. 

  synapse    The region of contact where a neuron 

 transfers information to another cell. 

  synaptic cleft    The region separating the presynap-

tic and postsynaptic membranes of neurons. 

  synaptic consolidation    The transformation of sen-
sory information into a temporary memory trace in 
the hippocampus. 

  synaptic integration    The process by which multiple 

EPSPs and/or IPSPs combine within one postsyn-
aptic neuron, in some cases triggering one or more 
action potentials. 

  synaptic scaling    A cell-wide adjustment of synaptic 

strengths in response to a change in the average 
 ﬁ ring rate of the postsynaptic neuron. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   921
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   921

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

922

GLOSSARY

  synaptic transmission    The process of transferring 
information from one cell to another at a synapse. 
  synaptic vesicle    A membrane-enclosed structure, 

about 50 nm in diameter, containing neurotransmit-
ter and found at a site of synaptic contact. 

  synergist muscle    A muscle that contracts with other 

muscles to produce movement in one direction. 
  systems consolidation    The transformation of 
a temporary hippocampal memory trace into a 
 permanent engram in neocortex. 

  T tubule    A membrane-enclosed tunnel running 

within a skeletal muscle ﬁ ber that links excitation 
of the sarcolemma with the release of Ca 2  ⫹  from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. 

  taste bud    A cluster of cells, including taste receptor 

cells, in papillae of the tongue. 

  taste receptor cell    A modiﬁ ed epithelial cell that 

transduces taste stimuli. 

  tectorial membrane    A sheet of tissue that hangs 
over the organ of Corti in the cochlea in the inner 
ear. 

  tectospinal tract    A tract originating in the supe-
rior colliculus and terminating in the spinal cord; 
involved in the control of head and neck movement. 
  tectum    The part of the midbrain lying dorsal to the 

cerebral aqueduct. 

  tegmentum    The part of the midbrain lying ventral 

to the cerebral aqueduct. 

  telencephalon    A region of the brain derived from 

the prosencephalon (forebrain). Telencephalic 
structures include the paired cerebral hemi-
spheres that contain cerebral cortex and the basal 
telencephalon. 

  temporal coding    The representation of information 

by the timing of action potentials rather than by 
their average rate. 

  temporal lobe    The region of the cerebrum lying 

under the temporal bone. 

  temporal summation    The combining of excit-

atory postsynaptic potentials generated in rapid 
succession at the same synapse.  See also  spatial 
summation. 

  terminal arbor    Branches at the end of an axon ter-
minating in the same region of the nervous system. 

  terminal bouton    The end region of an axon, usu-

ally a site of synaptic contact with another cell; also 
called axon terminal. 

  tetanus    A type of repetitive stimulation. 
  tetrodotoxin (TTX)    A toxin that blocks Na ⫹  per-
meation through voltage-gated sodium channels, 
thereby blocking action potentials. 

  thalamus    The dorsal part of the diencephalon, 

highly interconnected with the cerebral neocortex. 

  thermoreceptor    A sensory receptor selective for 

temperature changes. 

  thick ﬁ lament    A part of the cytoskeleton of a muscle 

cell containing myosin, lying between and among 
thin ﬁ laments and sliding along them to cause 
muscle contraction. 

  thin ﬁ lament    A part of the cytoskeleton of a muscle 
cell containing actin, anchored to Z lines and sliding 
along thick ﬁ laments to cause muscle contraction. 

  third ventricle    The CSF-ﬁ lled space within the 

diencephalon. 

  threshold    A level of depolarization sufﬁ cient to 

 trigger an action potential. 

  tonotopy    The systematic organization within an 
auditory structure on the basis of characteristic 
frequency. 

  top–down attention    Attention voluntarily directed 
by the brain to serve a behavioral goal; also called 
endogenous attention. 

  tract    A collection of central nervous system axons 

with a common site of origin and a common 
destination. 

  transcription    The process of synthesizing a messen-
ger RNA molecule according to genetic instructions 
encoded in DNA. 

  transcription factor    A protein that regulates the 

binding of RNA polymerase to a gene promoter. 

  transducin    The G-protein that couples rhodop-

sin to the enzyme phosphodiesterase in rod 
photoreceptors. 

  transduction    The transformation of sensory stimu-
lus energy into a cellular signal, such as a receptor 
potential. 

  transgenic mice    Mice in which extra genes have 

been introduced by genetic engineering. 

  translation    The process of synthesizing a protein 
molecule according to genetic instructions carried 
by a messenger RNA molecule. 

  transmitter-gated ion channel    A membrane pro-
tein forming a pore that is permeable to ions and 
gated by neurotransmitter. 

  transporter    A membrane protein that transports 

neurotransmitters, or their precursors, across mem-
branes to concentrate them in either presynaptic 
cytosol or synaptic vesicles. 

  trigeminal nerve    Cranial nerve V; attaches to the 
pons and carries primarily sensory axons from the 
head, mouth, and dura mater and motor axons of 
mastication. 

  trophic factor    Any molecule that promotes cell 

survival. 

  troponin    A protein that binds Ca 2  ⫹  in a skeletal 
muscle cell, thereby regulating the interaction of 
myosin and actin. 

  TTX     See  tetrodotoxin. 
  tympanic membrane    A membrane at the internal 
end of the auditory canal that moves in response to 
variations in air pressure; also called eardrum. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   922
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   922

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

  ultradian rhythm    Any rhythm with a period signiﬁ -

cantly less than 1 day.  See also  circadian rhythm. 

  unconscious emotion    The experience or expression 
of emotion in the absence of conscious awareness of 
the stimulus that evoked the emotion. 

  undershoot    The part of an action potential when the 

membrane potential is more negative than at rest; 
also called after-hyperpolarization. 

  unipolar neuron    A neuron with a single neurite. 

  V1    Primary visual cortex or striate cortex. 
  vagus nerve    Cranial nerve X, arising from the 

medulla and innervating the viscera of the thoracic 
and abdominal cavities; a major source of pregangli-
onic parasympathetic visceromotor axons. 

  vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT)    A 
specialized region of the hypothalamus containing neu-
rons that are sensitive to blood tonicity; they activate 
magnocellular neurosecretory cells to release vasopres-
sin into the blood, triggering osmometric thirst. 

  vasopressin    A small peptide hormone released from 
the posterior pituitary by magnocellular neurosecre-
tory cells; promotes water retention and decreased 
urine production by the kidney; also called antidi-
uretic hormone (ADH). 

  ventral    An anatomical reference meaning toward 

the belly. 

  ventral cochlear nucleus    A nucleus in the medulla 

that receives afferents from the spiral ganglion in 
the cochlea of the inner ear. 

  ventral horn    The ventral region of the spinal cord 

containing neuronal cell bodies. 

  ventral lateral (VL) nucleus    A nucleus of the 

thalamus that relays information from the basal 
ganglia and cerebellum to the motor cortex. 

  ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus    The part 

of the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus 
that receives somatosensory input from the face, 
including afferents from the tongue. 

  ventral posterior (VP) nucleus    The main thalamic 

relay nucleus of the somatic sensory system. 

ventral root   A bundle of motor neuron axons that 

emerges from the ventral spinal cord and joins 
sensory ﬁ bers to form a spinal nerve. Ventral root 
axons carry information away from the spinal cord. 
 See also  dorsal root. 

  ventricular system    The cerebrospinal ﬂ uid–ﬁ lled 

spaces inside the brain, consisting of the lateral 
ventricles, third ventricle, cerebral aqueduct, and 
fourth ventricle. 

  ventromedial hypothalamic syndrome    Obesity as-
sociated with lesions of the lateral hypothalamic area. 

  ventromedial pathway    Axons in the ventromedial 

column of the spinal cord that are involved in the 
control of posture and locomotion and are under 
brain stem control. 

GLOSSARY

923

  verbal dyspraxia    An inability to produce the coor-
dinated muscular movements needed for speech in 
the absence of damage to nerves or muscles. 
  vermis    The midline region of the cerebellum. 
  vestibular labyrinth    A part of the inner ear spe-

cialized for the detection of head motion; consists of 
the otolith organs and semicircular canals. 

  vestibular nucleus    A nucleus in the medulla that 
receives input from the vestibular labyrinth of the 
inner ear. 

  vestibular system    The neural system that monitors 
and regulates the sense of balance and  equilibrium. 

  vestibulo-ocular reﬂ ex (VOR)    A reﬂ exive move-

ment of the eyes stimulated by rotational move-
ments of the head; stabilizes the visual image on 
the retinas. 

  vestibulospinal tract    A tract originating in the 

vestibular nuclei of the medulla and terminating in 
the spinal cord; involved in the control of movement 
and posture. 

  visceral PNS    The part of the peripheral nervous sys-

tem that innervates the internal organs, blood vessels, 
and glands; also called autonomic nervous system. 

  vision    The sense of sight. 
  visual acuity    The ability of the visual system to 

distinguish between two nearby points. 

  visual angle    A way to describe distance across the 
retina; an object that subtends an angle of 3.5° will 
form an image on the retina that is 1 mm across. 

  visual ﬁ eld    The total region of space viewed by both 

eyes when the eyes are ﬁ xated on a point. 

  visual hemiﬁ eld    The half of the visual ﬁ eld to one 

side of the ﬁ xation point. 

  vitreous humor    The jellylike substance ﬁ lling the 

eye between the lens and the retina. 

  VL nucleus     See  ventral lateral nucleus. 
  vocal folds    Two bands of muscle within the larynx, 
also known as vocal chords, that vibrate to produce 
the human voice. 

  volley principle    The idea that high sound frequen-
cies are represented in the pooled activity of a num-
ber of neurons, each of which ﬁ res in a phase-locked 
manner. 

  voltage    The force exerted on an electrically charged 
particle, represented by the symbol V and measured 
in volts; also called electrical potential or potential 
difference. 

  voltage clamp    A device that enables an investiga-
tor to hold the membrane potential constant while 
transmembrane currents are measured. 

  voltage-gated calcium channel    A membrane pro-
tein forming a pore that is permeable to Ca 2  ⫹  and 
gated by depolarization of the membrane. 

  voltage-gated potassium channel    A membrane 

protein forming a pore that is permeable to K ⫹  and 
gated by depolarization of the membrane. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   923
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   923

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

924

GLOSSARY

  voltage-gated sodium channel    A membrane pro-
tein forming a pore that is permeable to Na ⫹  and 
gated by depolarization of the membrane. 

  volumetric thirst    The motivation to drink water as 

a result of a decrease in blood volume. 

  VOR     See  vestibulo-ocular reﬂ ex. 
  VPM nucleus     See  ventral posterior medial nucleus. 
  VP nucleus     See  ventral posterior nucleus.

 Wada procedure    A procedure in which one cerebral 
hemisphere is anesthetized to enable testing of the 
function of the other hemisphere. 

  Wernicke–Geschwind model    A model for language 

processing involving interactions of Broca’s area 
and Wernicke’s area with sensory and motor areas. 

  Wernicke’s aphasia    A language disturbance in 

which speech is ﬂ uent but comprehension is poor. 

  Wernicke’s area    An area on the superior surface of 
the temporal lobe between auditory cortex and the 

angular gyrus; associated with Wernicke’s aphasia 
when damaged. 

  white matter    A generic term for a collection of cen-

tral nervous system axons. When a freshly dissected 
brain is cut open, axons appear white.  See also  gray 
matter. 

  working memory    Information storage that is tem-
porary, limited in capacity, and requires continual 
rehearsal. 

  Young–Helmholtz trichromacy theory    The 
theory that the brain assigns colors based on a 
comparison of the readout of the three types of cone 
photoreceptors.

 zeitgeber    Any environmental cue, such as the light–

dark cycle, which signals the passage of time. 

  Z line    A band delineating sarcomeres in a myoﬁ bril 

of a muscle ﬁ ber. 

901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   924
901–924_Bear_Glossary_revised_final.indd   924

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 REFERENCES 

 Chapter 1 
 Allman JM. 1999.  Evolving 

Brains . New York: Scientiﬁ c 
American Library. 

 Alt KW, Jeunesse C, Buitrago-
Téllez CH, Wächter R, Boës 
E, Pichler SL. 1997. Evidence 
for stone age cranial surgery. 
Nature  387:360. 

 Alzheimer’s Association. http://

www.alz.org 

 American Stroke Association. 

http://www.strokeassociation.org/ 

 Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention, National Center for 
Injury Prevention and Control. 
http://www.cdc.gov 

 Clarke E, O’Malley C. 1968.  The 

Human Brain and Spinal Cord , 
2nd ed. Los Angeles: University 
of California Press. 

 Corsi P, ed. 1991.  The Enchanted 

Loom.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Crick F. 1994.  The Astonishing 

Hypothesis: The Scientiﬁ c 
Search for the Soul . New York: 
Macmillan. 

 Finger S. 1994.  Origins of 

Neuroscience . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Glickstein M. 2014. Neuroscience: 

A Historical Introduction. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.

 Hall MJ, DeFrances CJ. 2003. 
National Hospital Discharge 
Survey. Advance Data from 
Vital and Health Statistics No. 
332. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 

 Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler 
O, Jin R, Koretz D, Merikangas 
KR, Rush AJ, Walters EE, 
Wang PS. 2003. The epide-
miology of major depressive 
 disorder: results from the 
National Comorbidity Survey 

Replication  (NCS-R).  Journal 
of the   American Medical 
Association  289(23):3095–3105. 

 Mos´ cicki EK. 1997. Identiﬁ cation 
of suicide risk factors using epi-
demiologic studies.  Psychiatric  
Clinics of North America  
20(3):499–517. 

 National Academy of Sciences 
Institute of Medicine. 1991. 
Science, Medicine, and Animals. 
Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. 

 National Institute of Mental 

Health. http://www.nimh.nih.
gov/index.shtml 

 National Institute on Drug Abuse. 

http://www.drugabuse.gov 

 National Parkinson Foundation. 

http://www.parkinson.org. 
 National Stroke Association. 

http://www.stroke.org. 

 Shepherd GM, Erulkar SD. 1997. 
Centenary of the synapse: from 
Sherrington to the molecular 
biology of the synapse and 
beyond.  Trends in Neurosciences  
20:385–392. 

 U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services. 2004.  Mental 
Health: A   Report of the Surgeon 
General.    Rockville, MD: U.S. 
Department of Health and 
Human Services, Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration, Center 
for Mental Health Services, 
National Institutes of Health, 
National Institute of Mental 
Health. 

 U.S. Ofﬁ ce of Science and 
Technology Policy. 1991. 
Decade of the Brain 1990–2000: 
Maximizing Human Potential. 
Washington, DC: Subcommittee 
on Brain and Behavioral 
Sciences.  

Chapter 2 
 Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, 
Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 
2008.  Molecular Biology of 
the Cell , 5th ed. New York: 
Garland. 

 Bick K, Amaducci L, Pepeu 

G. 1987.  The Early Story of  
Alzheimer’s Disease.  New York: 
Raven Press. 

 Capecchi MR. 1980. High efﬁ -

ciency transformation by direct 
microinjection of DNA into 
cultured mammalian cells.  Cell  
22:479–488. 

 Chen SC, Tvrdik P, Peden E, 
Cho S, Wu S, Spangrude G, 
Capecchi MR. 2010. Hemato-
poietic origin of pathological 
 grooming in Hoxb8 mutant 
mice.  Cell  141(5):775–785. 
 DeFelipe J, Jones EG. 1998. 

 Cajal on the Cerebral Cortex . 
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 De Vos KJ, Grierson AJ, 

Ackerley S, Miller CCJ. 2008. 
Role of axoplasmic transport 
in neurodegenerative diseases. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
31:151–173. 

 Eroglu C, Barres BA. 2010. 

Regu lation of synaptic connec-
tivity by glia.  Nature  468:
223–231. 

 Finger S. 1994.  Origins of 

Neuroscience . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Folger KR, Wong EA, Wahl G, 
Capecchi MR. 1982. Patterns 
of integration of DNA microin-
jected into cultured mammalian 
cells: evidence for homologous 
recombination between in-
jected plasmid DNA molecules. 
 Molecular and Cellular Biology  
2:1372–1387. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   925
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   925

925
 925

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

926

REFERENCES

 Goedert M, Spillantini MG, 

Hasegawa M, Jakes R, Crowther 
RA, Krug A. 1996. Molecular 
dissection of the neuroﬁ bril-
lary lesions of Alzheimer’s 
disease.  Cold   Spring Harbor 
Symposia on Quantitative  
 Biology,  Vol. LXI. Cold Spring 
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory Press. 

 Grafstein B, Forman DS. 1980. 

Intracellular transport in 
neurons.  Physiological Reviews  
60:1167–1283. 

 Hammersen F. 1980.  Histology . 

Baltimore: Urban & 
Schwarzenberg. 

 Harris KM, Stevens JK. 1989. 

Dendritic spines of CA1 
pyramidal cells in the rat 
hippocampus: serial electron 
 microscopy with reference to 
their biophysical characteris-
tics.  Journal of Neuroscience  
9:2982–2997. 

 Hubel DH. 1988.  Eye, Brain and 

Vision.  New York: Scientiﬁ c 
American Library. 

the neuron doctrine.  Journal 
of   the History of Neuroscience  
8:170–178. 

 Lent R, Azevedo FAC, Andrade-
Moraes CH, Pinto AVO. 2012. 
How many neurons do you 
have? Some dogmas of quan-
titative neuroscience under 
revision.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience  35: 1–9. 

 Levitan I, Kaczmarek L. 2002. 

 The Neuron: Cell and Molecular 
Biology , 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

 Nelson SB, Hempel C, Sugino K. 

2006. Probing the transcriptome 
of neuronal cell types.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
16:571–576. 

 Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H 
deF. 1991.  The Fine Structure 
of the   Nervous System , 3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Purpura D. 1974. Dendritic spine 
“dysgenesis” and mental retar-
dation.  Science  20:1126–1128. 

 Jones EG. 1999. Golgi, Cajal and 

 Wilt BA, Burns LD, Ho ETW, 

 Sadava D, Hills DM, Heller HC, 

Berenbaum MR. 2011.  Life: 
The Science   of Biology , 9th ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Shepherd GM, Erulkar SD. 1997. 
Centenary of the synapse: from 
Sherrington to the molecular 
biology of the synapse and 
beyond.  Trends in Neurosciences  
20:385–392. 

 Steward O, Schuman EM. 2001. 
Protein synthesis at synaptic 
sites on dendrites.  Annual Review  
 of Neuroscience  24:299–325. 

 Thomas KR, Capecchi MR. 1987. 

Site-directed mutagenesis 
by gene targeting in mouse 
embryo- derived stem cells.  Cell  
51:503–512. 

 Vickers JC, Riederer BM, Marugg 

RA, Buee-Scherrer V, Buee L, 
Delacourte A, Morrison JH. 
1994. Alterations in neuroﬁ la-
ment protein immunoreactiv-
ity in human hippocampal 
neurons related to normal 
aging and Alzheimer’s disease. 
 Neuroscience  62:1–13. 

Ghosh KK, Mukamel EA, 
Schnitzer MJ. 2009. Advances 
in light microscopy for neu-
roscience.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  32: 435–506. 

 Chapter 3 
 Doyle DA, Cabral JM, Pfuetzner 
RA, Kuo A, Gulbis JM, Cohen 
SL, Chait BT, MacKinnon R. 
1998. The structure of the potas-
sium channel: molecular basis 
of K ⫹  conduction and selectivity. 
 Science  280:69–77. 

 Goldstein SA, Pheasant DJ, Miller 

C. 1994. The charybdotoxin re-
ceptor of a Shaker K ⫹  channel: 
peptide and channel residues 
mediating molecular recogni-
tion. Neuron 12:1377–1388. 

 Hille B. 2001 . Ionic Channels of 
Excitable Membranes,  3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Jan L, Jan YN. 1997. Cloned potas-
sium channels from eukaryotes 
and prokaryotes.  Annual Review 
of   Neuroscience  20:91–123. 

 Levitan I, Kaczmarek L. 2002. 

 The Neuron: Cell and Molecular 
Biology , 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

 Li M, Unwin N, Staufer KA, Jan 

YN, Jan L. 1994. Images of puri-
ﬁ ed  Shaker  potassium channels. 
 Current Biology  4:110–115. 

 MacKinnon R. 1995. Pore loops: 

an emerging theme in ion 
 channel structure.  Neuron  
14:889–892. 

 MacKinnon R. 2003. Potassium 

channels.  Federation of 
European   Biochemical Societies 
Letters  555:62–65. 

 Miller C. 1988.  Shaker  shakes out 
potassium channels.  Trends in  
 Neurosciences  11:185–186. 
 Nicholls J, Martin AR, Fuchs 

PA, Brown DA, Diamond ME, 
Weisblat D. 2011.  From Neuron 
to Brain , 5th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Ransom BR, Goldring S. 1973. 
Slow depolarization in cells 
presumed to be glia in cere-
bral cortex of cat.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  36:869–878. 

 Sanguinetti MC, Spector PS. 1997. 

Potassium channelopathies. 
 Neuropharmacology  36:755–762. 

 Shepherd G. 1994.  Neurobiology , 

3rd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Somjen GG. 2004.  Ions in the 

Brain: Normal Function, 
Seizures, and Stroke.  New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

 Stoffel M, Jan LY. 1998. Epilepsy 

genes: excitement traced to 
potassium channels.  Nature 
Genetics  18:6–8. 

 Chapter 4 
 Agmon A, Connors BW. 1992. 

Correlation between intrinsic 
ﬁ ring patterns and thalamo-
cortical synaptic responses of 
neurons in mouse barrel cortex. 
 Journal of   Neuroscience  
12:19–329. 

 Armstrong CM, Hille B. 1998. 

Voltage-gated ion channels and 
electrical excitability.  Neuron  
20:371–380. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   926
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   926

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Boyden ES, Zhang F, Bamberg E, 

 Nagel G, Szellas T, Huhn 

W, Kateriya S, Adeishvili 
N, Berthold P, Ollig D, 
Hegemann P, Bamberg E. 2003. 
Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly 
light-gated cation-selective 
membrane channel.  Proceedings 
of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of 
America  100:13940–13945. 

 Narahashi T. 1974. Chemicals as 

tools in the study of excitable 
membranes.  Physiology Reviews  
54:813–889. 

 Narahashi T, Deguchi T, 

Urakawa N, Ohkubo Y. 1960. 
Stabilization and rectiﬁ cation 
of muscle ﬁ ber membrane by 
tetrodotoxin.  American Journal 
of Physiology  198:934–938. 

 Narahashi T, Moore JW, Scott 

WR. 1964. Tetrodotoxin block-
age of sodium conductance 
increase in lobster giant axons. 
 Journal of   General Physiology  
47:965–974. 

 Neher E. 1992. Nobel lecture: 
ion channels or communica-
tion  between and within cells. 
 Neuron  8:605–612. 

 Neher E, Sakmann B. 1992. 

The patch clamp technique. 
 Scientiﬁ c   American  266:28–35. 

 Nicholls J, Martin AR, Fuchs 

PA, Brown DA, Diamond ME, 
Weisblat D. 2011.  From Neuron 
to Brain , 5th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Noda M, Shimizu S, Tanabe T, 
Takai T, Kayano T, Ikeda T, 
Takahashi H, Nakayama H, 
Kanaoka Y, Minamino N, et al. 
1984. Primary structure of 
 Electrophorus   electricus  sodium 
channel deduced from cDNA 
sequence.  Nature  312:121–127. 
 Shepherd G. 1994.  Neurobiology , 

3rd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Sigworth FJ, Neher E. 1980. 

Single Na ⫹  channel currents 
observed in cultured rat muscle 
cells.  Nature  287:447–449. 

 Unwin N. 1989. The structure of 

ion channels in membranes of ex-
citable cells.  Neuron  3:665–676. 

REFERENCES

927

Watanabe A. 1958. The interac-

tion of electrical activity among 
neurons of lobster cardiac 
ganglion. Japanese Journal of 
Physiology 8:305–318.

 Chapter 5 
 Bloedel JR, Gage PW, Llinás R, 

Quastel DM. 1966. Transmitter 
release at the squid giant syn-
apse in the presence of tetrodo-
toxin.  Nature  212:49–50. 

Chouquet D, Triller A. 2013. 

The dynamic synapse. Neuron 
80:691–703.

   Colquhoun D, Sakmann B. 1998. 
From muscle endplate to brain 
synapses: a short history of syn-
apses and agonist-activated ion 
channels.  Neuron  20:381–387. 

 Connors BW, Long MA. 2004. 

Electrical synapses in the mam-
malian brain.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  27:393–418. 

 Cowan WM, Südhof TC, Stevens 
CF. 2001.  Synapses . Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 

 Fatt P, Katz B. 1951. An analy-
sis of the end-plate potential 
recorded with an intracellular 
electrode.  Journal of Physiology 
(London)  115:320–370. 

 Furshpan E, Potter D. 1959. 
Transmission at the giant 
motor synapses of the crayﬁ sh. 
 Journal   of Physiology (London)  
145:289–325. 

Harris KM, Weinberg RJ. 2012. 
Ultrastructure of synapses in 
the mammalian brain. Cold 
Spring Harbor Perspectives in 
Biology 4:a005587.

 Heuser J, Reese T. 1973. Evidence 
for recycling of synaptic vesicle 
membrane during transmitter 
release at the frog neuromus-
cular junction.  Journal of Cell 
Biology  57:315–344. 

 Heuser J, Reese T. 1977. Structure 

of the synapse. In  Handbook 
of   Physiology—Section 1. The 
Nervous   System, Vol. I. Cellular 
Biology of   Neurons,  eds. Brookhart 
JM, Mountcastle VB. Bethesda, 
MD: American Physiological 
Society, pp. 261–294. 

Nagel G, Deisseroth K. 2005. 
Millisecond-timescale, geneti-
cally targeted optical control 
of neural activity.  Nature 
Neuroscience  8:1263–1268. 

Brunton L, Chabner B, Knollman 
B. 2011. Goodman and Gilman's 
the Pharmacological Basis of 
Therapeutics, 12th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.

 Cole KS. 1949. Dynamic electrical 
characteristics of the squid axon 
membrane.  Archives of Scientiﬁ c  
 Physiology  3:253–258. 

 Connors B, Gutnick M. 1990. 
Intrinsic ﬁ ring patterns of 
 diverse neocortical neurons. 
 Trends in   Neurosciences  
13:99–104. 

 Hille B. 2001.  Ionic Channels of 
Excitable Membranes , 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Hodgkin A. 1976. Chance and 
design in electrophysiology: 
an informal account of certain 
experiments on nerves carried 
out between 1942 and 1952. 
 Journal   of Physiology (London)  
263:1–21. 

 Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF, Katz B. 

1952. Measurement of cur-
rent voltage relations in the 
membrane of the giant axon of 
 Loligo .  Journal of Physiology 
(London)  116:424–448. 

 Huguenard J, McCormick D. 1994. 
 Electrophysiology of the Neuron . 
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Kullmann DM, Waxman SG. 

2010. Neurological channelopa-
thies: new insights into disease 
mechanisms and ion channel 
function.  Journal of Physiology  
 (London)  588:1823–1827. 

 Levitan I, Kaczmarek L. 2002. 

 The Neuron: Cell and Molecular 
Biology , 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

 Llinás R. 1988. The intrinsic 
 electrophysiological proper-
ties of mammalian neurons: 
insights into central nervous 
system function.  Science  
242:1654–1664. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   927
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   927

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Loewi O. 1953.  From the Workshop 

 Stuart G, Spruston N, Hausser M. 

928

REFERENCES

 Johnston D, Wu SM-S. 1994. 

 Foundations of Cellular 
Neurophysiology.  Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 

 Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell 
TM, Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth 
AJ. 2012.  Principles of Neural 
Science,  5th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Professional. 
 Koch C. 2004.  Biophysics of 
Computation: Information 
Processing in Single Neurons . 
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Llinás R, Sugimori M, Silver RB. 

1992. Microdomains of high 
calcium concentration in a 
 presynaptic terminal.  Science  
256:677–679. 

of Discoveries . Lawrence: 
University of Kansas Press. 
Long MA, Deans MR, Paul DL, 

Connors BW. 2002. Rhythmicity 
without synchrony in the 
electrically uncoupled inferior 
olive. Journal of Neuroscience 
22:10898-10905.

 Matthews R. 1995.  Nightmares of 
Nature . London: Harper Collins. 

 Neher E. 1998. Vesicle pools and 
Ca2 ⫹  microdomains: new tools 
for understanding their roles 
in neurotransmitter release. 
 Neuron  20:389–399. 

 Neher E, Sakmann B. 1992. 

The patch clamp technique. 
 Scientiﬁ c   American  266:44–51. 

 Nicholls JG, Martin AR, Fuchs 
PA, Brown DA, Diamond ME, 
Weisblat D. 2011.  From Neuron 
to Brain,  5th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Rajendra S, Schoﬁ eld PR. 1995. 

Molecular mechanisms of inher-
ited startle syndromes.  Trends 
in   Neurosciences  18:80–82. 

 Rothman JE. 2002. Lasker Basic 
Medical Research Award. The 
machinery and principles of 
vesicle transport in the cell. 
 Nature   Medicine  8:1059–1062. 

 Sheng M, Sabatini BL, Südhof TC. 

2012.  The Synapse.  New York: 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press. 

Shepherd GM. 2003. The Synaptic 

 Changeux J-P. 1993. Chemical 

Organization of the Brain. 
New York: Oxford University 
Press.

 Sherrington C. 1906.  Integrative 
Action of the Nervous System.  
New Haven: Yale University 
Press. 

 Siksou L, Triller A, Marty S. 2011. 

Ultrastructural organization of 
presynaptic terminals. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology 
21:261–268.

  Sloper JJ, Powell TP. 1978. Gap 

junctions between dendrites 
and somata of neurons in the 
primate sensori-motor cortex. 
 Proceedings   of the Royal Society, 
Series B  203:39–47. 

2007.  Dendrites,  2nd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 Südhof TC. 2013. Neurotransmit-
ter release: the last millisecond 
in the life of a synaptic vesicle. 
 Neuron  80:675–690. 

 Unwin N. 1993. Neurotransmitter 

action: opening of ligand-gated 
ion channels.  Cell  72:31–41. 
Watanabe A. 1958. The interac-

tion of electrical activity among 
neurons of lobster cardiac 
ganglion. Japanese Journal of 
Physiology 8:305-318.

 Chapter 6 
 Attwell D, Mobbs P. 1994. 
Neurotransmitter trans-
porters.  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  4:353–359. 
 Brezina V, Weiss KR. 1997. 

Analyzing the functional conse-
quences of transmitter complex-
ity.  Trends in Neurosciences  
20:538–543. 

 Burnstock G, Krügel U, 

Abbracchio MP, Illes P. 2011. 
Purinergic signalling: from 
normal behaviour to pathologi-
cal brain function.  Progress in 
Neurobiology  95:229–274. 

 Castillo PE, Younts TJ, Chávez 
AE, Hashimotodani Y. 2012. 
Endocannabinoid signaling 
and synaptic function.  Neuron  
76:70–81. 

signaling in the brain.  Scientiﬁ c  
 American  269:58–62.

  Colquhoun D, Sakmann B. 1998. 
From muscle endplate to brain 
synapses: a short history of syn-
apse and agonist-activated ion 
channels.  Neuron  20:381–387. 
 Cowan WM, Südhof TC, Stevens 
CF. 2001.  Synapses . Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 

 Gilman AG. 1995. Nobel lecture: 

G proteins and regulation of 
 adenylyl cyclase.  Bioscience 
Report  15:65–97. 

 Gudermann T, Schöneberg T, 

Schultz G. 1997. Functional and 
structural complexity of signal 
transduction via G-protein-
couple receptors.  Annual Review 
of Neuroscience  20:399–427. 

 Hille B. 2001.  Ionic Channels of 
Excitable Membranes , 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

Iversen LL, Iversen SD, Bloom FE, 

Roth RH. 2008. Introduction to 
Neuropsychopharmacology. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

Jiang J, Amara SG. 2011. New 

views of glutamate trans-
porter structure and  function: 
advances and challenges. 
Neuropharmacology 60:172–181.

 Katritch V, Cherezov V, Stevens 
RC. 2012. Diversity and modu-
larity of G protein-coupled 
receptor structures.  Trends 
in Pharmacological Sciences  
33:17–27. 

 Krnjevi´c K. 2010. When and 

why amino acids?  Journal of 
Physiology (London)  588:33–44. 

 Kumar J, Mayer ML. 2013. 

Functional insights from glu-
tamate receptor ion channel 
structures.  Annual Review of 
Physiology  75:313–337. 

 Matsuda LA. 1997. Molecular as-
pects of cannabinoid receptors. 
 Critical Reviews in Neurobiology  
11:143–166. 

 Mayer ML, Armstrong N. 2004. 
Structure and function of glu-
tamate receptor ion channels. 
 Annual   Review of Physiology  
66:161–181. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   928
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   928

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Meyer JS, Quenzer LF. 2013. 

 Psychopharmacology: Drugs, the 
Brain, and Behavior , 2nd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Mustafa AK, Gadalla MM, 

Snyder SH. 2009. Signaling 
by  gasotransmitters.  Science 
Signaling  2(68):re2. 

 Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, 

Malenka RC. 2008.  Molecular 
Neuropharmacology: A 
Foundation for Clinical 
Neuroscience,  2nd ed. McGraw-
Hill Professional. 

Nicholls JG, Martin AR, Fuchs 
PA, Brown DA, Diamond ME, 
Weisblat D. 2011. From Neuron 
to Brain, 5th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer.

 Nicoll R, Malenka R, Kauer J. 
1990. Functional comparison 
of neurotransmitter receptor 
subtypes in the mammalian 
nervous system.  Physiological 
Reviews  70:513–565. 

 Palczewski K, Orban T. 2013. From 

atomic structures to neuronal 
functions of G protein– coupled 
receptors. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 36:139–164.

  Pierce KL, Premont RT, Lefkowitz 
RJ. 2002. Seven-transmembrane 
receptors.  Nature Reviews 
Molecular   and Cell Biology  
3:639–650. 

 Piomelli D. 2003. The molecu-
lar logic of endocannabinoid 
signalling.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  4:873–884. 

 Regehr WG, Carey MR, Best AR. 

2009. Activity-dependent regula-
tion of synapses by retrograde 
messengers.  Neuron  63:154–170. 

 Siegel GJ, Agranoff BW, Albers 

RW, Fisher SK, Uhler MD, eds. 
1998 . Basic Neurochemistry: 
Molecular, Cellular and Medical 
Aspects , 6th ed. Baltimore: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 

 Snyder S. 1986.  Drugs and the 

Brain . New York: W.H. Freeman. 

Squire LR, Berg D, Bloom FE, 
du Lac S, Ghosh A, Spitzer 
NC. 2012. Fundamental 
Neuroscience, 4th ed. San Diego: 
Academic Press.

 Wilson RI, Nicoll RA. 2002. 

Endocannabinoid signaling in 
the brain.  Science  296:678–682. 

 Wollmuth LP, Sobolevsky AI. 

2004. Structure and gating of 
the glutamate receptor ion chan-
nel.  Trends   in Neurosciences  
27:321–328. 

 Chapter 7 
 Butterworth CE, Bendich A. 1996. 
Folic acid and the prevention of 
birth defects.  Annual Review of  
 Nutrition  16:73–97. 

 Cajal SR. 1899.  Clark University, 

1889–1899: Decennial 
Celebration,  ed. Story WE. 
Worcester: Clark University 
Press, pp. 311–382. 

 Chung K, Deisseroth K. 2013. 

CLARITY for mapping the ner-
vous system.  Nature Methods  
10:508–513. 

 Creslin E. 1974. Development of 
the nervous system: a logical 
approach to neuroanatomy.  CIBA  
 Clinical Symposium  26:1–32. 

 Frackowick RSJ. 1998. The func-
tional architecture of the brain. 
 Daedalus  127:105–130. 

 Gilbert SF. 2003.  Developmental 

Biology,  7th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Gluhbegoric N, Williams TH. 

1980.  The Human Brain: 
A Photographic   Guide . 
Philadelphia: Lippincott. 

 Johnson KA, Becker JA. The whole 

brain atlas. http://www.med
.harvard.edu/AANLIB/home/html 

 Kaas JH. 1995. The evolution of 

neocortex.  Brain, Behavior and  
 Evolution  46:187–196. 

 Kaas JH. 2013. The evolution of 
brains from early mammals to 
humans. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews. Cognitive Science 
4:33–45. 

 Posner MI, Raichle M. 1994. 
 Images of Mind . New York: 
Scientiﬁ c American Library. 
 Povinelli DJ, Preuss TM. 1995. 
Theory of mind: evolutionary 
history of a cognitive specializa-
tion.  Trends in Neurosciences  
18:414–424. 

REFERENCES

929

 Seung S. 2012.  Connectome: How 

the Brain’s Wiring Makes Us 
Who We Are . Boston: Joughton 
Mifﬂ in Harcourt. 

 Smith JL, Schoenwolf GC. 1997. 

Neurulation: coming to clo-
sure.  Trends in Neurosciences  
20:510–517. 

 Watson C. 1995.  Basic Human 

Neuroanatomy: An Introductory 
Atlas , 5th ed. Baltimore: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 

 Chapter 8 
 Belluscio L, Gold GH, Nemes A, 

Axel R. 1998. Mice deﬁ cient 
in G(olf) are anosmic.  Neuron  
20:69–81. 

Blauvelt DG, Sato TF, Wienisch 

M, Knöpfel T, Murthy VN. 2013. 
Distinct spatiotemporal activ-
ity in principal neurons of the 
mouse olfactory bulb in anesthe-
tized and awake states. Frontiers 
in Neural Circuits 7:46.

 Brennan PA, Keverne EB. 2004. 

Something in the air? New 
insights into mammalian 
pheromones.  Current Biology  
14:R81–R89. 

 Buck LB. 1996. Information 

coding in the vertebrate olfac-
tory system.  Annual Review of 
Neurosciences  19:517–554. 

 Buck LB, Axel R. 1991. A novel 
multigene family may encode 
odorant receptors: a molecular 
basis for odor recognition.  Cell  
65:175–187. 

Bushdid C, Magnasco MO, 

Vosshall LB, Keller A. 2014. 
Humans can discriminate more 
than 1 trillion olfactory stimuli. 
Science 343:1370–1372.

Dhawale AK, Hagiwara A, Bhalla 

US, Murthy VN, Albeanu DF. 
2010. Non-redundant odor 
coding by sister mitral cells 
revealed by light addressable 
glomeruli in the mouse. Nature 
Neuroscience 13:1404–1412.
 Dorries KM. 1998. Olfactory 

coding: time in a model.  Neuron  
20:7–10. 

 Engen T. 1991.  Odor Sensation and 

Memory . New York: Praeger. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   929
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   929

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

930

REFERENCES

 Fain GL. 2003.  Sensory 

Transduction . Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer. 

 Getchell TV, Doty RL, Bartoshuk 
LM, Snow JB. 1991.  Smell and  
 Taste in Health and Disease . 
New York: Raven Press. 

Jones G, Teeling EC, Rossiter SJ. 
2013. From the ultrasonic to the 
infrared: molecular evolution 
and the sensory biology of bats. 
Frontiers in Physiology 4:117.

 Kauer JS. 1991. Contributions of 
topography and parallel process-
ing to odor coding in the verte-
brate olfactory pathway.  Trends 
in   Neurosciences  14:79–85. 

Kinnamon SC. 2013. Neurosensory 
transmission without a synapse: 
new perspectives on taste sig-
naling. BMC Biology 11:42.
 Laurent G. 2002. Olfactory net-

work dynamics and the coding of 
multidimensional signals.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  3:884–895. 

 Laurent G, Wehr M, Davidowitz 

H. 1996. Temporal repre-
sentations of odors in an 
olfactory network.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  16:3837–3847. 
Liberles SD. 2014. Mammalian 

pheromones. Annual Review of 
Physiology 76:151–175.

Liman ER, Zhang YV, Montell C. 
2014. Peripheral coding of taste. 
Neuron 81:984–1000.

 Luo M, Katz LC. 2004. Encoding 

pheromonal signals in the 
mammalian vomeronasal 
system.  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:429–434. 

Mattes RD. 2009. Is there a fatty 

acid taste? Annual Review of 
Nutrition 29:305–27.

McClintock MK. 1971. Menstrual 

synchrony and suppression. 
Nature 229:244–245.

Murthy VN. 2011. Olfactory maps 

in the brain. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 34:233–258.

 Nakamura T, Gold GH. 

1987. A cyclic nucleotide-
gated conductance in olfac-
tory receptor cilia.  Nature  
325:442–444. 

 Nelson G, Hoon MA, 

Chandrashekar J, Zhang Y, 
Ryba NJ, Zuker CS. 2001. 
Mammalian sweet taste recep-
tors.  Cell  106:381–390. 

 Ressler J, Sullivan SL, Buck LB. 

1993. A zonal organization of 
odorant receptor gene expres-
sion in the olfactory epithelium. 
 Cell  73:597–609. 

Sato T. 1980. Recent advances 

in the physiology of taste 
cells. Progress in Neurobiology 
14:25–67.

 Stern K, McClintock MK. 1998. 

Regulation of ovulation by 
human pheromones.  Nature  
392:177–179. 

Stettler DD, Axel R. 2009. 

 Representations of odor in 
the  piriform cortex. Neuron 
63:854–864.

 Stewart RE, DeSimone JA, Hill 
DL. 1997. New perspectives in 
gustatory physiology: trans-
duction, development, and 
plasticity.  American Journal of 
Physiology  272:C1–C26. 

 Stopfer M, Bhagavan S, Smith 

BH, Laurent G. 1997. Impaired 
odour discrimination on desyn-
chronization of odour-encoding 
neural assemblies.  Nature  
390:70–74. 

 Strausfeld NJ, Hildebrand JG. 

1999. Olfactory systems: 
common design, uncommon 
origins?  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  9:634–639. 

 Zhao GQ, Zhang Y, Hoon MA, 

Chandrashekar J, Erlenbach I, 
Ryba NJ, Zuker CS. 2003. 
The receptors for mammalian 
sweet and umami taste.  Cell  
115:255–266. 

 Chapter 9 
 Arshavsky VY, Lamb TD, 

Pugh EN. 2002. G proteins 
and  phototransduction.  Annual 
Review of Physiology  
64:153–187. 

 Barlow H. 1953. Summation and 
inhibition in the frog’s retina. 
 Journal of Physiology (London)  
119:69–78. 

 Baylor DA. 1987. Photoreceptor 

signals and vision.  Investigative 
Ophthalmology and Visual 
Science  28:34–49. 

 Berson DM. 2003. Strange  vision: 

ganglion cells as circadian 
photoreceptors.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  26:314–320. 
 Burns ME, Baylor DA. 2001. 

Activation, deactivation, and 
adaptation in vertebrate 
 photoreceptor cells.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
24:779–805. 

 Curcio CA, Sloan KR, Kalina RE, 
Hendrickson AE. 1990. Human 
photoreceptor  topography. 
 Journal of Comparative 
Neurology  292:497–523. 

 Dacey DM, Packer OS. 2003. 

 Colour coding in the primate 
retina: diverse cell types and 
cone-speciﬁ c circuitry.   Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
13:421–427. 

 Dowling JE. 2012.  The Retina: 
An Approachable Part of the 
Brain . Revised ed. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 

 Dowling JE, Werblin FS. 1971. 

Synaptic organization of the ver-
tebrate retina.  Vision Research 
Suppl  3:1–15. 

 Fesenko EE, Kolesnikov SS, 

Lyubarsky AL. 1985. Induction 
by cyclic GMP of cationic con-
ductance in plasma membrane 
of retinal rod outer segment. 
 Nature  313:310–313. 

 Meredith M. 2001. Human vomero-

 Wysocki CJ, Preti G. 2004. Facts, 

nasal organ function: a critical 
review of best and worst cases. 
 Chemical Senses . 26:433–445. 
 Mombaerts P. 2004. Genes and 

ligands for odorant, vomero-
nasal and taste receptors. 
 Nature Reviews   Neuroscience  
5:263–278. 

fallacies, fears, and frustra-
tions with human phero-
mones.  Anatomical Record  
281A:1201–1211. 

Zhang X, Firestein S. 2002. The 
olfactory receptor gene super-
family of the mouse. Nature 
Neuroscience 5:124–133.

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   930
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   930

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Field GD, Chichilinsky EJ. 2007. 

 Smith SO. 2010. Structure and 

 De Haan EHF, Cowey A. 2011. 

Information processing in 
the primate retina: circuitry 
and coding.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  30:1–30. 

 Gegenfurtner KR, Kiper DC. 2003. 

Color vision.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  26:181–206. 

Hofer H, Carroll J, Neitz J, Neitz 

M, Williams DR. 2005. Orga-
nization of the human trichro-
matic cone mosaic.  Journal of 
Neuroscience 25:9669–9679.

 Kufﬂ er S. 1953. Discharge patterns 

and functional organization of 
the mammalian retina.  Journal 
of Neurophysiology  16:37–68. 

 Masland RH. 2001. The fun-

damental plan of the retina. 
 Nature Neuroscience  4:877–886. 

 Nassi JJ, Callaway EM. 2009. 

Parallel processing strategies 
of the primate visual system. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
10:360–372. 

 Nathans J. 1999. The evolution 
and physiology of human color 
vision: insights from molecular 
genetic studies of visual pig-
ments.  Neuron  24:299–312. 

 Neitz J, Jacobs GH. 1986. 

Polymorphism of the long- 
wavelength cone in normal 
human colour vision.  Nature  
323:623–625. 

 Newell FW. 1996.  Ophthalmology , 

8th ed. St. Louis: Mosby. 

 Rodieck RW. 1998.  The First Steps 

in Seeing . Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer. 

Roorda A, Williams DR. 1999. The 

arrangement of the three cone 
classes in the living human eye. 
Nature 397:520–522.

 Schmidt TM, Chen S, Hattar S. 

2011. Intrinsically photosensitive 
retinal ganglion cells: many sub-
types, diverse functions. Trends 
in Neurosciences 34:572–580. 
 Schnapf JL, Baylor DA. 1987. 

How photoreceptor cells respond 
to light.  Scientiﬁ c American  
256:40–47. 

 Schwab L. 1987.  Primary Eye Care 

in Developing Nations . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

activation of the visual pigment 
rhodopsin.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  39:309–328. 

 Solomon SG, Lennie P. 2007. The 

machinery of colour vision. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
8:276–286. 

 Wade NJ. 2007. Image, eye, 
and retina.  Journal of the 
Optical Society of America  
24:1229–1249. 

 Wässle H. 2004. Parallel process-
ing in the mammalian retina. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
5:747–757. 

 Wässle H, Boycott B. 1991. Func-
tional architecture of the mam-
malian retina.  Physiological 
Reviews  71:447–480. 

 Watanabe M, Rodieck RW. 
1989. Parasol and midget 
ganglion cells of the primate 
retina.  Journal of Comparative 
Neurology  289:434–454. 

 Weiland JD, Liu W, Humayun 
MS. 2005. Retinal prosthesis. 
 Annual Review of Biomedical 
Engineering  7:361–401. 

 Chapter 10 
 Alonso JM. 2002. Neural connec-
tions and receptive ﬁ eld proper-
ties in the primary visual cortex. 
 Neuroscientist  8:443–456. 

 Barlow H. 1972. Single units and 

sensation: a neuron doctrine 
for perceptual psychology? 
 Perception  1:371–394. 

 Callaway EM. 1998. Local cir-

cuits in primary visual cortex 
of the macaque monkey.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
21:47–74 

 Casagrande VA, Xu X. 2004. 
Parallel visual pathways: a 
comparative perspective. In 
 The Visual Neurosciences , eds. 
Chalupa L, Werner JS. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
pp. 494–506. 

 Courtney SM, Ungerleider LG. 
1997. What fMRI has taught 
us about human vision.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
7:554–561. 

REFERENCES

931

On the usefulness of “what” and 
“where” pathways in vision. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences  
15:460–466. 

 Desimone R, Albright TD, 

Gross CG, Bruce C. 1984. 
Stimulus-selective properties 
of inferior temporal neurons 
in the macaque.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  4:2051–2062. 
 Fraser J. 1908. A new visual 
 illusion of direction.  British 
Journal of Psychology  
2:307–320. 

 Gauthier I, Tarr MJ, Anderson 
AW, Skudlarski P, Gore JC. 
1999. Activation of the middle 
fusiform “face area” increases 
with expertise in recogniz-
ing novel objects.  Nature 
Neuroscience  2:568–573. 

 Gegenfurtner KR. 2003. Cortical 

mechanisms of colour vision. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
4:563–572. 

 Goodale MA, Westwood DA. 2004. 

An evolving view of duplex 
vision: separate but interacting 
cortical pathways for perception 
and action.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:203–211. 

 Grill-Spector K, Malach R. 2004. 

The human visual cortex. 
 Annual Reviews of Neuroscience  
27:649–677. 

 Gross CG, Rocha-Miranda CE, 

Bender DB. 1972. Visual prop-
erties of neurons in inferotem-
poral cortex of the macaque. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology  
35:96–111. 

 Hendry SHC, Reid RC. 2000. 
The koniocellular pathway 
in  primate vision.  Annual 
Reviews of Neuroscience  
23:127–153. 

 Horibuchi S, ed. 1994.  Stereogram . 

Tokyo: Shogakukan. 

 Hubel D. 1982. Explorations 

of the primary visual cortex, 
1955–78 (Nobel lecture).  Nature  
299:515–524. 

 Hubel D. 1988.  Eye, Brain, 

and Vision . New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   931
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   931

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

932

REFERENCES

 Hubel D, Wiesel T. 1962. 

Receptive ﬁ elds, binocular 
 interaction and functional 
 architecture in the cat’s visual 
cortex.  Journal of Physiology 
(London)  160:106–154. 
 Hubel D, Wiesel T. 1968. 

Receptive ﬁ elds and functional 
architecture of monkey striate 
cortex.  Journal of Physiology 
(London)  195:215–243. 
 Hubel D, Wiesel T. 1977. 

Functional architecture of the 
macaque monkey visual cortex 
(Ferrier lecture).  Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London 
Series B  198:1–59. 

 Julesz B. 1971.  Foundations of 

Cyclopean Perception . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

 Kenichi O, Reid RC. 2007. 

Speciﬁ city and randomness 
in the visual cortex.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
17:401–407. 

 Kourtzi Z, Connor CE. 2011. 
Neural representations for 
object perception: structure, 
category, and adaptive coding. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
34:45–67. 

 Kravitz DJ, Kadharbatcha SS, 

Baker CI, Ungerleider LG, 
Mishkin M. 2013. The ventral vi-
sual pathway: an expanded neu-
ral framework for the processing 
of object quality.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  17:26–49. 
 Kreiman G. 2007. Single unit 

approaches to human vision and 
memory.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  17:471–475. 

 Kufﬂ er SW. 1953. Discharge pat-

terns and functional organization 
of mammalian retina.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  16:37–68. 
 Leopold DA. 2012. Primary 

visual cortex: awareness and 
blindsight.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  35:91–109. 

 LeVay S, Wiesel TN, Hubel DH. 

1980. The development of ocular 
dominance columns in normal 
and visually deprived monkeys. 
 Journal of Comparative 
Neurology  191:1–51. 

 Livingstone M, Hubel D. 1984. 
Anatomy and physiology of a 
color system in the primate 
visual cortex.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  4:309–356. 

 Martin K. 1994. A brief history of 
the “feature detector.”  Cerebral 
Cortex  4:1–7. 

 Milner AD, Goodale MA. 2008. 

Two visual systems re-viewed. 
 Neuropsychologia  46:774–785. 

 Nassi JJ, Callaway EM. 2009. 

Parallel processing strategies of 
the primate visual system.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  10:360–372. 
 Ohki K, Chung S, Ch’ng YH, Kara 

P, Reid RC. 2005. Functional 
imaging with cellular resolution 
reveals precise microarchitec-
ture in visual cortex.  Nature  
433:597–603. 

Ohki K, Chung S, Kara P, Hubener 

M, Bonhoeffer T, Reid C. 2006. 
Highly ordered arrangement of 
single neurons in orientation 
pinwheels. Nature 442:925–928.

 Ohki K, Reid RC. 2007. 

Speciﬁ city and randomness in the 
visual cortex.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  17:401–407. 

 Orban B. 2011. The extraction 
of 3D shape in the visual sys-
tem of human and nonhuman 
primates.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  34:361–388. 

 Palmer SE. 1999.  Vision Science: 

Photons to Phenomenology . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Paradiso MA. 2002. Perceptual 

and neuronal correspon-
dence in primary visual 
cortex.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  12:155–161. 

 Salzman C, Britten K, Newsome 
W. 1990. Cortical microstimu-
lation inﬂ uences perceptual 
judgments of motion detection. 
 Nature  346:174–177. 

 Sereno MI, Dale AM, Reppas 

JB, Kwong KK, Belliveau JW, 
Brady TJ, Rosen BR, Tootell 
RB. 1995. Borders of multiple 
visual areas in humans re-
vealed by functional magnetic 
resonance imaging . Science  
268:889–893. 

 Sharpee TO. 2013. Computational 
identiﬁ cation of receptive ﬁ elds. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
36:103–120. 

 Shepard RN. 1990.  Mind Sights: 

Original Visual Illusions, 
Ambiguities, and other 
Anomalies . New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

 Sherman SM. 2012. 

Thalamocortical interac-
tions.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  22:575–579. 

 Sherman SM, Guillery RW. 2002. 
The role of the thalamus in the 
ﬂ ow of information to the cortex. 
 Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B  
357:1695–1708. 

 Sincich LC, Horton JC. 2005. The 
circuitry of V1 and V2: integra-
tion of color, form, and motion. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
28:303–326. 

 Singer W, Gray CM. 1995. Visual 

feature integration and the 
temporal correlation hypothesis. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
18:555–586. 

 Tsao DY, Moeller S, Freiwald W. 

2008. Comparing face patch 
systems in macaques and 
humans.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science  
49:19514–19519. 

 Ts’o DY, Frostig RD, Lieke EE, 
Grinivald A. 1990. Functional 
organization of primate visual 
cortex revealed by high resolu-
tion optical imaging.  Science  
249:417–420. 

 Tyler C, Clarke MB. 1990. The 
autostereogram.  Proceedings 
of the International Society 
for Optical Engineering  
1256:182–197. 

 Weiner KS, Grill-Spector K. 2012. 
The improbable simplicity of the 
fusiform face area.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  16:251–254. 

 Zeki S. 1993.  A Vision of the 
Brain . London: Blackwell 
Scientiﬁ c. 

 Zeki S. 2003. Improbable areas 
in the visual brain.  Trends in 
Neuroscience  26:23–26. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   932
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   932

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Zihl J, von Cramon D, Mai N. 
1983. Selective disturbance 
of movement vision after bi-
lateral brain damage.  Brain  
106:313–340. 

 Chapter 11 
 Ashida G, Carr CE. 2011. Sound 

localization: Jeffress and 
beyond.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  21:745–751. 

 Baloh RW, Honrubia V. 2001. 
 Clinical Neurophysiology of 
the Vestibular System,  3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Brandt T. 1991. Man in motion: 

historical and clinical aspects of 
vestibular function. A review. 
 Brain  114:2159–2174. 

 Copeland BJ, Pillsbury HC 3rd. 
2004. Cochlear implantation 
for the treatment of deafness. 
 Annual   Review Medicine  
55:157–167. 

 Cullen KE. 2012. The vestibular 

system: multimodal integra-
tion and encoding of self-motion 
for motor control.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  35:185–196. 
 Eatock RA, Songer JE. 2011. 

Vestibular hair cells and 
afferents: two channels for 
head motion signals.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
34:501–534. 

 Goldberg JM. 1991. The vestibu-
lar end organs: morphological 
and physiological diversity of 
afferents.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  1:229–235. 

 Guinan JJ Jr, Salt A, Cheatham 
MA. 2012. Progress in cochlear 
physiology after Békésy. 
 Hearing Research  293:12–20. 

 Holt JR, Pan B, Koussa MA, 

Asai Y. 2014. TMC function in 
hair cell transduction.  Hearing 
Research  311:17–24.. 

 Hudspeth AJ. 1997. How hearing 

happens.  Neuron  19:947–950. 

 Joris PX, Schreiner CE, Rees 

A. 2004. Neural  processing of 
amplitude-modulated sounds. 
 Physiological   Reviews  
84:541–577. 

 Kazmierczak P, Müller U. 2012. 
Sensing sound: molecules that 
orchestrate mechanotransduc-
tion by hair cells.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  35:220–229. 

 Kemp DT. 2002. Otoacoustic emis-

sions, their origin in cochlear 
function, and use.  British 
Medical   Bulletin  63:223–241. 
Knipper M, Van Dijk P, Nunes I, 

Rüttiger L, Zimmermann U. 2013. 
Advances in the neurobiology of 
hearing disorders: recent develop-
ments regarding the basis of tin-
nitus and hyperacusis. Progress in 
Neurobiology 111:17–33.

 Konishi M. 2003. Coding of audi-
tory space.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  26:31–55. 

 Liberman MC, Gao J, He DZ, Wu 

X, Jia S, Zuo J. 2002. Prestin 
is required for electromotility 
of the outer hair cell and for 
the cochlear ampliﬁ er.  Nature  
419:300–304. 

 McAlpine D, Grothe B. 2003. Sound 

localization and delay lines—do 
mammals ﬁ t the model?  Trends 
in Neurosciences  26:347–350. 
 Middlebrooks JC, Green DM. 
1991. Sound localization by 
human listeners.  Annual Review 
of Psychology  42:135–159. 

 Oertel D. 1997. Encoding of tim-
ing in the brain stem auditory 
nuclei of vertebrates.  Neuron  
19:959–962. 

 Oertel D, Doupe AJ. 2013. The 
auditory central nervous sys-
tem. In  Principles of Neural 
Science,  5th ed., eds. Kandel 
ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, 
Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth 
AJ. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc., pp. 682–711. 

 Palmer AR. 2004. Reassessing 
mechanisms of low-frequency 
sound localisation.  Current 
Opinion   in Neurobiology  
14:457–460. 

 Rose JE, Hind JE, Anderson DJ, 

Brugge JF. 1971. Some effects of 
stimulus intensity on response 
of auditory nerve ﬁ bers in the 
squirrel monkey.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  24:685–699. 

REFERENCES

933

 Ruggero MA, Rich NC. 1996. 

Furosemide alters organ of Corti 
mechanics: evidence for feed-
back of outer hair cells upon the 
basilar membrane.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  11:1057–1067. 

 Santos-Sacchi J. 2003. New tunes 

from Corti’s organ: the outer 
hair cell boogie rules.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
13:459–468. 

Shamma SA, Micheyl C. 2010. 

Behind the scenes of auditory 
perception. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 20:361–366.

 Simmons JA. 1989. A view of the 
world through the bat’s ear: the 
formation of acoustic images 
in echolocation.  Cognition  
33:155–199. 

 Suga N. 1995. Processing of audi-

tory information carried by 
species-speciﬁ c complex sounds. 
In  The Cognitive Neurosciences , 
ed. Gazzaniga MS. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, pp. 295–314. 

 Trussell LO. 1999. Synaptic 

mechanisms for coding timing 
in  auditory neurons. Annual 
Review of Physiology 
61:477-496. 

 Volta A. 1800. On the electric-

ity excited by mere contact of 
conducting substances of dif-
ferent kinds.  Philosophical 
Transactions of   the Royal 
Society of London  90:403–431. 
 von Békésy G. 1960.  Experiments 

in Hearing , ed. and trans. Wever 
EG. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

 Zeng F-G. 2004. Trends in 

cochlear implants.  Trends in 
Ampliﬁ cation  8:1–34. 

 Zenner H-P, Gummer AW. 1996. 

The vestibular system. In 
 Comprehensive   Mammalian 
Physiology.   From Cellular 
Mechanisms to Integration , 
 Vol. 1 , eds. Greger R, Windhorst 
U. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
pp. 697–710. 

 Chapter 12 
 Abraira VE, Ginty DD. 2013. 

The sensory neurons of touch. 
 Neuron  79:618–639. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   933
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   933

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

934

REFERENCES

 Bautista DM, Wilson SR, Hoon 

 Eijkelkamp N, Linley JE, Torres 

MA. 2014. Why we scratch 
an itch: the molecules, cells 
and circuits of itch.  Nature 
Neuroscience  17:175–182. 

 Braz J, Solorzano C, Wang X, 

Basbaum AI. 2014. Transmitting 
pain and itch messages: a 
contemporary view of the spinal 
cord circuits that generate gate 
control.  Neuron  82:522–536. 
 Chen R, Corwell B, Yaseen Z, 

Hallett M, Cohen L. 1998. 
Mechanisms of cortical reorga-
nization in lower-limb ampu-
tees.  Journal   of Neuroscience  
18(9):3443–3450. 

 Coste B, Mathur J, Schmidt M, 
Earley TJ, Ranade S, Petrus 
MJ, Dubin AE, Patapoutian 
A. 2010. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are 
essential components of distinct 
mechanically activated cation 
channels.  Science  330:55–60. 
 Costigan M, Scholz J, Woolf CJ. 

2009. Neuropathic pain: a 
maladaptive response of the ner-
vous system to damage.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  32:1–32. 

 Cox JJ, Reimann F, Nicholas 
AK, Thornton G, Roberts E, 
Springell K, Karbani G, Jafri H, 
Mannan J, Raashid Y, Al-Gazali 
L, Hamamy H, Valente EM, 
Gorman S, Williams R, McHale 
DP, Wood JN, Gribble FM, 
Woods CG. 2006. An SCN9A 
channelopathy causes congeni-
tal inability to experience pain. 
 Nature  444:894–898. 

 DeFelipe C, Huerrero J, O’Brien 

J, Palmer J, Doyle C. 1998. 
Altered nociception, analgesia 
and aggression in mice lacking 
the receptor for substance P. 
 Nature  392:394–397. 

 Diamond ME. 2010. Texture sensa-

tion through the ﬁ ngertips and 
the whiskers.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  20:319–327. 

 Di Noto PM, Newman L, Wall 

S, Einstein G. 2013. The 
 hermunculus: what is known 
about the representation of 
the female body in the brain? 
 Cerebral Cortex  23:1005–1013. 

JM, Bee L, Dickenson AH, 
Gringhuis M, Minett MS, Hong 
GS, Lee E, Oh U, Ishikawa Y, 
Zwartkuis FJ, Cox JJ, Wood JN. 
2013. A role for Piezo2 in EPAC1-
dependent mechanical allodynia. 
 Nature Communications  4:1682. 

 Eijkelkamp N, Quick K, Wood 
JN. 2013. Transient receptor 
potential channels and mecha-
nosensation.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  36:519–546. 

 Elbert T, Pantev C, Wienbruch C, 

Rockstroh B, Taub E. 1995. 
Increased cortical representa-
tion of the ﬁ ngers of the left 
hand in string players.  Science  
270:305–306. 

 Fain GL. 2003.  Sensory 

Transduction.  Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Fields H. 2004. State-dependent 
opioid control of pain.  Nature 
Reviews   Neuroscience  5:565–575. 

 Gawande A. 2008, June 30. The 
itch.  The New Yorker . 58–65. 
 Hsiao S. 2008. Central mecha-

nisms of tactile shape per-
ception.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  18:418–424. 

 Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM, 

Ochs MT, Allard T, Guic-Robles 
E. 1990. Functional reorganiza-
tion of primary somatosensory 
cortex in adult owl monkeys 
after behaviorally controlled 
tactile stimulation.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  63:82–104. 
 Johnson KO, Hsiao SS. 1992. 

Neural mechanisms of tactile 
form and texture perception. 
 Annual   Review of Neuroscience  
15:227–250. 

 Julius D, Basbaum AL. 2001. 

Molecular mechanisms of 
nociception.  Nature  413:203–210. 

 Kaas SH, Nelson RH, Sur 

M, Merzenich MM. 1981. 
Organization of somatosensory 
cortex in primates. In  The 
Organization of   the Cerebral 
Cortex , eds. Schmitt FO, 
Worden FG, Adelman G, Dennis 
SG. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
pp. 237–262. 

 Kass J. 1998. Phantoms of the 
brain.  Nature  391:331–333. 

 Kell CA, von Kriegstein K, Rösler 

A, Kleinschmidt A, Laufs H. 
2005. The sensory cortical repre-
sentation of the human penis: 
revisiting somatotopy in the 
male homunculus.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  25:5984–5987. 

 Loewenstein WR, Mendelson M. 

1965. Components of recep-
tor adaptation in a Pacinian 
corpusule.  Journal of Physiology  
177:377–397. 

 Maksimovic S, Nakatani M, Baba 

Y, Nelson AM, Marshall KL, 
Wellnitz SA, Firozi P, Woo 
SH, Ranade S, Patapoutian A, 
Lumpkin EA. 2014. Epidermal 
Merkel cells are mechanosensory 
cells that tune mammalian touch 
receptors.  Nature  509:617–621. 
 Mantyh PW, Rogers SD, Honore 
P, Allen BJ, Ghilardi JR, Li J, 
et al. 1997. Inhibition of hyper-
algesia by ablation of lamina 
I spinal neurons expressing the 
substance P receptor.  Science  
278:275–279. 

McGlone F, Wessberg J, Olausson 

H. 2014. Discriminative and 
affective touch: sensing and feel-
ing. Neuron 82:737–755.

 Melzack R, Wall P. 1983.  The 

Challenge of Pain . New York: 
Basic Books. 

 Mendelson M, Loewenstein 
WR. 1964. Mechanisms of 
receptor adaptation.  Science  
144:554–555. 

 Merzenich MM, Nelson RJ, Stryker 

MP, Cynader MS, Schoppman 
A. 1984. Somatosensory corti-
cal map changes following digit 
amputation in adult mon-
keys.  Journal   of Comparative 
Neurology  224:591–605. 

 Mountcastle VB. 1997. The colum-

nar organization of the neocor-
tex.  Brain  120:701–722. 

 Patapoutian A, Peier AM, Story 

GM, Viswanath V. 2003. 
ThermoTrp channels and be-
yond: mechanisms of tempera-
ture sensation.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  4:529–539. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   934
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   934

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Penﬁ eld W, Rasmussen T. 1952. 

 The Cerebral Cortex of Man . 
New York: Macmillan. 
 Ramachandran VS. 1998. 
Consciousness and body 
image: lessons from phan-
tom limbs, Capgras syn-
drome and pain asymbolia. 
 Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological Sciences  
353(1377):1851–1859. 

 Sacks O. 1985.  The Man Who 

Mistook His Wife for a Hat and 
Other Clinical Tales . New York: 
Summit. 

 Sadato N, Pascual-Leone A, 

Grafman J, Ibanez V, Delber 
M-P. 1996. Activation of the 
primary visual cortex by Braille 
reading in blind subjects. 
 Nature  380:526–527. 

Schmidt RF. 1978.  Fundamentals 

of Sensory Physiology . New 
York: Springer-Verlag.

 Springer SP, Deutsch G. 1989 . 
Left Brain, Right Brain . New 
York: W.H. Freeman. 

 Taddese A, Nah S-Y, McCleskey 
E. 1995. Selective opioid inhibi-
tion of small nociceptive neu-
rons.  Science  270:1366–1369. 

 Tsunozaki M, Bautista DM. 
2009. Mammalian somato-
sensory mechanotransduc-
tion.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  19:1–8. 

 Vallbo Å. 1995. Single-afferent 

neurons and somatic sensation 
in humans. In  The Cognitive 
Neurosciences , ed. Gazzaniga 
M. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
pp. 237–251. 

K, Lumpkin EA, Stucky CL, 
Patapoutian A. 2014. Piezo2 
is required for Merkel-cell 
mechanotransduction.  Nature  
509:622–626. 

 Woolsey TA, Van Der Loos H. 

1970. The structural organiza-
tion of layer IV in the somato-
sensory region (S1) of mouse 
cerebral cortex: the description 
of a cortical ﬁ eld composed of 
discrete cytoarchitectonic units. 
 Brain Research  17:205–242. 

 Chapter 13 
 Brown T. 1911. The intrinsic fac-
tors in the act of progression in 
the mammal.  Proceedings of the 
Royal   Society of London Series B  
84:308–319. 

 Buller A, Eccles J, Eccles R. 

1960. Interactions between 
motoneurons and muscles in 
respect to the characteristic 
speeds of their responses. 
 Journal of Physiology   (London)  
150:417–439. 

MJ, Alvarez FJ, Cope TC. 2011. 
Permanent central synaptic 
disconnection of proprioceptors 
after nerve injury and regen-
eration. II. Loss of functional 
connectivity with motoneurons. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology  
106:2471–2485. 

 Burke RE, Levine DN, Tsairis 

P, Zajac FE 3rd. 1973. 
Physiological types and his-
tochemical proﬁ les in motor 
units of the cat gastrocnemius. 
 Journal of Physiology   (London)  
234:723–748. 

 Bullinger KL, Nardelli P, Pinter 

 Huxley H, Hanson J. 1954. 

REFERENCES

935

Science, 5th ed., eds. Kandel 
ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, 
Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth AJ. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Grillner S, Ekeberg Ö, El Manira 
A, Lansner A, Parker D, Tegnér 
J, Wallén P. 1998. Intrinsic 
function of a neuronal network: 
a vertebrate central pattern 
generator.  Brain Research 
Reviews  26:184–197. 

Haftel VK, Bichler EK, Wang QB, 

Prather JF, Pinter MJ, Cope 
TC. 2005. Central suppres-
sion of regenerated proprio-
ceptive afferents. Journal of 
Neuroscience 25:4733–4742.

 Henneman E, Somjen G, 

Carpenter D. 1965. Functional 
signiﬁ cance of cell size in spi-
nal motoneurons.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  28:560–580. 
 Huxley A, Niedergerke R. 1954. 
Structural changes in muscle 
during contraction. Interference 
microscopy of living muscle 
ﬁ bres.  Nature  173:971–973. 

Changes in cross-striations of 
muscle during contraction and 
stretch and their structural 
interpretation.  Nature  
173:973–976. 

 Kernell D. 2006.  The Motoneurone 

and its Muscle Fibres . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

 Leung DG, Wagner KR. 2013. 

Therapeutic advances in mus-
cular dystrophy.  Annals of 
Neurology  74:404–411. 

Lieber RL. 2002. Skeletal Muscle 

Structure, Function, and 
Plasticity, 2nd ed. Baltimore: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

 Lømo T, Westgaard R, Dahl 

H. 1974. Contractile proper-
ties of muscle: control by pat-
tern of muscle activity in the 
rat.  Proceedings   of the Royal 
Society of London   Series B  
187:99–103. 

 Mendell L, Henneman E. 1968. 
Terminals of single Ia ﬁ bers: 
distribution within a pool of 
300 homonymous motor neu-
rons.  Science  160:96–98. 

 Vallbo Å, Johansson R. 1984. 

 Dalkilic I, Kunkel LM. 2003. 

Properties of cutaneous mecha-
noreceptors in the human hand 
related to touch sensation. 
 Human   Neurobiology  3:3–14. 

Muscular dystrophies: genes to 
pathogenesis.  Current Opinion 
in   Genetics and Development  
13:231–238. 

 Wall P. 1994. The placebo and the 

Eccles JC. 1974. Trophic interac-

placebo response. In  Textbook 
of   Pain , eds. Wall P, Melzack 
R. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, pp. 1297–1308. 
 Woo SH, Ranade S, Weyer AD, 

Dubin AE, Baba Y, Qiu Z, 
Petrus M, Miyamoto T, Reddy 

tions in the mammalian central 
nervous system. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences 
228:406–423.

Enoka RM, Pearson KG. 2013. 

The motor unit and muscle 
action. In Principles of Neural 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   935
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   935

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

936

REFERENCES

 Nicolle MW. 2002. Myasthenia 

gravis.  The Neurologist  8:2–21. 

 Patrick J, Lindstrom J. 1973. 

Autoimmune response to 
acetylcholine receptor.  Science  
180:871–872 

 Pette D. 2001. Historical 

 perspectives: plasticity of 
 mammalian skeletal muscle. 
 Journal of Applied   Physiology  
90:1119–1124. 

 Poppele R, Bosco G. 2003. 

Sophisticated spinal contribu-
tions to motor control.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  26:269–276. 

 Renton AE, Chiò A, Traynor BJ. 

2014. State of play in amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis  genetics. 
 Nature Neuroscience  17:17–23. 

 Rotterman TM, Nardelli P, 

Cope TC, Alvarez FJ. 2014. 
Normal distribution of 
VGLUT1 synapses on spinal 
 motoneuron dendrites and 
their  reorganization after nerve 
injury. Journal of Neuroscience 
34:3475–3492.

2001. The Segerfalk  symposium 
on principles of spinal cord 
function, plasticity, and repair. 
 Brain   Research Reviews  
40:1–329. 

 Sherrington C. 1947.  The 

Integrative Action of the Nervous 
System,  2nd ed. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 

 Sherrington C. 1979. 1924 Linacre 

lecture. In  Sherrington: His 
Life   and Thought , eds. Eccles 
JC, Gibson WC. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, p. 59. 

 Silvestri NJ, Wolfe GI. 2012. 

Myasthenia gravis.  Seminars in 
Neurology  32:215–226. 

 Stein PSG, Grillner S, Selverston 

AI, Stuart DG, eds. 1999. 
 Neurons,   Networks, and Motor 
Behavior . Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 

 Vucic S, Rothstein JD, Kiernan 

MC. 2014. Advances in 
 treating amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis: insights from patho-
physiological studies.  Trends in 
Neuroscience  37:433–442. 

  Schouenborg J, Kiehn O, eds. 

 Blumenfeld H. 2011. 

 Wallen P, Grillner S. 1987. 

 N- methyl-D-aspartate receptor-
induced, inherent oscillatory 
activity in neurons active during 
ﬁ ctive locomotion in the lam-
prey.  Journal of Neuroscience  
7:2745–2755. 

 Windhorst U. 2007. Muscle pro-
prioceptive feedback and spi-
nal networks.  Brain Research 
Bulletin  73:155–202. 

 Chapter 14 
 Alstermark B, Isa T. 2012. 

Circuits for skilled reaching 
and grasping.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  35:559–578. 
 Andersen RA, Musallam S, 

Pesaran B. 2004. Selecting the 
signals for a brain-machine 
interface.  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:720–726. 
Betz W. 1874. Anatomischer 

Nachweis zweier Gehirncentra. 
Centralblatt für die med-
izinischen Wissenschaften 
12:578–580, 595–599.

 Neuroanatomy through Clinical 
Cases,  2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer. 

 Campbell A. 1905.  Histological 
Studies on the Localization of 
Cerebral Function . Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University 
Press. 

The Cerebellum: Development, 

Physiology, and Plasticity. 
1998.  Trends in Neurosciences  
21:367–419 (special issue). 
 Cheney PD, Fetz EE, Palmer 

SS. 1985. Patterns of fa-
cilitation and suppression of 
antagonist forelimb muscles 
from motor cortex sites in the 
awake monkey.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  53:805–820. 
 Dauer W, Przedborski S. 2003. 
Parkinson’s disease: mecha-
nisms and models.  Neuron  
39:889–909. 

 Donoghue JP. 2002. Connecting 

cortex to machines: recent 
advances in brain inter-
faces.  Nature   Neuroscience  
5(Suppl):1085–1088. 

 Evarts EV. 1973. Brain mecha-

nisms in movement.  Scientiﬁ c 
American  229:96–103. 
 Feigin A. 1998. Advances 
in Huntington’s disease: 
implications for experimental 
therapeutics.  Current Opinion 
in Neurology  11:357–362. 

 Ferrier D. 1890. The Croonian 

lectures on cerebral localisation. 
Delivered before the Royal 
College of Physicians,
June 1890. London: Smith 
Elder, 61:152. 

 Foltynie T, Kahan J. 2013. 

Parkinson’s disease: an update 
on pathogenesis and treat-
ment.  Journal of Neurology  
260:1433–1440. 

 Fritsch G, Hitzig E. 1870/1960. 
On the electrical excitability 
of the cerebrum, trans. von 
Bonin G. In  Some Papers on the 
Cerebral Cortex , Springﬁ eld: 
Thomas, 1960:73–96. Originally 
 published in 1870. 

 Georgopoulos A, Caminiti R, 
Kalaska J, Massey J. 1983. 
Spatial coding of movement: 
a hypothesis concerning the 
coding of movement direction 
by motor control populations. 
 Experimental   Brain Research  
Suppl 7:327–336. 

 Georgopoulos A, Kalaska J, 

Caminiti R, Massey J. 1982. 
On the relations between the 
direction of two-dimensional 
arm movements and cell dis-
charge in primate motor cor-
tex.  Journal of   Neuroscience  
2:1527–1537. 

 Glickstein M, Doron K. 2008. 

Cerebellum: connections and 
functions.  Cerebellum  7:589–594. 

 Graziano M. 2006. The organiza-
tion of behavioral repertoire in 
motor cortex.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  29:105–134. 
 Kilner JM, Lemon RN. 2013. 

What we know currently about 
mirror neurons.  Current Biology  
23:R1057–R1062. 

 Langston JW, Palfreman J. 1995. 
 The Case of the Frozen Addicts . 
New York: Pantheon. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   936
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   936

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Lawrence D, Kuypers H. 1968. 
The functional organization 
of the motor system in the 
monkey: I. The effects of bilat-
eral pyramidal lesions.  Brain  
91:1–14. 

 Lawrence D, Kuypers H. 1968. 

The functional organization of 
the motor system in the mon-
key: II. The effects of lesions 
of the descending brain-stem 
pathways.  Brain  91:15–36. 
 Lemon RN. 2008. Descending 
pathways in motor control. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
31:195–218. 

 Lozano AM, Lipsman N. 2013. 

Probing and regulating 
dysfunctional circuits using 
deep brain stimulation.  Neuron  
77:406–424. 

 Porter R, Lemon R. 1993. 

 Corticospinal Function and 
Voluntary Movement.  Oxford, 
England: Clarendon Press. 

 Rizzolatti G, Fadiga L, Gallese 
V, Fogassi L. 1996. Premotor 
cortex and the recognition of 
motor actions.  Brain Research: 
Cognitive Brain Research  
3:131–141. 

 Rizzolatti G, Sinigaglia C. 2008. 

 Mirrors in the Brain: How 
Our Minds Share Actions and 
Emotions.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Roland PE, Zilles K. 1996. 
Functions and structures 
of the motor cortices in 
humans.  Current Opinion   in 
Neurobiology  6:773–781. 

 Roland P, Larsen B, Lassen N, 

Skinhøf E. 1980. Supplementary 
motor area and other corti-
cal areas in organization of 
voluntary movements in man. 
 Journal of   Neurophysiology  
43:118–136.

Sanes JN, Donoghue JP. 1997. 

Static and dynamic organization 
of motor cortex. Advances in 
Neurology 73:277–296.

Sanes JN, Donoghue JP. 2000. 
Plasticity and primary motor 
cortex.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  23:393–415. 

 Schwalb JM, Hamani C. The 

history and future of deep brain 
stimulation.  Neurotherapeutics  
5:3–13. 

 Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer 

JW. 2010. Error correction, sen-
sory prediction, and adaptation 
in motor control.  Annual Review 
of Neuroscience  33:89–108. 

 Strange PG. 1992.  Brain 

Biochemistry and Brain 
Disorders . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Weinrich M, Wise S. 1982. The 

premotor cortex of the mon-
key.  Journal of Neuroscience  
2:1329–1345. 

 Wichmann T, DeLong MR. 2003. 

Functional neuroanatomy of 
the basal ganglia in Parkinson’s 
disease.  Advances in Neurology  
91:9–18. 

 Chapter 15 
 Aghananian GK, Marek GJ. 

1999. Serotonin and hallucino-
gens.  Neuropsychopharmacology  
2(Suppl):16S–23S. 

 Appenzeller O. 1990.  The Autonomic 
Nervous System: An Introduction 
to Basic and Clinical Concepts , 
4th ed. New York: Elsevier. 

 Aston-Jones G, Bloom FE. 1981. 

Norepinephrine-containing locus 
coeruleus neurons in behaving 
rats exhibit pronounced re-
sponses to non-noxious envi-
ronmental stimuli.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  1:887–900. 

 Bloom FE. 2010. The catechol-
amine neuron: historical and 
future perspectives.  Progress in 
Neurobiology  90:75–81. 

 Bloom FE, Hoffer BJ, Siggins GR. 
1972. Norepinephrine mediated 
cerebellar synapses: a model 
system for neuropsychophar-
macology.  Biological Psychiatry  
4:157–177. 

 Carlsson A. 2001. A paradigm 

shift in brain research.  Science  
294:1021–1024. 

 Cooper JR, Bloom FE, Roth RH. 
2002.  The Biochemical Basis of 
Neuropharmacology . New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

REFERENCES

937

 Dahlstroem A, Fuxe K. 1964. A 
method for the demonstration 
of monoamine-containing nerve 
ﬁ bers in the central nervous 
system.  Acta Physiologica 
Scandinavica  60:293–294. 

 Falck B, Hillarp NA. 1959. On 

the cellular localization of cat-
echol amines in the brain.  Acta 
Anatomica  38:277–279. 

 Foote SL, Bloom FE, Aston-Jones 
G. 1983. Nucleus locus ceruleus: 
new evidence of anatomical 
and physiological  speciﬁ city. 
 Physiological Reviews  
63:844–914. 

 Furness, JB. 2012. The enteric 

nervous system and neuro-
gastroenterology.  National 
Review of Gastroenterological 
Hepatology  9:286–294. 

 Hofmann A. 1979. How LSD origi-

nated.  Journal of Psychedelic 
Drugs  11:1–2. 

 Jänig W, McLachlan EM. 1992. 

Characteristics of function-
speciﬁ c pathways in the sympa-
thetic nervous system.  Trends 
in Neurosciences  15:475–481. 

 Kerr DS, Campbell LW, Applegate 

MD, Brodish A, Landsﬁ eld 
PW. 1991. Chronic stress-
induced  acceleration of electro-
physiologic and morphometric 
biomarkers of hippocampal 
aging.  Journal of   Neuroscience  
11:1316–1324. 

 Kerr DS, Campbell LW, Hao 
S-Y, Landsﬁ eld PW. 1989. 
Corticosteroid modulation 
of hippocampal potentials: 
increased effect with aging. 
 Science  245:1505–1509. 

 Koob GF. 1992. Drugs of abuse: 
anatomy, pharmacology and 
function of reward pathways. 
 Trends in Pharmacological 
Sciences  13:177–184. 

 McEwen BS. 2002. Sex, stress and 

the hippocampus: allostasis, 
allostatic load and the aging 
process.    Neurobiological Aging  
23(5):921–939. 

 McEwen BS, Schmeck HM. 1994. 
 The Hostage Brain . New York: 
Rockefeller University Press. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   937
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   937

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Berridge KC, Robinson TE. 1998. 

 Koob GF, Sanna PP, Bloom FE. 

 Friedman JM. 2009. Leptin at 14 y 

 Sawchenko PE. 1998. Toward a 

938

REFERENCES

 Meyer JS, Quenzer LF. 2013. 

 Psychopharmacology: Drugs, the 
Brain, and Behavior , 2nd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. 

 Moore RY, Bloom FE. 1979. Central 

catecholamine neuron systems: 
anatomy and physiology of the 
norepinephrine and epineph-
rine systems.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  2:113–168. 

 Morrison JH, Foote SL, O’Connor 

D, Bloom FE. 1982. Laminar, 
tangential and regional orga-
nization of the noradrenergic 
innervation of monkey cortex: 
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase 
immunohistochemistry.  Brain 
Research Bulletin  9:309–319. 
 Sapolsky RM. 1994.  Why Zebras 

Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide to 
Stress, Stress-Related Diseases, 
and Coping . New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

 Sapolsky RM, Krey LC, McEwen 
BS. 1986. The neuroendocrinol-
ogy of stress and aging: the glu-
cocorticoid cascade hypothesis. 
 Endocrine Reviews  7:284–301. 

 Scharrer E, Scharrer B. 1939. 

Secretory cells within the 
hypothalamus.  Research 
Publications—Association for 
Research in Nervous and Mental 
Disease  20:179–197. 

 Snyder SH. 1986.  Drugs and the 

Brain . New York: Scientiﬁ c 
American Books. 

 Watanabe Y, Gould E, McEwen 
BS. 1992. Stress induces atro-
phy of apical dendrites of hippo-
campal CA3 pyramidal neurons. 
 Brain   Research  588:341–345. 

 Wurtman RJ, Wurtman JJ. 1989. 
Carbohydrates and depression. 
 Scientiﬁ c American  260:68–75. 

 Chapter 16 
 Berridge KC. 2004. Motivation 

concepts in behavioral neurosci-
ence.  Physiology & Behavior  
81:179–209. 

 Berridge KC. 2009. “Liking” and 
“wanting” food rewards: brain 
substrates and roles in eat-
ing disorders.  Physiology & 
Behavior  97:537–550. 

What is the role of dopamine 
in reward: hedonic impact, 
reward learning, or incentive 
salience?  Brain Research Review  
28:308–367. 

 Di Marzo V, Ligresti A, Cristino 
L. 2009. The endocannabinoid 
system as a link between ho-
moeostatic and hedonic path-
ways involved in energy  balance 
regulation.  International 
Journal of Obesity (London)  
33(Suppl 2):S18–S24. 

 Flier JS. 2004. Obesity wars: 

molecular progress confronts 
an expanding epidemic.  Cell  
116:337–350. 

 Friedman JM. 2004. Modern 
science versus the stigma 
of obesity.  Nature Medicine  
10:563–569. 

of age: an ongoing story.  The 
American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition  89:973S–979S. 

 Gao Q, Hovath TL. 2007. Neuro-
biology of feeding and energy 
expenditure.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  30:367–398. 

 Gibson WT, Farooqui IS, Moreau 

M, DePaoli AM, Lawrence E, 
O’Rahilly S, Trussell RA. 2004. 
Congenital leptin deﬁ ciency 
due to homozygosity for the 
delta 133 mutation: report of 
another case and evaluation 
response to four years of leptin 
therapy.  Journal   of Clinical 
Endocrinology and   Metabolism  
89:4821–4826. 

Glimcher PW, Fehr E. 2014. 
Neuroeconomics: Decision 
Making and the Brain, 2nd ed. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

 Heath RG. 1963. Electrical self-

stimulation of the brain in man. 
 American Journal of Psychiatry  
120:571–577. 

 Hoebel BG. 1997. Neuroscience 

and appetitive behavior research: 
25 years.  Appetite  29:119–133. 

 Kauer JA, Malenka RC. 2007. 

Synaptic plasticity and 
 addiction.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  8:844–858. 

1998. Neuroscience of addiction. 
 Neuron  21:467–476. 

 Navakkode S, Korte M. 2014. 
Pharmacological activation 
of cb1 receptor modulates 
long term potentiation by 
 interfering with protein synthe-
sis.  Neuropharmacology  
79:525–533. 

 Olds J, Milner P. 1954. Positive 

reinforcement produced by 
 electrical stimulation of the 
septal area and other regions 
of the rat brain.  Journal of 
Comparative Physiological  
 Psychology  47:419–427. 

 Saper CB, Chou TC, Elmquist 
JK. 2002. The need to feed: 
 homeostatic and hedonic 
 control of eating.  Neuron  
36:199–211. 

new neurobiology of energy bal-
ance, appetite, and obesity: the 
anatomists weigh in.  Journal 
of Comparative Neurology  
402:435–441. 

 Schultz W. 2002. Getting formal 

with dopamine and reward. 
 Neuron  36:241–263. 

 Schultz W. 2013. Updating dopa-
mine reward signals.  Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology  
23:229–238. 

 Schwartz DH, Hernandez L, 

Hoebel BG. 1990. Serotonin 
release in lateral and medial 
hypothalamus during  feeding 
and its anticipation.  Brain 
Research Bulletin  25:797–802. 

 Soria-Gomez E, Bellocchio L, 

Reguero L, Lepousez G, Martin 
C, Bendahmane M,Ruehle S, 
Remmers F, Desprez T, Matias 
I, Wiesner T, Cannich A, 
Nissant A, Wadleigh A, Pape 
HC, Chiarlone AP, Quarta C, 
Verrier D, Vincent P, Massa F, 
Lutz B, Guzmán M, Gurden H, 
Ferreira G, Lledo PM, Grandes 
P, Marsicano G. 2014. The 
endocannabinoid system con-
trols food intake via olfactory 
processes.  Nature Neuroscience  
17:407–415. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   938
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   938

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

Squire LR, Berg D, Bloom FE, 
du Lac S, Ghosh A, Spitzer 
NC. 2012. Fundamental 
Neuroscience, 4th ed. San Diego: 
Academic Press.

 Wise RA. 2004. Dopamine, 
 learning, and motivation. 
 Nature Reviews   Neuroscience  
5:483–494. 

 Woods SC, Seeley RJ, Porte D, 
Schwartz MW. 1998. Signals 
that regulate food intake and 
energy homeostasis.  Science  
280:1378–1382. 

 Woods SC, Stricker EM. 1999. 
Food intake and metabolism. 
In  Fundamental   Neuroscience , 
eds. Zigmond MJ, Bloom FE, 
Landis SC, Roberts JL, Squire 
LR. New York: Academic Press, 
pp. 1091–1109. 

 Chapter 17 
 Agate RJ, Grisham W, Wade J, 
Mann S, Wingﬁ eld J, Schanen 
C, Palotie A, Arnold AP. 2003. 
Neural, not gonadal, origin of 
brain sex differences in a gyn-
andromorphic ﬁ nch.  Proceedings 
of   the National Academy of 
Sciences   USA  100:4873–4878. 
 Allen LS, Richey MF, Chai YM, 

Gorski RA. 1991. Sex differences 
in the corpus callosum of the 
living human being.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  11:933–942. 

 Alvarez-Buylla A, Kirn JR. 1997. 
Birth, migration, incorporation, 
and death of vocal control neu-
rons in adult songbirds.  Journal 
of   Neurobiology  33:585–601. 
 Amateau SK, McCarthy MM. 
2004. Induction of PGE2 by 
 estradiol mediates develop-
mental masculinization of sex 
behavior.  Nature Neuroscience  
7:643–650. 

 Arnold AP. 2004. Sex chro-

mosomes and brain gender. 
 Nature Reviews   Neuroscience  
50:701–708. 

 Bakker J, Baum MJ. 2008. Role 
for estradiol in female-typical 
brain and behavioral sexual 
differentiation.  Frontiers in 
Neuroendocrinology  29:1–16. 

 Bakker J, de Mees C, Douhard Q, 
Balthazart J, Gabant P, Szpirer 
J, Szpirer C. 2006. Alpha-
fetoprotein protects the develop-
ing female mouse brain from 
masculinization and defemi-
nization by estrogens.  Nature 
Neuroscience  9:220–226. 

 Bartels A, Zeki S. 2004. The 

neural correlates of maternal 
and romantic love.  Neuroimage  
21:1155–1166. 

 Berne RM, Levy MN. 2009. 

 Physiology  6th ed. St. Louis: 
Mosby. 

 Blum D. 1997.  Sex on the Brain: 

The Biological Differences 
Between Men and Women . New 
York: Viking. 

 Breedlove SM. 1994. Sexual 

differentiation in the human 
nervous system.  Annual Review 
of Psychology  45:389–418. 

 Colapinto J. 2001.  As Nature Made 
Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as 
a Girl . New York: Harper Collins. 
 De Boer A, van Buel EM, ter Horst 
GJ. 2012. Love is more than just 
a kiss: a neurobiological per-
spective on love and affection. 
 Neuroscience  201:114–124. 
 Dewing P, Shi T, Horvath S, 

Vilain E. 2003. Sexually dimor-
phic gene expression in mouse 
brain precedes gonadal dif-
ferentiation.  Molecular Brain 
Research  118:82–90. 

 Diamond J. 1997.  Why Is Sex 

Fun? The Evolution of Human 
Sexuality.  New York: Basic 
Books. 

 Fausto-Sterling A. 1992.  Myths 
of Gender: Biological Theories 
About Women and Men . New 
York: Basic Books. 

 Fausto-Sterling A. 2000.  Sexing the 

Body . New York: Basic Books. 
 Ferris CF, Kulkarni P, Sullivan 
JM Jr, Harder JA, Messenger 
TL, Febo M. 2005. Pup suckling 
is more rewarding than co-
caine: evidence from functional 
magnetic resonance imaging 
and three-dimensional compu-
tational analysis.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  25:149–156. 

REFERENCES

939

 Garcia-Segura LM, Azcoitia I, 

DonCarlos LL. 2001. 
Neuroprotection by estradiol. 
 Progress in Neurobiology  
63:29–60. 

 Gilbert SF. 2013.  Developmental 
Biology , 10th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Gould E, Woolley CS, Frankfurt 
M, McEwen BS. 1990. Gonadal 
steroids regulate spine density 
on hippocampal pyramidal 
cells in adulthood.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  10:1286–1291. 

 Hamer DH, Hu S, Magnuson VL, 
Hu N, Pattatucci AM. 1993. A 
linkage between DNA mark-
ers on the X chromosome and 
male sexual orientation.  Science  
261:321–327. 

 Hines M. 2011. Gender develop-

ment and the human brain. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
34:69–88. 

 Insel TR, Young LJ. 2001. The 
neurobiology of attachment. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
2:129–136. 

 Kimura D. 1992. Sex differences 

in the brain.  Scientiﬁ c American  
267:119–125. 

 Kimura D. 1996. Sex, sexual 

orientation and sex hormones 
inﬂ uence human cognitive 
function.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  6:259–263. 

 Koopman P, Gubbay J, Vivian N, 
Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R. 
1991. Male development of 
chromosomally female mice 
transgenic for Sry.  Nature  
351:117–121. 

 Kotrschal A, Rasanen K, 

Kristjansson BK, Senn M, Kolm 
N. 2012. Extreme sexual brain 
size dimorphism in sticklebacks: 
a consequence of the cognitive 
challenges of sex and parenting? 
 PLoS ONE  7:1–4. 

 Kozorovitsky Y, Hughes M, Lee 
K, Gould E. 2006. Fatherhood 
affects dendritic spines and 
vasopressin V1a receptors 
in the primate prefrontal 
cortex.  Nature Neuroscience  
9:1094–1095. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   939
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   939

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 LeVay S. 1991. A difference in hypo-

 Nottebohm F, Arnold AP. 1976. 

 Walum H, Westberg L, 

940

REFERENCES

thalamic structure between het-
erosexual and homosexual men. 
 Science  253:1034–1037. 

 LeVay S. 1993.  The Sexual Brain.  

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

LeVay S, Baldwin J. 2011. Human 

Sexuality, 4th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer.

 Lim MM, Wang Z, Olazabal DE, 

Ren X, Terwilliger EF, Young LJ. 
2004. Enhanced partner prefer-
ence in a promiscuous species by 
manipulating the expression of a 
single gene.  Nature  429:754–757. 

 Maggi A, Ciana P, Belcredito S, 

Vegeto E. 2004. Estrogens in the 
nervous system: mechanisms 
and nonreproductive functions. 
 Annual   Review of Physiology  
66:291–313. 

 McEwen BS. 1976. Interactions be-

tween hormones and nerve tissue. 
 Scientiﬁ c American  235:48–58. 
 McEwen BS. 1999. Permanence 

of brain sex differences and 
structural plasticity of the 
adult brain.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy   of Sciences 
USA  96:7128–7130. 

 McEwen BS, Akama KT, Spencer-

Segal JL, Milner TA, Waters 
EM. 2012. Estrogen effects on 
the brain: actions beyond the 
hypothalamus via novel mecha-
nisms.  Behavioral Neuroscience  
126:4–16. 

 McEwen BS, Davis PG, Parsons 
BS, Pfaff DW. 1979. The brain 
as a target for steroid hor-
mone action.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  2:65–112. 

 McLaren A. 1990. What makes a 

man a man?  Nature  346:216–217. 

 Morris JA, Jordan CL, Breedlove 

SM. 2004. Sexual differentia-
tion of the vertebrate nervous 
system.  Nature Neuroscience  
7:1034–1039. 

 Murphy DD, Cole NB, 

Greenberger V, Segal M. 1998. 
Estradiol increases dendritic 
spine density by reducing GABA 
neurotransmission in hippo-
campal neurons.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  18:2550–2559. 

Sexual dimorphism in vocal con-
trol areas of the songbird brain. 
 Science  194:211–213. 

 Pfaus JG. 1999. Neurobiology 
of sexual behavior.  Current 
Opinion   in Neurobiology  
9:751–758. 

 Pfaus JG. 2009. Pathways of 

sexual desire.  Journal of Sexual 
Medicine  6:1506–1533. 

 Rinn JL, Snyder M. 2005. Sexual 

dimorphism in mammalian gene 
expression.  Trends in Genetics  
21:298–305. 

 Roselli CE, Reddy RC, Kaufman 
KR. 2011. The development of 
male-oriented behavior in rams. 
 Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology  
32:164–169. 

 Rosenzweig MR, Breedlove SM, 
Watson NV. 2013 . Biological 
Psychology,  7th ed. Sunderland, 
MA: Sinauer. 

 Sinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer 
MS, Hawkins JR, Grifﬁ ths 
BL, Smith MJ,Foster JW, 
Frischauf AM, Lovell-Badge 
R, Goodfellow PN. 1990. A 
gene from the human sex-
determining region encodes 
a protein with  homology to a 
conserved DNA-binding motif. 
 Nature  346:240–242. 

 Smith MS, Freeman ME, Neill 
JD. 1975. The control of pro-
gesterone secretion during the 
estrous cycle and early pseudo-
pregnancy in the rat: prolactin, 
gonadotropin and steroid 
levels associated with rescue 
of the  corpus  luteum of pseu-
dopregnancy.  Endocrinology  
96:219–226. 

 Terasawa E, Timiras PS. 1968. 
Electrical activity during the 
estrous cycle of the rat: cyclical 
changes in limbic structures. 
 Endocrinology  83:207–216. 
 Toran-Allerand CD. 1980. Sex 

steroids and the development of 
the newborn mouse hypothala-
mus and preoptic area in vitro. 
II. Morphological correlates 
and hormonal speciﬁ city.  Brain 
Research  189:413–427. 

Henningsson S, Neiderhiser 
JM, Reiss D, Igl W, Ganiban 
JM, Spotts EL, Pedersen NL, 
Eriksson E, Lichtenstein P. 2008. 
Genetic variation in the vasopres-
sin receptor 1a gene (AVPR1A) 
associates with pair-bonding be-
havior in humans.  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences  
105:14153–14156. 

 Woolley CS. 1999. Effects of 

estrogen in the CNS.  Current 
Opinion   in Neurobiology  
9:349–354. 

 Woolley CS. 2007. Acute effects 

of estrogen on neuronal 
physiology.  Annual Review of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology  
47:657–680. 

 Woolley CS, Schwartzkroin PA. 
1998. Hormonal effects on the 
brain.  Epilepsia  39(Suppl):S2–S8. 

 Woolley CS, Weiland N, McEwen 

BS, Schwartzkroin PA. 1997. 
Estradiol increases the sensitivity 
of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal 
cells to NMDA receptor-mediated 
synaptic input: correlation with 
dendritic spine density.  Journal 
of   Neuroscience  17:1848–1859. 

 Wu MV, Shah NM. 2011. Control 
of masculinization of the brain 
and behavior.  Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology  21:116–123. 
 Xerri C, Stern JM, Merzenich 
MM. 1994. Alterations of the 
cortical representation of the rat 
ventrum induced by nursing be-
havior.  Journal of Neuroscience  
14:1710–1721. 

 Young KA, Gobrogge KL, Liu Y, 

Wang Z. 2011. The neurobiology 
of pair bonding: insights from 
a socially monogamous rodent. 
 Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology  
32:53–69. 

 Young LJ, Wang Z, Insel TR. 
1998. Neuroendocrine bases 
of monogamy.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  21:71–75. 

 Yunis JJ, Chandler ME. 1977. 
The chromosomes of man—
clinical and biologic signiﬁ cance: 
a review.  American Journal of 
Pathology  88:466–495. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   940
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   940

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Zhao D, McBride D, Nandi S, 
McQueen HA, McGrew MJ, 
Hocking PM, Lewis PD, Sang 
HM, Clinton M. 2010. Somatic 
sex identity is cell autonomous 
in the chicken.  Nature  
464:237–243. 

 Chapter 18 
 Adolphs R. 2002. Neural systems 

for recognizing emotion.  Current  
 Opinion in Neurobiology  
12:169–177. 

 Adolphs R, Tranel D, Damasio 

H, Damasio A. 1994. Impaired 
recognition of emotion in 
facial expressions following 
bilateral damage to the 
human amygdala.  Nature  
372:669–672. 

 Aggleton JP. 1993. The contribu-
tion of the amygdala to normal 
and abnormal emotional states. 
 Trends   in Neurosciences  
16:328–333. 

 Bard P. 1934. On emotional 

expression after decortication 
with some remarks on certain 
theoretical views.  Psychological 
Reviews  41:309–329. 

 Barrett LF, Satpute AB. 2013. 

Large-scale networks in 
affective and social neurosci-
ence: towards an integrative 
functional architecture of the 
brain.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  23:361–372. 

 Breiter HC, Etcoff NL, Whalen 
PJ, Kennedy WA, Rauch SL, 
Buckner RL, Strauss MM, 
Hyman SE, Rosen BR. 1996. 
Response and habituation of the 
human amygdala during visual 
processing of facial expression. 
 Neuron  17:875–887. 

 Broca P. 1878. Anatomie com-
pare de circonvolutions céré-
brales. Le grand lobe limbique 
et la scissure limbique dans la 
série des mammiféres.  Revue 
d’Anthropologie  1:385–498. 
 Büchel C, Morris J, Dolan RJ, 

Friston KJ. 1998. Brain systems 
mediating aversive conditioning: 
an event-related fMRI study . 
Neuron  20:947–957. 

 Cannon WB. 1927. The James-

Lange theory of emotion. 
 American   Journal of Psychology  
39:106–124. 

 Dagleish T. 2004. The emotional 

brain.  Nature Reviews  
5:582–589. 

Damasio A, Carvalho GB. 

2013. The nature of feelings: 
evolutionary and neurobio-
logical origins. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 14:143–152.

Damasio AR. 1989. Time-locked 
multiregional retroactivation: 
a systems level proposal for 
the neural substrates of recall 
and recognition. Cognition 
33:25–62.

Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes’ 

Error, 1st ed. New York: 
Penguin Books.

Damasio AR. 1996. The somatic 

marker hypothesis and the 
 possible functions of the pre-
frontal cortex. Transactions 
of the Royal Society (London) 
351:1413–1420.

 Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank 

R, Galaburda AM, Damasio AR. 
1994. The return of Phineas 
Gage: clues about the brain from 
the skull of a famous patient. 
 Science  264:1102–1105. 
 Darwin C. 1872/1955.  The 

Expression of the Emotions in 
Man and Animals . New York: 
The Philosophical Library, 
1955. Originally published in 
1872. 

 Davis M. 1992. The role of the 

amygdala in fear and anxiety. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
15:353–375. 

tion, and behavior.  Science  
298:1191–1194. 

 Duke AA, Bell R, Begue L, 
Eisenlohr-Moul T. 2013. 
Revisiting the serotonin-
aggression relation in humans: 
a meta-analysis.  Psychological 
Bulletin  139:1148–1172. 

 Edwards DH, Kravitz EA. 1997. 

Serotonin, social status and 
aggression.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  7:812–819. 

REFERENCES

941

 Flynn JP. 1967. The neural 

basis of aggression in cats. 
In  Neurophysiology   and 
Emotion , ed. Glass DC. New 
York: Rockefeller University 
Press. 

 Fulton JF. 1951.  Frontal 
Lobotomy and Affective 
Behavior. A Neurophysiological 
Analysis . New York: Norton. 

 Gallagher M, Chiba AA. 1996. The 
amygdala and emotion.  Current  
 Opinion in Neurobiology  
6:221–227. 

 Gendron M, Barrett LF. 2009. 

Reconstructing the past: a 
century of ideas about emotion 
in psychology.  Emotion Review  
1:316–339. 

 Gross CT, Canteras NS. 2012. 

The many paths to fear.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  
13:651–658. 

 Hamann S. 2012. Mapping dis-

crete and dimensional emotions 
onto the brain: controversies 
and consensus.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  16:458–466. 
 Hamann SB, Ely TD, Grafton ST, 
Kilts CD. 1999. Amygdala activ-
ity related to enhanced memory 
for pleasant and aversive 
stimuli.  Nature   Neuroscience  
2:289–293. 

 Harlow JM. 1848. Passage of 

an iron rod through the head. 
 Boston   Medical and Surgical 
Journal  39:389–393. 

 Harlow JM. 1868. Recovery from 

the passage of an iron bar 
through the head.  Publication 
of   the Massachusetts Medical 
Society  2:329–347. 

TJ, Danao JA, Bajwa P, Parsons 
LH, Tecott LH. 1998. Elevated 
anxiety and antidepressant-
like responses in serotonin 
5-HT1A receptor mutant mice. 
 Proceedings of the   National 
Academy of Sciences USA  
95:15049–15054. 

 Hess WR. 1954.  Diencephalon: 

Autonomic and Extrapyramidal 
Functions . New York: Grune & 
Stratton. 

 Dolan RJ. 2002. Emotion, cogni-

 Heisler LK, Chu HM, Brennan 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   941
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   941

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

942

REFERENCES

 Jacobsen CF, Wolf JB, Jackson 

TA. 1935. An experimental 
analysis of the functions of the 
frontal association areas in pri-
mates.  Journal   of Nervous and 
Mental Disease  82:1–14. 

 James W. 1884. What is an emo-

tion?  Mind  9:188–205. 

 Julius D. 1998. Serotonin recep-

tor knockouts: a moody subject. 
 Proceedings   of the National 
Academy of   Sciences USA  
95:15153–15154. 

 Kalin NH. 1993. The neurobiol-

ogy of fear.  Scientiﬁ c American  
268:94–101. 

 Kapp BS, Pascoe JP, Bixler 
MA. 1984. The amygdala: 
a neuroanatomical systems 
approach to its contributions 
to aversive conditioning. 
In  Neuropsychology of   Memory , 
eds. Butler N, Squire LR. 
New York: Guilford. 

 Klüver H, Bucy PC. 1939. 

Preliminary analysis of func-
tions of the temporal lobes in 
monkeys.  Archives of Neurology 
and Psychiatry  42:979–1000. 

 LaBar KS, Gatenby JC, Gore 
JC, LeDoux JE, Phelps EA. 
1998. Human amygdala activa-
tion during conditioned fear 
acquisition and extinction: a 
mixed-trial fMRI study.  Neuron  
20:937–945. 

 Lange CG. 1887.  Uber 

Gemuthsbewegungen . Liepzig: 
T. Thomas. 

 LeDoux JE. 1994. Emotion, 

memory and the brain.  Scientiﬁ c 
American  270:50–57. 

 LeDoux JE. 2012. Rethinking 
the emotional brain.  Neuron  
73:653–676. 

 Lindquist KA, Wager TD, Kober 

H, Bliss-Moreau E, Barrett 
LF. 2012. The brain basis of 
emotion: a meta-analytic review. 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  
35:121–143. 

 MacLean PD. 1955. The limbic 
system (“visceral brain”) and 
emotional behavior.  Archives 
of Neurology   and Psychiatry  
73:130–134. 

 McGaugh JL. 2004. The amygdala 

modulates the consolidation of 
memories of emotionally arous-
ing experiences.  Annual Review 
of   Neuroscience  27:1–28. 
Meyer K, Damasio A. 2009. 

Convergence and divergence in 
a neural architecture for recog-
nition and memory. Trends in 
Neurosciences 32(7):376–382.
 Morris JS, Öhman A, Dolan RJ. 

1998. Conscious and unconscious 
emotional learning in the human 
amygdala.  Nature  393:467–470. 
Nummenmaa L, Glerean E, Hari 

R, Hietanen JK. 2014. Bodily 
maps of emotions. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA 111:646–651.

 Olivier B, van Oorschot R. 2005. 

5-HT 1B  receptors and aggression: 
a review.  European Journal of 
Pharmacology  526:207–217. 

 Papez JW. 1937. A proposed 

mechanism of emotion.  Archives 
of   Neurology and Psychiatry  
38:725–743. 

 Pare D, Quirk GJ, LeDoux JE. 2004. 
New vistas on amygdala networks 
in conditioned fear.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  92:1–9. 

 Pessoa L, Ungerleider LG. 2005. 

Neuroimaging studies of 
attention and the processing of 
emotion-laden stimuli.  Progress 
in   Brain Research  144:171–182. 

 Pribram KH. 1954. Towards a 
science of neuropsychology 
(method and data). In  Current  
 Trends in Psychology and the 
Behavioral   Sciences , ed. Patton 
RA. Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press. 

 Raleigh MJ, McGuire MT, 

Brammer GL, Pollack DB, 
Yuwiler A. 1991. Serotonergic 
mechanisms promote dominance 
acquisition in adult vervet 
 monkeys.  Brain Research  
559:181–190. 

 Saudou F, Amara DA, Dierich 

A, LeMeur M, Ramboz S, Segu 
L, Buhot MC, Hen R. 1994. 
Enhanced aggressive behavior 
in mice lacking 5-HT1B recep-
tor.  Science  265:1875–1878. 

van Wyhe J, ed. 2002. The 

Complete Work of Charles 
Darwin Online. http://darwin-
online.org.uk/

 Chapter 19 
Albrecht U. 2012. Timing to per-
fection: the biology of central 
and peripheral circadian clocks. 
Neuron 74:246–260.

Bal T, McCormick DA. 1993. 
Mechanisms of oscillatory 
activity in guinea-pig nucleus 
reticularis thalami in vitro: 
a mammalian pacemaker. 
Journal of Physiology (London) 
468:669–691.

 Basheer R, Strecker RE, Thakkar 

MM, McCarley RW. 2004. 
Adenosine and sleep-wake regu-
lation.  Progress in Neurobiology  
73:379–396. 

 Berger H. 1929. Über das elek-
troenkephalogramm des men-
schen.  Archiv für Psychiatrie 
und   Nervenkrankheiten  
87:527–570. Translated and 
republished as: Berger H. 1969. 
On the electroencephalogram of 
man.  Electroencephalography 
Clinical Neurophysiology  Suppl 
28:37–73. 

 Berson DM. 2003. Strange vision: 

ganglion cells as circadian 
photoreceptors.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  26:314–320. 

 Braun AR, Balkin TJ, Wesensten 

NJ, Gwadry F, Carson RE, 
Varga M, Baldwin P, Belenky G, 
Herscovitch P. 1998. Dissociated 
pattern of activity in visual cor-
tices and their projections dur-
ing human rapid eye movement 
sleep.  Science  279:91–95. 

 Brown RE, Basheer R, McKenna 
JT, Strecker RE, McCarley RW. 
2012. Control of sleep and wake-
fulness.  Physiological Reviews  
92:1087–1187. 

 Brzezinski A, Vangel MG, 
Wurtman RJ, Norrie G, 
Zhdanova I, Ben-Shushan A, 
Ford I. 2005. Effects of exog-
enous melatonin on sleep: a 
meta-analysis.  Sleep Medicine 
Reviews  9:41–50. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   942
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   942

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Buzsáki G. 2006.  Rhythms of 

the Brain.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

 Buzsáki G, Anastassiou CA, Koch 

C. 2012. The origin of extracel-
lular ﬁ elds and currents—EEG, 
ECoG, LFP and spikes.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  
13:407–420. 

Buzsáki G, Logothetis N, Singer 

W. 2013. Scaling brain size, 
keeping timing: evolutionary 
preservation of brain rhythms. 
Neuron 80:751–764.

 Carskadon MA, ed. 1993.  Encyclo-

pedia of Sleep and Dreaming.  
New York: Macmillan. 

 Carskadon MA, Acebo C, Jenni 
OG. 2004. Regulation of ado-
lescent sleep: implications for 
behavior.  Annals of the New 
York   Academy of Sciences  
1021:276–291. 

 Caton R. 1875. The electric 

currents of the brain.  British 
Medical   Journal  2:278. 

 Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton 

CM, Elmquist JK, Scammell T, 
Lee C, Richardson JA, Williams 
SC, Xiong Y, Kisanuki Y, Fitch 
TE, Nakazato M, Hammer RE, 
Saper CB, Yanagisawa M. 1999. 
Narcolepsy in orexin knockout 
mice: molecular genetics of sleep 
regulation.  Cell  98:437–451. 

 Cirelli C, Gutierrez CM, Tononi G. 

2004. Extensive and divergent 
effects of sleep and wakeful-
ness on brain gene expression. 
 Neuron  41:35–43. 

 Cirelli C, Tononi G. 2008. Is 

sleep essential?  PLoS Biology  
6:e216. 

 Coleman RM. 1986.  Wide Awake 

at 3:00 A.M. by Choice or by 
Chance ? New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

 Czeisler CA, Duffy JF, Shanahan 

TL, Brown EN, Mitchell JF, 
Rimmer DW, Ronda JM, 
Silva EJ, Allan JS, Emens JS, 
Dijk DJ, Kronauer RE. 1999. 
Stability, precision, and near-
24-hour period of the human 
circadian pacemaker.  Science  
284:2177–2181. 

Watch While Some Must Sleep . 
San Francisco: San Francisco 
Book Company. 

 Do MT, Yau KW. 2010. 

Intrinsically photosensitive reti-
nal ganglion cells.  Physiological 
Reviews  90:1547–1581. 

 Edgar DM, Dement WC, Fuller 

CA. 1993. Effect of SCN lesions 
on sleep in squirrel monkeys: 
evidence for opponent pro-
cesses in sleep-wake regula-
tion.  Journal of   Neuroscience  
13:1065–1079. 

 Engel AK, Fries P. 2010. Beta-

band oscillations—signaling the 
status quo?  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  20:156–165. 
 Engel AK, Fries P, Singer W. 
2001. Dynamic predictions: 
oscillations and synchrony in 
top-down processing.  Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience  
2:704–716. 

 Freeman W. 1991. The physiol-
ogy of perception.  Scientiﬁ c 
American  264:78–85. 

 Fries P. 2009. Neuronal gamma-

band synchronization as a 
fundamental process in cortical 
computation.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  32:209–224. 

 Gekakis N, Staknis D, Nguyen 

HB, Davis FC, Wilsbacher LD, 
King DP, Takahashi JS, Weitz 
CJ. 1998. Role of the CLOCK 
protein in the mammalian 
circadian mechanism.  Science  
280:1564–1568. 

 Goldberg EM, Coulter DA. 2013. 
Mechanisms of epileptogenesis: 
a convergence on neural circuit 
dysfunction.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  14:337–349. 

 Greene R, Siegel J. 2004. Sleep: 
a functional enigma.  NeuroMo-
lecular   Medicine  5:59–68. 
 Hobson JA. 1993. Sleep and 

dreaming.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  10:371–382. 

 Horne JA. 1988.  Why We Sleep: 

The Functions of Sleep in 
Humans and Other Mammals.  
New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Dement WC. 1976.  Some Must 

 Jackson JH. 1932.  Selected 

REFERENCES

943

Writings of John Hughlings 
Jackson,  ed. Taylor J. London: 
Hodder and Stoughton. 

Jacobs MP, Leblanc GG, Brooks-

Kayal A, Jensen FE, Lowenstein 
DH, Noebels JL, Spencer DD, 
Swann JW. 2009. Curing epi-
lepsy: progress and future direc-
tions. Epilepsy and Behavior 
14:438–445.

 Karni A, Tanne D, Rubenstein 

BS, Akenasy JJM, Sagi D. 
1994. Dependence on REM 
sleep of overnight performance 
of a perceptual skill.  Science  
265:679–682. 

Kisanuki Y, Fitch TE, Nakazato 

M, Hammer RE, Saper 
CB, Yanagisawa M. 1999. 
Narcolepsy in orexin knockout 
mice: molecular genetics of sleep 
regulation. Cell 98:437–451.

 Lamberg L. 1994.  Bodyrhythms: 

Chronobiology and Peak 
Performance . New York: Morrow. 
 Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, Kadotani H, 
Rogers W, Lin X, Qiu X, de Jong 
PJ, Nishino S, Mignot E. 1999. 
The sleep disorder canine narco-
lepsy is caused by a mutation in 
the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 
2 gene.  Cell  98:365–376. 

 Lowrey PL, Takahashi JS. 2004. 
Mammalian circadian  biology: 
elucidating genome-wide lev-
els of temporal organization. 
 Annual   Review of Genomics and 
Human Genetics  5:407–441. 

 Lyamin OI, Manger PR, Ridgway 

SH, Mukhametov LM, 
Siegel JM. 2008. Cetacean 
sleep: an unusual form of 
 mammalian sleep.  Neuroscience 
Biobehavioral Reviews  
32:1451–1484. 

 McCarley RW, Massaquoi SG. 

1986. A limit cycle recipro-
cal interaction model of the 
REM sleep oscillator system. 
 American Journal of Physiology  
251:R1011. 

 McCormick DA, Bal T. 1997. Sleep 

and arousal: thalamocortical 
mechanisms.  Annual Review of  
 Neuroscience  20:185–216. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   943
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   943

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

944

REFERENCES

McCormick DA, Pape H-C. 1990. 

Properties of a hyperpolariza-
tion-activated cation current 
and its role in rhythmic oscilla-
tion in thalamic relay neurones. 
Journal of Physiology (London) 
431:291–318.

 Mohawk JA, Green CB, 

Takahashi JS. 2012. Central 
and peripheral circadian 
clocks in mammals.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
35:445–462. 

 Moruzzi G. 1964. Reticular 

inﬂ uences on the EEG.  Electro-
encephalography   and Clinical 
Neurophysiology  16:2–17. 

 Mukhametov LM. 1984. Sleep 

in marine mammals. In  Sleep 
Mechanisms , eds. Borbély AA, 
Valatx JL. Munich: Springer-
Verlag, pp. 227–238. 

 Noebels JL. 2003. The biology of 
epilepsy genes.  Annual Review 
of   Neuroscience  26:599–625. 

 Novarino G, Baek ST, Gleeson JG. 

2013. The sacred disease: the 
puzzling genetics of epileptic 
disorders.  Neuron  80:9–11. 
 Obal F Jr, Krueger JM. 2003. 

Biochemical regulation of non-
rapid eye-movement sleep. 
 Frontiers in   Bioscience  
8:520–550. 

 Pappenheimer JR, Koski G, 
Fencl V, Karnovsky ML, 
Krueger J. 1975. Extraction 
of sleep-promoting factor 
S from  cerebrospinal ﬂ uid 
and from brains of sleep-
deprived animals.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  38:1299–1311. 

 Partinen M, Kornum BR, 

Plazzi G, Jennum P, Julkunen I, 
Vaarala O. 2014. Narcolepsy 
as an autoimmune disease: 
the role of H1N1 infection and 
vaccination.  Lancet Neurology  
13:600–613. 

 Porkka-Heiskanen T, Strecker 

RE, Thakkar M, Bjorkum AA, 
Greene RW, McCarley RW. 
1997. Adenosine: a mediator 
of the sleep inducing effects of 
prolonged wakefulness.  Science  
276:1265–1268. 

 Purves D, Augustine GJ, 
Fitzpatrick D, Hall WC, 
LaMantia AS, McNamara 
JO, Williams SM. 2004. 
 Neuroscience , 3rd ed. 
Sunderland MA: Sinauer. 

 Ralph MR, Foster RG, Davis FC, 

Menaker M. 1990. Transplanted 
suprachiasmatic nucleus deter-
mines circadian period.  Science  
247:975–978. 

 Ralph MR, Menaker M. 1988. 

A mutation of the circadian sys-
tem in golden hamsters.  Science  
241:1225–1227. 

 Savage N. 2014. The complexities 
of epilepsy.  Nature  511:S2–S3. 

 Shaw PJ, Cirelli C, Greenspan RJ, 

Tononi G. 2000. Correlates of 
sleep and waking in  Drosophila  
 melanogaster. Science  
287:1834–1837. 

 Siegel JM. 2004. Hypocretin 

(orexin): role in normal behavior 
and neuropathology.  Annual 
Review   of Psychology  55:125–148. 

 Steriade M, McCormick 

DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993. 
Thalamocortical oscillations in 
the sleeping and aroused brain. 
 Science  262:679–685. 

 Thannickal TC, Moore RY, 

Nienhuis R, Ramanathan L, 
Gulyani S, Aldrich M, Cornford 
M, Siegel JM. 2000. Reduced 
number of hypocretin neurons 
in human narcolepsy.  Neuron  
27:469–474. 

 Wheless JW, Castillo E, Maggio 

V, Kim HL, Breier JI, Simos 
PG, Papanicolaou AC. 2004. 
Magnetoencephalography 
(MEG) and magnetic source 
imaging (MSI).  The Neurologist  
10:138–153. 

 Winson J. 1993. The biology and 

function of rapid eye move-
ment sleep.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  3:243–248. 

 Yamaguchi S, Isejima H, 

Matsuo T, Okura R, Yagita 
K, Kobayashi M, Okamura 
H. 2003. Synchronization of 
cellular clocks in the supra-
chiasmatic nucleus.  Science  
302:1408–1412. 

 Chapter 20 
 Baynes K, Eliassen JC, Lutsep HL, 

Gazzaniga MS. 1988. Modular 
organization of cognitive systems 
masked by interhemispheric in-
tegration.  Science  280:902–905. 

 Berwick RC, Friederici AD, 

Chomsky N, Bolhuis JJ. 2013. 
Evolution, brain, and the nature 
of language.  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  17:89–98. 

 Binder JR, Frost JA, Hammeke TA, 
Cox RW, Rao SM, Prieto T. 1997. 
Human brain language areas 
identiﬁ ed by functional magnetic 
resonance imaging . Journal of  
 Neuroscience  17:353–362. 

 Bookeheimer S. 2002. Functional 

MRI of language: new ap-
proaches to understanding the 
cortical organization of semantic 
processing.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  25:51–188. 

 Broca P. 1861. Perte de la pa-

role, ramollissement chro-
nique et destruction partielle 
du lobe anterieur gauche du 
cerveau.  Bulletins de la Societe 
d’Anthropologie  2:235–238. 

 Damasio AR, Damasio H. 1992. 
Brain and language.  Scientiﬁ c  
 American  267:88–95. 

 Dehaene-Lambertz G, Dehaene 

S, Hertz-Pannier L. 2002. 
Functional neuroimaging of 
speech perception in infants. 
 Science  298:2013–2015. 

 Deutscher G. 2010. Through 
the Looking Glass: Why the 
World Looks Different in Other 
Languages. New York: Picador. 

Dronkers NF, Plaisant O, 

 Iba-Zizen MT, Cabanis EA. 
2007. Paul Broca’s historic cases 
high resolution MR imaging 
of the brains of Leborgne and 
Lelong. Brain 130:1432–1441.
 Friederici, AD. 2012. The corti-

cal language circuit: from 
auditory perception to sentence 
 comprehension.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  16:262–268. 

 Fromkin V, Rodman R. 2013. 

An Introduction to Language, 
10th ed. New York: Wadsworth 
Publishing Company. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   944
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   944

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Gardner H. 1974.  The Shattered 

Mind . New York: Vintage Books. 

 Gardner RA, Gardner B. 1969. 

Teaching sign language to a chim-
panzee.  Science  165:664–672. 

 Gazzaniga MS. 1970.  The Bisected 

Brain . New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts. 

 Geschwind N. 1979. Specializations 

of the human brain.  Scientiﬁ c  
 American  241:180–199. 

 Geschwind N, Levitsky W. 1968. 
Human-brain: left-right asym-
metries in temporal speech 
region.  Science  161:186–187. 
 Graham SA, Fisher SE. 2013. 

Decoding the genetics of speech 
and language.  Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology  23:43–51. 
 Hobaiter C, Byrne RW. 2014. 

 Neville HJ, Bavelier D, Corina 
D, Rauschecker J, Karni A, 
Lalwani A, Braun A, Clark 
V, Jezzard P, Turner R. 1998. 
Cerebral organization for 
language in deaf and hearing 
subjects: biological constraints 
and effects of experience. 
 Proceedings of the National 
Academy   of Sciences USA  
95:922–929. 

 Ojemann G, Mateer C. 1979. 
Human language cortex: lo-
calization of memory, syntax, 
and sequential motor-phoneme 
identiﬁ cation systems.  Science  
205:1401–1403. 

The meanings of chimpanzee 
gestures.  Current Biology  
24:1596–1600. 

 Kuhl PK. 2004. Early language 

acquisition: cracking the 
speech code.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  5:831–843. 

 Kuhl PK. 2010. Brain mechanisms 

in early language acquisition. 
 Neuron  67:713–727. 

 Lehericy S, Cohen L, Bazin B, 

Samson S, Giacomini E, 
Rougetet R, Hertz-Pannier L, 
Le Bihan D, Marsault C, Baulac 
M. 2000. Functional MR evalu-
ation of temporal and frontal 
language dominance compared 
with the Wada test.  Neurology  
54:1625–1633. 

 Patterson FG. 1978. The gestures 
of a gorilla: language acquisition 
in another pongid.  Brain and 
Language  5:56–71. 

 Penﬁ eld W, Rasmussen T. 1950. 

 The Cerebral Cortex of Man . 
New York: Macmillan. 

 Petersen SE, Fox PT, Posner MI, 
Mintum M, Raichle ME. 1988. 
Positron emission tomographic 
studies of the cortical anatomy 
of single-word processing . 
Nature  331:585–589. 

 Pinker S. 1994.  The Language 
Instinct . New York: Morrow. 

 Posner MI, Raichle M. 1994. 
 Images of Mind . New York: 
Scientiﬁ c American Library. 

 Rasmussen T, Milner B. 1977. The 

role of early left-brain injury 
in determining lateralization 
of cerebral speech functions. 
 Annals   of New York Academy of 
Sciences  299:355–369. 

 Sadato N, Pascual-Leone A, 

Grafman J, Ibanez V, Deiber 
M, Dold G, Hallett M. 1996. 
Activation of the primary visual 
cortex by Braille reading in 
blind subjects.  Nature  
380:526–528. 

 Saffran EM. 2000. Aphasia and 

the relationship of language and 
brain.  Seminars in Neurology  
20:409–418. 

 Saffran JR, Aslin RN, Newport 
EL. 1996. Statistical learning 
by 8-month-old infants.  Science  
274:1926–1928. 

Saygin AP, Dick F, Wilson SW, 
Dronkers NF. Bates E. 2003. 
Neural resources for processing 
language and environmental 
sounds: evidence from aphasia. 
Brain 126:928–945.

 Scott SK, Johnsrude IS. 2002. The 
neuroanatomical and functional 
organization of speech percep-
tion.  Trends in Neurosciences  
26:100–107. 

 Sperry RW. 1964. The great 

cerebral commissure.  Scientiﬁ c 
American  210:42–52. 

 Spreer J, Arnold S, Quiske A, 

Wohlfarth R, Ziyeh S, 
Altenmuller D, Herpers M, 

REFERENCES

945

Kassubek J, Klisch J, Steinhoff 
BJ, Honegger J, Schulze-
Bonhage A, Schumacher M. 
2002. Determination of hemi-
sphere dominance for language: 
comparison of frontal and 
temporal fMRI activation with 
intracarotid amytal testing. 
 Neuroradiology  44:467–474. 

 Vargha-Khadem F, Gadian DG, 

Copp A, Mishkin M. 2005. 
 FOXP2  and the neuroanatomy 
of speech and language.  Nature 
Reviews   Neuroscience  
6:131–138. 

 Wada JA, Clarke R, Hamm A. 
1975. Cerebral hemispheric 
asymmetry in humans. Cortical 
speech zones in 100 adults 
and 100 infant brains. 
 Archaeological   Neurology  
32:239–246. 

 Watkins KE, Dronkers NF, 
Vargha-Khadem F. 2002. 
Behavioural analysis of an 
inherited speech and lan-
guage disorder: comparison 
with acquired aphasia.  Brain  
125:452–464. 

 Wernicke C. 1874/1977. Der 

aphasische  symptomenkomplex: 
eine psychologische studie auf 
anatomischer basis, trans. 
Eggert GH. In  Wernicke’s Works 
on Aphasia:   A Sourcebook and 
Review . The Hague: Mouton, 
1977. Originally published in 
1874. 

 Chapter 21 
 Addis DR, Wong AT, Schacter 
DL. 2007. Remembering the 
past and imagining the future: 
common and distinct neural 
substrates during event con-
struction and elaboration. 
 Neuropsychologia  45:1363–1377. 
 Behrmann M, Geng JJ, Shomstein 

S. 2004. Parietal cortex and 
attention.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:212–217. 

 Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. 

Attention, intention, and 
 priority in the parietal lobe. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
33:1–21. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   945
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   945

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Borji A, Itti L. 2013. State-of-the-

Koubeissi MZ, Bartolomei F, Beltagy 

946

REFERENCES

art in visual attention model-
ing.  IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence  35:185–207. 

 Brefczynski JA, DeYoe EA. 1999. 
A physiological correlate of the 
“spotlight” of visual attention. 
 Nature Neuroscience  2:370–374. 
 Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, 
Schacter DL. 2008. The brain’s 
default network: anatomy, 
function, and relevance to 
disease.  Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science s 1124:1–38. 

 Chalmers DJ. 1995. Facing up 
to the problem of conscious-
ness.  Journal of Consciousness 
Studies  2:200–219. 

 Cohen MA, Dennett DC. 2011. 

Consciousness cannot be sepa-
rated from function.  Trends in 
Cognitive Science  15:358–364. 

 Corbetta M, Miezin FM, Dobmeyer 

S, Shulman GL, Petersen SE. 
1990. Attentional modulation 
of neural processing of shape, 
color, and velocity in humans. 
 Science  248:1556–1559. 
 Courtney SM, Ungerleider 

LG, Keil K, Haxby JV. 1997. 
Transient and sustained activity 
in a distributed neural system 
for human working memory. 
 Nature  386:608–611. 

 Crick R. 1994.  The Astonishing 

Hypothesis: The Scientiﬁ c 
Search for the Soul . New York: 
Scribner’s. 

 Crick F, Koch C, Kreiman G, 

Fried I. 2004. Consciousness 
and neurosurgery.  Neurosurgery  
55:273–282. 

 Fried F, MacDonald KA, Wilson 
CL. 1997. Single neuron activ-
ity in human hippocampus and 
amygdala during recognition 
of faces and objects.  Neuron  
18:753–765. 

 Itti L, Koch C. 2001. 

Computational modeling of vi-
sual attention.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  2:194–203. 

 Koch C, Greenﬁ eld S. 2007. How 

does consciousness happen? 
 Scientiﬁ c American  297:76–83. 

A, Picard F. 2014. Electrical 
stimulation of a small brain area 
reversibly disrupts consciousness. 
Epilepsy & Behavior 37:32–35.

 Kreiman G, Koch C, Fried I. 2000. 
Imagery neurons in the human 
brain.  Nature  408:357–361. 

 Mesulam MM. 1999. Spatial atten-
tion and neglect: parietal, frontal 
and cingulate contributions to the 
mental representation and atten-
tional targeting of salient extra-
personal events.  Philosophical  
 Transactions of the Royal Society 
of   London. Series B, Biological 
Sciences  1387:1325–1346. 

 Miller EK, Buschman TJ. 2013. 
Cortical circuits for the control 
of attention.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  23:216–222. 

 Moore T, Armstrong KM. 2003. 

Selective gating of visual signals 
by microstimulation of frontal 
cortex.  Nature  421:370–373. 

 Moore T, Fallah M. 2001. Control 

of eye movements and spatial 
attention.  Proceedings of the 
National   Academy of Sciences 
USA  98:1273–1276. 

 Moran J, Desimone R. 1985. 

Selective attention gates visual 
processing in the extrastriate 
cortex.  Science  229:782–784. 

 Noudoost B, Chang MH, Steimetz 

NA, Moore T. 2010. Top-
down control of visual at-
tention.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  20:183–190. 

 Olfson M. 2004. New op-

tions in the pharmacological 
management of attention-
deﬁ cit/ hyperactivity disorder. 
 American Journal of Managed  
 Care  10(4)(Suppl):S117–S124. 
 Pessoa L, Ungerleider LG. 2004. 

Neuroimaging studies of 
attention and the processing of 
emotion-laden stimuli.  Progress 
in   Brain Research  144:171–182. 
 Petersen SE, Fox PT, Posner MI, 
Mintum M, Raichle ME. 1988. 
Positron emission tomographic 
studies of the cortical anatomy 
of single-word processing. 
 Nature  331:585–589. 

 Posner MI, Petersen SE. 1990. 
The attention system of the 
human brain.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  13:25–42. 

 Posner MI, Raichle M. 1994. 
 Images of Mind . New York: 
Scientiﬁ c American Library. 

 Posner MI, Snyder CRR, Davidson 

BJ. 1980. Attention and the 
detection of signals.  Journal 
of Experimental   Psychology 
General  109:160–174. 

 Ptak R. 2012. The frontoparietal 
attention network of the brain: 
action, saliency, and a prior-
ity map of the environment. 
 Neuroscientist  18:502–515. 
 Raichle ME, Snyder AZ. 2007. 

A default mode of brain 
function: a brief history of an 
evolving idea.  Neuroimage  
37:1083–1090. 

Rees G, Kreiman G, Koch C. 2002. 

Neural correlates of conscious-
ness in humans. 2002. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 3:261–270.

 Sheinberg DL, Logothetis NK. 

1997. The role of temporal 
cortical areas in perceptual 
organization.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences  
94:3408–3413. 

 Shipp S. 2004. The brain circuitry 
of attention.  Trends in Cognitive  
 Science  8:223–230. 

 Tong F, Nakayama K, Vaughn JT, 

Kanwisher N. 1998. Binocular 
rivalry and visual awareness 
in human extrastriate cortex. 
 Neuron  21:753–759. 

 Treue S. 2003. Visual attention: 
the where, what, how and why 
of saliency.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  13:428–432. 

 Wurtz RH, Goldberg ME, 

Robinson DL. 1982. Brain 
mechanisms of visual atten-
tion.  Scientiﬁ c American  
246:124–135. 

 Chapter 22 
 American Psychiatric Association. 
2013.  Diagnostic and Statistical  
 Manual of Mental Disorders , 
5th ed. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Association. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   946
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   946

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Andreasen NC. 1984.  The Broken 

 Heuser I. 1998. The hypothalamic-

 McCarthy SE, McCombie WR, 

Brain . New York: Harper 
Collins. 

 Andreasen NC. 2004.  Brave New 

Brain: Conquering Mental Illness 
in the Era of the Genome . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

 Barondes SH. 1993 . Molecules and 
Mental Illness . New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

 Cade JFJ. 1949. Lithium salts 
in the treatment of psychotic 
excitement.  Medical Journal of 
Australia  36:349–352. 

 Callicott JH. 2003. An expanded 
role for functional neuroimag-
ing in schizophrenia.  Current 
Opinion   in Neurobiology  
13:256–260. 

 Charney DS, Nestler EJ, eds. 

2009.  Neurobiology of Mental 
Illness , 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

 Corfas G, Roy K, Buxbaum JD. 

2004. Neuregulin 1-erbB signal-
ing and the molecular/cellular 
basis of schizophrenia.  Nature  
 Neuroscience  7:575–580. 
 Davidson RJ, Abercrombie 

H, Nitschke JB, Putnam K. 
1999. Regional brain func-
tion, emotion and disorders of 
emotion.  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  9:228–234. 

 Fogel BS, Schiffer RB, Rao SM, 

Fogel BS. 2003.  Neuropsychiatry:  
 A Comprehensive Textbook  
2nd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins. 

 Freud S. 1920/1990.  Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle . New York: 
Norton, 1990. Originally pub-
lished in 1920. 

 Gordon JA, Hen R. 2004. Genetic 

approaches to the study of 
anxiety.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  27:193–222. 

 Gottesman II. 1991.  Schizophrenia 

Genesis . New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 

 Harrison PJ, Weinberger DR. 

2005. Schizophrenia genes, gene 
 expression, and neuropathology: 
on the matter of their conver-
gence.  Molecular Psychiatry  
10:40–68. 

pituitary-adrenal system in 
depression. Anna-Monika-Prize 
paper.  Pharmacopsychiatry  
31:10–13. 

 Holtzheimer PE, Mayberg HS. 

2011. Deep brain stimulation for 
psychiatric disorders.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
34:289–307. 

 Insel TR. 2012. Next genera-

tion treatments for psychiatric 
disorders.  Science Translational 
Medicine  4:1–9. 

 Lewis DA, Levitt P. 2002. 

Schizophrenia as a disorder 
of neurodevelopment.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
25:409–432. 

 Liu D, Diorio J, Tannenbaum B, 
Caldji C, Francis D, Freedman 
A, Sharma S, Pearson D, 
Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ. 1997. 
Maternal care, hippocampal 
glucocorticoid receptors, and 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
responses to stress.  Science  
277:1659–1662. 

 Malberg JE, Eisch AJ, Nestler 

EJ, Duman RS. 2000. Chronic 
antidepressant treatment 
 increases neurogenesis in 
adult rat hippocampus. 
 Journal of Neuroscience  
20:9104–9110. 

 Malizia AL, Cunningham VJ, 
Bell CJ, Liddle PF, Jones T, 
Nutt DJ. 1998. Decreased 
brain GABA(A)-benzodiazepine 
receptor binding in panic 
disorder: preliminary results 
from a quantitative PET study. 
 Archives General Psychiatry  
55:715–720. 

 Mayberg HS. 2009. Targeted 
electrode-based modulation 
of neural circuits for depres-
sion.  The Journal of Clinical 
Investigation.  119:717–725. 

 Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, 

McNeely HE, Seminowicz D, 
Hamani C, Schwalb JM, 
Kennedy SH. 2005. Deep brain 
stimulation for treatment-
resistant depression.  Neuron.  
45:651–660. 

REFERENCES

947

Corvin A. 2014. Unlocking the 
treasure trove: from genes to 
schizophrenia biology.  Schizo-
phrenia Bulletin  40:492–496. 

 Moghaddam B, Wolf ME, eds. 
2003. Glutamate and disor-
ders of cognition and moti-
vation.  Annals   of the New 
York Academy of Sciences  
1003:1–484. 

 Mohn AR, Gainetdinov RR, Caron 

MG, Koller BH. 1999. Mice 
with reduced NMDA receptor 
 expression display behaviors 
related to schizophrenia.  Cell  
98:427–436. 

 Morris BJ, Cochran SM, Pratt 
JA. 2005. PCP: from pharma-
cology to modelling schizo-
phrenia.  Current   Opinion in 
Pharmacology  5:101–106. 

 Nemeroff CB. 1998. The neurobi-
ology of depression.  Scientiﬁ c 
American  278(6):42–49. 

 Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, 

Surget A, Battaglia F, 
Dulawa S, Weisstaub N, Lee J, 
Duman R, Arancio O, Belzung 
C, Hen R. 2003. Requirement 
of hippocampal neurogen-
esis for the  behavioral effects 
of  antidepressants.  Science  
301:805–809. 

 Satcher D. 1999.  Mental Health: 

A Report of the Surgeon 
General . Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing 
Ofﬁ ce. 

 Seeman P. 1980. Brain dopamine 

receptors.  Pharmacological 
Reviews  32:229–313. 

 Slater E, Meyer A. 1959. 

Contributions to a pathology 
of the musicians.  Conﬁ nia 
Psychiatrica  2:65–94. 

Thompson PM, Vidal C, Giedd 

JN, Gochman P, Blumenthal J, 
Nicolson R, Toga AW, Rapoport 
JL. 2001. Mapping adolescent 
brain change reveals dynamic 
wave of accelerated gray matter 
loss in very early-onset schizo-
phrenia. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 
USA 98:11650–11655.

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   947
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   947

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

948

REFERENCES

 Winterer G, Weinberger DR. 
2004. Genes, dopamine and 
cortical signal-to-noise ratio 
in schizophrenia.  Trends in 
Neurosciences  27:683–690. 

 Wong ML, Licinio J. 2001. 
Research and treatment 
 approaches to depression. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience  
2:343–351. 

 Zhang X, Gainetdinov RR, 

Beaulieu JM, Sotnikova TD, 
Burch LH, Williams RB, 
Schwartz DA, Krishnan KR, 
Caron MG. 2005. Loss-of-
function mutation in tryptophan 
hydroxylase-2 identiﬁ ed in uni-
polar major depression.  Neuron  
45:11–16. 

 Chapter 23 
 Altman J, Das GD. 1965. 

Autoradiographic and histo-
logical evidence of postnatal 
hippocampal neurogenesis in 
rats.  Journal of   Comparative 
Neurology  124:319–335. 

 Balice-Gordon RJ, Lichtman JW. 

1994. Long-term synapse loss 
induced by focal blockade of 
postsynaptic receptors.  Nature  
372:519–524. 

 Bear MF. 2003. Bidirectional 

synaptic plasticity: from 
theory to reality.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London. Series B, 
Biological Sciences 358:649–655.  
 Bear MF, Huber KM, Warren ST. 
2004. The mGluR theory of frag-
ile X mental retardation.  Trends 
in   Neurosciences  27:370–377. 

 Bear MF, Kleinschmidt A, Gu Q, 
Singer W. 1990. Disruption of 
experience-dependent synaptic 
modiﬁ cations in striate cortex 
by infusion of an NMDA re-
ceptor antagonist.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  10:909–925. 

 Bear MF, Singer W. 1986. Modula-
tion of visual cortical plasticity 
by acetylcholine and noradrena-
line.  Nature  320:172–176. 
 Bourgeois J, Rakic P. 1993. 

Changes of synaptic density 
in the primary visual cortex 

of the macaque monkey from 
fetal to adult stage.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  13:2801–2820. 

 Cooke SF, Bear MF. 2014. 
How the mechanisms of 
long-term synaptic poten-
tiation and depression serve 
experience-dependent plastic-
ity in primary visual cortex. 
 Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London . 
 Series B, Biological Sciences  
369:20130284. 

 Dehay C, Kennedy H. 2007. 

Cell-cycle control and cortical 
development.  National Review 
of Neuroscience  8(6):438–450. 

 Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1989. A bio-
chemical correlate of the critical 
period for synaptic modiﬁ cation 
in the visual cortex.  Science  
246:673–675. 

 Espinosa JS, Styker MP. 2012. 
Development and plasticity 
of the primary visual cortex. 
Neuron 75:230-249. 

 Fish JL, Dehay C, Kennedy H, 
Huttner WB. 2008. Making 
bigger brains-the evolution 
of neural-progenitor-cell divi-
sion.  Journal of Cell Science  
121(Pt 17):2783–2793. 

 Fixsen W, Sternberg P, Ellis H, 

Horvitz R. 1985. Genes that 
affect cell fates during the 
development of  Caenorhabditis 
elegans .  Cold Spring Harbor 
Symposium on   Quantitative 
Biology  50:99–104. 

 Ghosh A, Carnahan J, Greenberg 

M. 1994. Requirement for BDNF 
in activity-dependent survival 
of cortical neurons.  Science  
263:1618–1623. 

 Goda Y, Davis GW. 2003. 

Mechanisms of synapse assem-
bly and disassembly.  Neuron  
40:243–264. 

 Goldberg JL, Barres BA. 2000. 
Nogo in nerve regeneration. 
 Nature  403:369–370. 

 Hamasaki T, Leingartner A, 

Ringstedt T, O’Leary DD. 2004. 
EMX2 regulates sizes and posi-
tioning of the primary sensory 
and motor areas in neocortex by 

direct speciﬁ cation of cortical pro-
genitors.  Neuron  43(3):359–372. 

 Harris WC, Holt CE. 1999. Slit, 
the midline repellent.  Nature  
398:462–463. 

 Hebb DO. 1949.  Organization of 

Behavior . New York: Wiley. 
 Heynen AJ, Yoon BJ, Liu CH, 

Chung HJ, Huganir RL, Bear 
MF. 2003. Molecular mechanism 
for loss of visual responsiveness 
following brief monocular de-
privation.  Nature Neuroscience  
6:854–862. 

 Honda T, Tabata H, Nakajima 
K. 2003. Cellular and molecu-
lar mechanisms of neuronal 
migration in neocortical devel-
opment.  Seminars in Cellular 
and Developmental   Biology  
14:169–174. 

 Huang ZJ, Kirkwood A, Pizzorusso 

T, Porciatti V, Morales B, Bear 
MF, Maffei L, Tonegawa S. 
1999. BDNF regulates the matu-
ration of inhibition and the criti-
cal period of plasticity in mouse 
visual cortex.  Cell  98:39–55. 

 Katz LC, Crowley JC. 2002. 

Development of cortical circuits: 
lessons from ocular dominance 
columns.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  3(1):34–42. 
 Kempermann G, Wiskott L, 

Gage FH. 2004. Functional 
signiﬁ cance of adult neuro-
genesis.  Current   Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:186–191. 
 Kennedy T, Seraﬁ ni T, Torre 

JDL, Tessier-Lavigne M. 
1994. Netrins are diffusible 
 chemotropic factors for commis-
sural axons in the embryonic 
spinal cord.  Cell  78:425–435. 
 Law MI, Constantine-Paton M. 

1981. Anatomy and physiol-
ogy of experimentally pro-
duced striped tecta.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  1:741–759. 

 LeVay S, Stryker MP, Shatz 

CJ. 1978. Ocular dominance 
columns and their develop-
ment in layer IV of the cat’s 
visual cortex: a quantitative 
study.  Journal of   Comparative 
Neurology  179:223–244. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   948
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   948

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Levi-Montalcini R, Cohen S. 1960. 

Effects of the extract of the mouse 
submaxillary salivary glands on 
the sympathetic system of mam-
mals.  Annals of the New   York 
Academy of Sciences  85:324–341. 
 Liao D, Zhang X, O’Brien R, Ehlers 

MD, Huganir RL. 1999. Regula-
tion of morphological postsynap-
tic silent synapses in developing 
hippocampal neurons.  Nature  
 Neuroscience  2:37–43. 

 McConnel SK. 1995. Constructing 

the cerebral cortex: neurogen-
esis and fate determination. 
 Neuron  15:761–768. 

 McLaughlin T, O’Leary DDM. 

2005. Molecular gradients 
and development of retino-
topic maps.  Annual   Review of 
Neuroscience  28:327–355. 

 Meister M, Wong R, Baylor D, 
Shatz C. 1991. Synchronous 
bursts of action potentials in 
ganglion cells of the develop-
ing mammalian retina.  Science  
252:939–943. 

 Mioche L, Singer W. 1989. Chronic 

recordings from single sites 
of kitten striate cortex during 
experience-dependent modiﬁ ca-
tions of receptive-ﬁ eld proper-
ties.  Journal   of Neurophysiology  
62:185–197. 

 Mower GD. 1991. The effect of 

dark rearing on the time course 
of the critical period in cat 
visual cortex.  Developmental 
Brain Research  58:151–158. 

 Paton JA, Nottebohm FN. 1984. 

Neurons generated in the 
adult brain are recruited into 
functional circuits.  Science  
225:1046–1048. 

 Price DJ, Jarman AP, Mason JO, 

Kind PC. 2011.  Building Brains: 
An Introduction to Neural 
Development . Boston: Wiley-
Blackwell. 

 Richardson PM, McGuinness 

UM, Aguayo AJ. 1980. Axons 
from CNS neurons regenerate 
into PNS grafts.  Nature  
284:264–265. 

 Ross SE, Greenberg ME, Stiles 

CD. 2003. Basic helix-loop-helix 

factors in cortical development. 
 Neuron  39:13–25. 

 Schlagger BL, O’Leary DD. 1991. 

Potential of visual cortex to 
develop an array of functional 
units unique to somatosensory 
cortex.  Science  252:1556–1560. 

 Spalding KL, Bergmann O, 

Alkass K, Bernard S, Salehpour 
M, Huttner HB, Boström E, 
Westerlund I, Vial C, Buchholz 
BA, Possnert G, Mash DC, 
Druid H, Frisén J. 2013. 
Dynamics of hippocampal neu-
rogenesis in adult humans.  Cell  
153:1219–1227. 

 Sperry R. 1963. Chemoafﬁ nity 

in the orderly growth of nerve 
ﬁ ber patterns and connections. 
 Proceedings   of the National 
Academy of Sciences   USA  
4:703–710. 

 Stoner R, Chow ML, Boyle MP, 

Sunkin SM, Mouton PR, Roy S, 
Wynshaw-Boris A, Colamarino 
SA, Lein ES, Courchesne E. 
2014. Patches of disorganiza-
tion in the neocortex of chil-
dren with autism.  The New 
England Journal of Medicine  
370:1209–1219. 

 Tessier-Lavigne M, Goodman CS. 

1996. The molecular biology 
of axon guidance.  Science  
274:1123–1133. 

 Walsh C, Cepko C. 1992. 

Widespread dispersion of neu-
ronal clones across functional 
regions of the cerebral cortex. 
 Science  255:434. 

 Whitford KL, Pijkhuizen P, 
Polleux F, Ghosh A. 2002. 
Molecular control of cortical 
dendrite development.  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience  
25:127–149. 

 Wiesel T. 1982. Postnatal 

 development of the visual 
cortex and the inﬂ uence of the 
 environment.  Nature  
299:583–592. 

 Wiesel TN, Hubel DH. 1963. 
Single cell responses in stri-
ate cortex of kittens deprived 
of vision in one eye.  Journal of 
Neurophysiology  26:1003–1017. 

REFERENCES

949

 Chapter 24 
 Baddeley A. 2003. Working 
memory: looking back and 
 looking forward.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  4:829–839. 

 Brunet A, Orr, SP, Tremblay J, 

Robertson K, Nader K, Pitman 
RK. 2008. Effect of post-retrieval 
propranolol on psychophysi-
ologic responding during subse-
quent script-driven traumatic 
imagery in post-traumatic stress 
disorder.  Journal of Psychiatric 
Research  42:503–506. 

 Cohen NJ, Eichenbaum H. 

1993.  Memory, Amnesia, and 
the Hippocampal   System . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

 Corkin S. 2002. What’s new with 

the amnesic patient H.M.? 
 Nature   Reviews Neuroscience  
3:153–160. 

Corkin S. 2013. Permanent Present 
Tense: The Unforgettable Life of 
the Amnesic Patient H.M. New 
York: Basic Books.

 Courtney SM, Ungerleider LG, 

Keil K, Haxby JV. 1996. Object 
and spatial visual working 
memory activate separate neu-
ral systems in human cortex. 
 Cerebral Cortex  6:39–49. 
 Courtney SM, Ungerleider 

LG, Keil K, Haxby JV. 1997. 
Transient and sustained activity 
in a distributed neural system 
for human working memory. 
Nature 386:608–611. 

 Desimone R, Albright TD, 

Gross CG, Bruce C. 1984. 
Stimulus selective properties 
of inferior temporal neurons 
in the macaque.  Journal of 
Neuroscience  4:2051–2062. 

 Doeller CF, Barry C, Burgess N. 

2010. Evidence for grid cells 
in a human memory network. 
 Nature  463:657–661. 

 Eichenbaum H. 2000. A cortical 

hippocampal system for declara-
tive memory.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  1:41–50. 

 Eichenbaum H. 2011. The 

Cognitive Neuroscience of 
Memory. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   949
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   949

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

950

REFERENCES

 Eichenbaum H, Dudchenko P, 
Wood E, Shapiro M, Tanila 
H. 1999. The hippocampus, 
 memory, and place cells: is it 
spatial memory or a memory 
space?  Neuron  23:209–226. 

 Eichenbaum H, Fagan H, 

Mathews P, Cohen NJ. 1988. 
Hippocampal system dysfunc-
tion and odor discrimination 
learning in rats: impairment 
or facilitation depending on 
representational demands. 
 Behavioral Neuroscience  
102:331–339. 

 Fried F, MacDonald KA, Wilson 
CL. 1997. Single neuron activ-
ity in human hippocampus and 
amygdala during recognition 
of faces and objects.  Neuron  
18:753–765. 

 Fuster JM. 1973. Unit activity in 

prefrontal cortex during delayed 
response performance: neuronal 
correlates of transient memory. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology  
36:61–78. 

 Fuster JM. 1995.  Memory in the 

Cerebral Cortex . Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 

 Gauthier I, Skularski P, Gore JC, 
Anderson AW. 2000. Expertise 
for cars and birds recruits brain 
areas involved in face recog-
nition.  Nature Neuroscience  
3:191–197. 

 Gnadt JW, Andersen RA. 1988. 

Memory related motor planning 
activity in posterior parietal 
cortex of macaque.  Experimental  
 Brain Research  70:216–220. 

 Goldman-Rakic P. 1992. Working 
memory and the mind.  Scientiﬁ c  
 American  267:111–117. 

 Graff J, Joseph NF, Horn ME, 

Samiei A, Meng J, Seo J, Rei D, 
Bero AW, Phan TX, Wagner F, 
Holson E, Xu J, Sun J, Neve RL, 
Mach RH, Haggarty SJ, Tsai 
LH. 2014. Epigenetic priming 
of memory updating during 
reconsolidation to attenuate 
remote fear memories.  Cell  
156:261–276. 

 Haxby JV, Petit L, Ungerleider 

LG, Courtney SM. 2000. 

Distinguishing the functional 
roles of multiple regions in 
distributed neural systems 
for visual working memory. 
 Neuroimage  11:380–391. 

 Hebb DO. 1949.  The 

Organization of Behavior: 
A Neuropsychological Theory . 
New York: Wiley. 

 Jog MS, Kubota Y, Connolly CI, 

Hillegaart V, Graybiel AM. 
1999. Building neural repre-
sentations of habits.  Science  
286:1745–1749. 

 Kandel ER, Dudai Y, Mayford 

MR. 2014. The molecular and 
systems biology of memory.  Cell  
157:163–186. 

 Knowlton BJ, Mangels JA, Squire 

LR. 1996. A neostriatal habit 
learning system in humans. 
 Science  273:1399–1402. 
 Lashley KS. 1929.  Brain 

Mechanisms and Intelligence.  
Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

 Luria A. 1968.  The Mind of a 

Mnemonist . Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
 Ma WJ, Husain M, Bays PM. 
2014. Changing concepts of 
working memory.  Nature 
Neuroscience  17:347–356. 

 Maguire EA, Burgess N, Donnett 
JG, Frackowiak RS, Frith CD, 
O’Keefe J. 1998. Knowing where 
and getting there: a human 
navigation network.  Science  
280:921–924. 

 McKenzie S, Eichenbaum H. 2011. 

Consolidation and reconsolida-
tion: two lives of memories? 
 Neuron  71:224–233. 

 Mishkin M, Appenzeller T. 1987. 

The anatomy of memory. 
 Scientiﬁ c American  256:80–89. 
 Morris RGM. 1984. Developments 

of a water-maze procedure for 
studying spatial learning in the 
rat.  Journal of Neuroscience 
Methods  11:47–60. 

 Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser M. 

2008. Place cells, grid cells, and 
the brain’s spatial representa-
tion system.  Annual Review of 
Neuroscience  31:69–89. 

 Nadel L, Hardt O. 2011. Update on 
memory systems and processes. 
 Neuro psychopharmacology  
36:251–273. 

 O’Keefe JA. 1979. Place units in 
the hippocampus of the freely 
moving rat.  Experimental 
Neurology  51:78–109. 

 O’Keefe JA, Nadel L. 1978.  The 
Hippocampus as a Cognitive 
Map . London: Oxford University 
Press. 

 Olton DS, Samuelson RJ. 1976. 

Remembrance of places passed: 
spatial memory in rats.  Journal 
of Experimental Psychology  
2:97–116. 

 Passingham D, Sakai K. 2004. The 

prefrontal cortex and working 
memory: physiology and brain 
imaging.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  14:163–168. 
 Penﬁ eld W. 1958.  The Excit-

able Cortex in Conscious Man.  
 Liverpool: Liverpool University 
Press. 

 Quiroga RQ, Kreiman G, Koch C, 

Fried I. 2008. Sparse but not 
“grandmother-cell” coding in the 
medial temporal lobe.  Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences  12:87–91. 

Quiroga RQ, Reddy L, Kreiman G, 
Koch C, Fried I. 2005. Invariant 
visual representation by single 
neurons in the human brain. 
Nature 435:1102–1107.

 Ramirez S, Liu X, Lin P, Suh 

J, Pignatelli M, Redondo RL, 
Ryan TJ, Tonegawa S. 2013. 
Creating a false memory in the 
 hippocampus.  Science  
341:387–391. 

 Scoville WB, Milner B. 1957. Loss 
of recent memory after bilateral 
hippocampal lesions.  Journal of  
 Neurology, Neurosurgery, and 
Psychiatry  20:11–21. 

 Squire LR, Stark CEL, Clark RE. 
2004. The medial temporal lobe. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience  
27:279–306. 

Squire LR, Wixted JT. 2011. 

The cognitive neuroscience of 
human memory since H.M. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience 
34:259–288.

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   950
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   950

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Wang S, Morris RGM. 2010. 
Hippocampal-neocortical 
interactions in memory for-
mation, consolidation, and 
 reconsolidation.  Annual Review 
of Psychology  61:49–79. 

 Wilson MA, McNaughton BL. 
1993. Dynamics of the hippo-
campal ensemble code for space. 
 Science  261:1055–1058. 

 Zola-Morgan S, Squire LR, Amaral 

DG, Suzuki WA. 1989. Lesions 
of perirhinal and parahippocam-
pal cortex that spare the amyg-
dala and hippocampal formation 
produce severe memory impair-
ment.  Journal of Neuroscience  
9:4355–4370. 

 Chapter 25 
 Abraham WC, Logan B, 

Greenwood JM, Dragunow M. 
2002. Induction and experience-
dependent consolidation of 
stable long-term potentiation 
lasting months in the hippocam-
pus.  Journal of Neuroscience  
22:9626–9634. 

 Abraham WC, Robins A. 2005. 

Memory retention: the synaptic 
stability versus plasticity di-
lemma.  Trends in Neuroscience  
28:73–78. 

 Bailey CH, Kandel ER. 1993. 
Structural changes accom-
panying memory storage. 
 Annual Review of   Neuroscience  
55:397–426. 

 Bear MF. 1996. A synaptic basis 

for memory storage in the 
cerebral cortex.  Proceedings 
of the National   Academy of 
Sciences USA  93:13453–13459. 

 Bear MF. 2003. Bidirectional 
synaptic plasticity: from the-
ory to reality.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London. Series B, 
Biological Sciences  358:649–655. 

 Bienenstock EL, Cooper LN, 

Munro PW. 1982. Theory for 
the development of neuron 
selectivity: orientation speciﬁ c-
ity and binocular interaction 
in visual cortex.  Journal   of 
Neuroscience  2:32–48. 

 Blais BA, Cooper LN, Shouval H. 

 Davis HP, Squire LR. Protein 

REFERENCES

951

2000. Formation of direction 
selectivity in natural scene envi-
ronments.  Neural Computation  
12:1057–1066. 

 Blais BS, Intrator N, Shouval HZ, 
Cooper LN. 1998. Receptive ﬁ eld 
formation in natural scene envi-
ronments: comparison of single-
cell learning rules.  Neural 
Computation  10:1797–1813. 

 Bliss TVP, Collingridge GL. 1993. 

A synaptic model of memory: 
long-term potentiation in the 
hippocampus. Nature 361:31–39. 
 Bredt DS, Nicoll RA. 2003. AMPA 
receptor trafﬁ cking at excitatory 
synapses.  Neuron  40:361–379. 

 Cajal SR. 1894. The Croonian 

Lecture: la ﬁ ne structure des 
centres nerveux.  Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London. Series B, 
Biological Sciences  55:344–468. 

 Carew TJ, Sahley CL. 1986. 

Invertebrate learning and mem-
ory: from behavior to molecules. 
 Annual   Review of Neuroscience  
9:435–487. 

 Castellucci VF, Kandel ER. 1974. 

A quantal analysis of the syn-
aptic depression underlying ha-
bituation of the gill-withdrawal 
reﬂ ex in  Aplysia .  Proceedings 
of the National   Academy of 
Sciences USA  77:7492–7496. 

 Chen WR, Lee S, Kato K, Spencer 
DD, Shepherd GM, Williamson 
A. 1996. Long-term modiﬁ ca-
tions of synaptic efﬁ cacy in the 
human inferior and middle tem-
poral cortex.  Proceedings of the 
National   Academy of Sciences 
USA  93:8011–8015. 

 Colledge M, Snyder EM, Crozier 

RA, Soderling JA, Jin Y, 
Langeberg LK, Lu H, Bear MF, 
Scott JD. 2003. Ubiquitination 
regulates PSD-95 degradation 
and AMPA receptor surface ex-
pression.  Neuron  40:595–607. 
 Cooper LN, Bear MF. 2012. The 

BCM theory of synapse modiﬁ ca-
tion at 30: interaction of theory 
and experiment.  Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience  13:798–810. 

synthesis and memory. 
1984.  Psychological   Bulletin  
96:518–559. 

 Dudai Y, Jan YN, Byers D, Quinn 

WG, Benzer S. 1976. Dunce, a 
mutant of  Drosophila  deﬁ cient 
in learning.  Proceedings of the 
National   Academy of Sciences 
USA  73:1684–1688. 

 Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1992. 

Homosynaptic long-term depres-
sion in area CA1 of hippocam-
pus and effects of N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor blockade. 
 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA  
89:4363–4367. 

 Hofer SB, Bonhoeffer T. 2010. 

Dendritic spines: the stuff that 
memories are made of?  Current 
Biology  20:R157–R159. 
 Ito M. 1982. Experimental 

veriﬁ cation of Marr-Albus’ 
plasticity assumption for 
the cerebellum.  Acta   Biology  
33:189–199. 

 Kandel ER. 1970. Nerve cells and 

behavior.  Scientiﬁ c American  
223:57–67. 

 Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular 
biology of memory storage: a di-
alogue between genes and syn-
apses.  Science  294:1030–1038. 

 Kandel ER. 2006.  In Search of 
Memory: The Emergence of a 
New Science of Mind.  New York: 
Norton. 

 Kessels HW, Malinow R. 2009. 
Synaptic AMPA receptor plas-
ticity and behavior.  Neuron  
61:340–350. 

 Kirkwood A, Bear MF. 1994. 

Homosynaptic long-term 
depression in the visual cor-
tex.  Journal of Neuroscience  
14:3404–3412. 

 Kirkwood A, Rioult MC, Bear MF. 

Experience-dependent modi-
ﬁ cation of synaptic plastic-
ity in visual cortex.  Nature  
1996;381:526–528. 

 Konorski J. 1948.  Conditioned 

Reﬂ exes and Neuron 
Organization . Cambridge, MA: 
University Press. 

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   951
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   951

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

952

REFERENCES

 Leopold DA, Bondar IV, Giese MA. 
2006. Norm-based face encoding 
by single neurons in the monkey 
inferotemporal cortex.  Nature  
442:572–575. 

 Levy WB, Steward O. 1983. 

Temporal contiguity require-
ments for long-term associative 
potentiation/depression in the 
hippocampus.  Neuroscience  
8:791–797. 

 Linden DJ, Connor JA. 1993. 

Cellular mechanisms of long-
term depression in the cer-
ebellum.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  3:401–406. 

 Lisman JE, Fallon JR. 1999. What 

maintains memories?  Science  
283:339–340. 

 Lisman J, Schulman H, Cline H. 

2002. The molecular basis of 
CaMKII function in synaptic and 
behavioural memory.  Nature 
Reviews   Neuroscience  3:175–190. 

 Lynch G, Baudry M. 1984. The 

biochemistry of memory: a new 
and speciﬁ c hypothesis. Science 
224(4653):1057–1063. 

 Malenka RC, Bear MF. 2004. LTP 
and LTD: an embarrassment of 
riches.  Neuron  44:5–21. 

 Malinow R. 2003. AMPA recep-
tor trafﬁ cking and long-term 
potentiation.  Philosophical 
Transactions   of the Royal 
Society of London.   Series B, 
Biological Sciences  358:707–714. 

 Markram H, Lubke J, Frotscher 
M, Sakmann B. 1997. Regula-
tion of synaptic efﬁ cacy by coin-
cidence of postsynaptic APs and 
EPSPs.  Science  275:213–215. 

 Marr D. 1969. A theory of cerebel-
lar cortex.  Journal of Physiology  
202:437–470. 

 Morris RGM, Anderson E, Lynch 
GS, Baudry M. 1986. Selective 
impairment of learning and 
blockade of long-term potentia-
tion by an   N -methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor antagonist, AP5 . 
Nature  319:774–776. 

 Quinlan EM, Olstein DH, Bear 

MF. 1999. Bidirectional, 
experience- dependent regula-
tion of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor subunit composition 
in the rat visual cortex dur-
ing postnatal development. 
 Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA  
96:12876–12880. 

 Quinlan EM, Philpot BD, Huganir 

RL, Bear MF. 1999. Rapid, ex-
perience-dependent expression 
of synaptic NMDA receptors 
in visual cortex in vivo.  Nature 
Neuroscience  2:352–357. 

 Roberts AC, Glanzman DL. 2003. 
Learning in  Aplysia : looking at 
synaptic plasticity from both 
sides.  Trends in Neurosciences  
26:662–670. 

 Rolls ET, Baylis GC, Hasselmo 

ME, Nalwa V. 1989. The effect of 
learning on the face selective re-
sponses of neurons in the cortex 
in the superior temporal  sulcus 
of the monkey.  Experimental 
Brain Research  76:153–164. 
 Schwartz JH. 1993. Cognitive 
kinases.  Proceedings of the 
National   Academy of Sciences 
USA  90:8310–8313. 

 Shouval H, Intrator N, Cooper LN. 

1997. BCM network develops 
orientation selectivity and ocu-
lar dominance in natural scene 
environment.  Vision Research  
37:3339–3342. 

 Silva AJ, Paylor R, Wehner JM, 
Tonegawa S. 1992. Impaired 
spatial learning in alpha- 
calcium-calmodulin kinase II 
mutant mice.  Science  
257:206–211. 

 Silva AJ, Stevens CF, 

Tonegawa S, Wang Y. 1992. 
Deﬁ cient hippocampal long-term 
potentiation in alpha-calcium-
calmodulin kinase II mutant 
mice.  Science  257:201–206. 

 Tang YP, Shimizu E, Dube GR, 

Rampon C, Kerchner GA, 
Zhuo M, Liu G, Tsien JZ. 1999. 
Genetic enhancement of learn-
ing and memory in mice.  Nature  
401:63–69. 

 Thorndike EL. 1911.  Animal 
Intelligence: Experimental 
Studies . New York: Macmillan. 

 Tsien JZ, Huerta PT, Tonegawa 
S. 1996. The essential role of 
 hippocampal CA1 NMDA recep-
tor dependent synaptic plas-
ticity in spatial memory.  Cell  
87:1327–1338. 

 Whitlock JR, Heynen AJ, Shuler 
MG, Bear MF. 2006. Learning 
induces long-term potentiation 
in the hippocampus.  Science  
313:1093–1097. 

 Yin JC, Tully T. 1996. CREB 

and the formation of long-term 
memory.  Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology  6:264–268.   

925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   952
925-954_Bear_References_revised_final.indd   952

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

Note: Page numbers in italics refer to 
 figures; those followed by b and t refer to 
boxes and tables, respectively.

A
 A1.  See  Primary auditory cortex 
 Abducens nerve,  246 , 247 
 Ablation 

 of auditory cortex, 402–403 
 experimental ablation method, 10 

 Absence seizures, 657 
 Absolute refractory period, 85, 98 
 Absorption, of light, 296,  296  
 Accessory olfactory bulb, 279 b  
 Accessory olfactory system, 279 b  
 Accommodation, of lens,  301 , 301–302 
 Acetylcholine (ACh), 49,  121 , 121 t , 122 

 ANS and, 537 
 ATP and, 160 
 brain stem and,  545 , 545–546 
 ChAT and,  50 , 154–156 
 cholinergic system and, 144 
 diffuse modulatory system and, 539 
 EPSP and, 459 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 467 
 falling asleep and, 668 
 forebrain and,  545 , 545–546 
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  
 hair cells and, 388 
 life cycle of,  155  
 Loewi and, 111 b  
 myasthenia gravis and, 464 b  
 neuromuscular junction and, 130 
 sleep and, 666, 667 
 synthesis and degradation of,  156  
 for taste, 270 
 transporter of, 154 

 Acetylcholine receptors (AChRs),  150 , 

150–151, 151 t , 801, 805,  805 . 
See also  Muscarinic ACh receptors; 
Nicotinic ACh receptors 

 Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 130, 156, 

464 b  

 ACh.  See  Acetylcholine 
 AChE.  See  Acetylcholinesterase 
 Achromatopsia, 316 b , 359–360 
 AChRs.  See  Acetylcholine receptors 
 Acoustic radiation, 399 
 ACTH.  See  Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 Actin, 39, 467 
 Action potential, 57, 81–107,  84 ,  134  

 axons and, 104–105 
 dendrites and, 104–105 
 depolarization of, 84,  85  
 electrical conductance and, 88–90,  89 , 

100 , 100–104 

 velocity of, 101, 102 b  
 firing frequency of, 85,  85  
 by ganglion cells, 319 
 generation of, 82–84 

 generation of multiples, 84–88 
 ins and outs of, 90 
 molecular basis of,  99  
 myelin and, 103–104 
 phase locking and, 392–393 
 properties of, 82–88 
 in reality, 90–99 
 recording of, 83 b  
 in theory, 88–90 
 ups and downs of, 82 

 Activational effects, of steroid hormones, 599 
 Active zones, 115 
 Adams, Raymond, 792 b –793 b  
 Adaptation 

 for behavior, 12 
 to light, 316–319,  318 ,  319  
 sleep and, 663, 664 
 to smell, 282 
 of thermoreceptors, 450,  450  

 Addiction 

 dopamine and, 569 b  
 to drugs, 20, 572 b –573 b  

 Addison, Thomas, 530 
 Addison disease, 530 
 Address selection, 796 
 Adenosine, for sleep, 671–672 
 Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 38 
 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 63 

 adenylyl cyclase and, 139 
 axoplasmic transport and, 44,  44  
 bitterness and, 270, 274 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 468 
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  
 hair cells and, 386 
 hyperplasia and, 439 
 mitochondria and, 38,  38  
 myosin and, 467 
 neurotransmitters and, 160 
 nociceptors and, 438 
 Parkinson’s disease and, 502 b  
 purinergic receptors of, 164 
 receptors of, 151 t  
 sodium-potassium pump and, 71 
 sweetness and, 270 
 umami and, 270 

 Adenylyl cyclase, 139, 172,  173 , 175 
 ADHD.  See  Attention-deficit hyperactivity 

disorder 
 Adiposity, 553 
 Adkins, Janet, 78 b  
 Adolphs, Ralph, 632 
 ADP.  See  Adenosine diphosphate 
 Adrenal cortex, 528, 530 
 Adrenaline.  See  Epinephrine 
 Adrenal insufficiency, 530 
 Adrenal medulla, 528 
 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 

528 t , 529,  530 , 557–558, 560, 
759,  759  

 Affective aggression, 636, 639,  639  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   953
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   953

INDEX

 Affective disorders, 763–771.  See also  

Depression 

 diffuse modulatory system and, 766,  767  
 MAO and, 764–766 
 monamine hypothesis of mood disorders, 

764–766 

 treatment for, 767–771 

 Affective neuroscience, 616 
 Afferent axons, 185 

 pain and, 446 
 primary afferent axons, 422–423,  423 , 

442–443 
 for taste, 269 

 AFP2.  See  Anterior face patch 2 
 After-hyperpolarization, of action 

 potential, 82 

 2-AG.  See  Arachidonoylglycerol 
 Aggression, 635–642 

 amygdala and, 635–636 
 dreams and, 665 
 hypothalamus and, 638–639 
 midbrain and, 639–640 
 neural components of, 638–640,  640  
 PAG and, 640 
 serotonin and, 640–641 
 VTA and, 639 

 Agnosia, 437 
 Agoraphobia, 756 t , 757, 758 b  
 Agouti-related peptide (AgRP), 558, 560, 561 
 Agrammatism, 699 
 Agrin, 801,  802  
 AgRP.  See  Agouti-related peptide 
 Aguayo, Albert, 800 f  
 Akinesia, 501 
 Alcohol addiction, 20 
 Alcoholism 

 amnesia from, 829 
 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, 845 b  

 Alpha helix, 60 
 Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone 

( ␣ MSH), 557–558 

 Alpha motor neurons, 458–461,  460 ,  461 , 

469,  474 , 477 

 of ventral horn, 469 

 Alpha rhythms, 651,  652  
 ALS.  See  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
 Altered state of consciousness, from 

 hallucinogens, 742 

 Altman, Joseph, 787 b  
 Alvarez, Francisco, 472 b  
 Alzheimer, A., 40 b  
 Alzheimer’s disease, 19, 19 t  

 basal forebrain complex and, 545 
 cytoskeleton and, 39, 40 b –41 b  
 estrogen replacement therapy and, 610 
 neurons in, 41 b  
 programmed cell death and, 804 

 Amacrine cells, 305,  305  
 American Sign Language (ASL), 689, 705, 

705 , 715 b  
 Amines, 120, 144 

953

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

954

INDEX

 Amino acid-gated channels, 164–169 
 Amino acids, 60,  61  

 axoplasmic transport and, 43 
 mRNA and, 32 
 mutations of, 96 
 as neurotransmitters, 120,  121 , 144,  159 , 

159–160 

 proteins and, 163 
 Ammon’s horn, 874 
 Amnesia, 829–830,  830  

 animal model of, 843–844 
 antegrade,  829 , 830, 841–843,  842 , 845 b  
 diencephalon and, 845 b  
 Parkinson’s disease and, 861–862,  862  
 retrograde,  829 , 830, 845 b , 854 
 temporal lobe and, 841–843,  842  

 AMPA-gated channels, 165–167,  166  
 AMPA receptors, 150,  150 , 884–885,  885  

 glutamate-gated channels, 165–167,  166  
 LTP and, 878–879 
 synaptic scaling and, 891 

 Amperes (amps), 64 
 Amphetamine, 158, 546–547, 775 

 CART, 557–558 

 Amplification 

 cochlear amplifier and, 386–388 
 signal amplification, by G-protein-

coupled receptors, 175,  175  
 of sound, 375–376, 386–388,  388  

 Amplitude 

 of EEG, 647 
 in electromagnetic radiation, 295,  295  

 Amps.  See  Amperes 
 Ampulla, 407,  407  
 Amputations, phantom limb sensations 

with, 436 

 Amygdala,  226 , 235,  235  

 aggression and, 635–636 
 anatomy of,  631 , 631–632 
 fear and, 626, 630–635 
 HPA and,  760 , 760–761,  761  
 memory and, 633–635,  635 ,  845  
 for unconscious emotion, 619, 621 

 Amygdalectomy, 636 
 Amyloid, Alzheimer’s disease and, 41 b  
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 

167 b , 463 b  

 Anabolism, 553,  554  
 Analgesia, 440 b  
 Anandamide, 161 b  
 Anatomical planes of section, 182,  182  
 Anatomical references 

 anterior, 180 
 caudal, 180, 238,  238  
 contralateral, 182 
 dorsal, 180,  229 , 229–230,  230 , 240,  241  
 ipsilateral, 182 
 lateral, 182 
 medial, 182, 225,  225  
 for nervous system, 180–183,  182  
 posterior, 180 
 rostral, 180, 238,  238 , 239,  239  
 ventral, 180, 228,  228  

 Andersen, Per, 850 b  
 Androgen insensitivity, 602 
 Androgens, 584, 635 
 Anesthesia, 102 b  

 Anger, 626,  627 ,  628 , 635–642 
 hypothalamus and, 638–639 
 neural components of, 638–640,  640  
 serotonin and, 640–641 

 Angiotensin I, 527 
 Angiotensin II, 527,  527  
 Angiotensinogen, 527 
 Angular acceleration, 407 
 Angular gyrus, 702 
 Animal models, 11–12 
 of amnesia, 843–844 

 Animals 

 auditory cortex of, 400 b –401 b  
 language in, 688–690,  690  
 in neuroscience research, 16–18,  18  

 Aniston, Jennifer, 840 
 Anodes, 64 
 Anomia, 699 
 Anomic aphasia, 697 t  
 Anorectic peptides, 558 
 Anorexia, 556 
 Anorexia nervosa, 571 
 ANS.  See  Autonomic nervous system 
 Antagonist muscle,  455 , 456, 477 
 Antegrade amnesia,  829 , 830, 841–843, 

 842 , 845 b  

 Anterior anatomical reference, 180 
 Anterior cerebral artery, 248,  248 , 249,  249  
 Anterior cingulate cortex, 767,  768 ,  773  
 Anterior communicating artery, 248,  248  
 Anterior face patch 2 (AFP2),  362  
 Anterior pituitary, 528–531, 528 t  
 Anterograde transport, 44 
 Antianxiety drugs, 158–159, 761–763 
 Antibiotics, 388, 402 b  
 Anticonvulsants, 656 
 Antidepressants, 158–159, 669 b , 

768–769,  769  

 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH). 

 See  Vasopressin 

 Antigens, 146 
 Antihistamines, 439, 442 
 Anti-nogo antibody (IN-1), 800 f  
 Anxiety 

 dreams and, 665 
 fear and, 758 
 frontal lobotomy for, 637 b  
 stress response and, 758, 759 

 Anxiety disorders, 756–763, 756 t  

 benzodiazepines for,  761 , 761–762 
 treatment for, 761–763 

 Anxiolytic drugs, 158–159, 761–763 
 Aphasia, 694–695 

 bilinguals and, 705 
 deafness and, 705 
 language and, 697–705 
 types of, 697 t  
 Wernicke–Geschwind model of, 701–704, 

 702 ,  703 ,  704  

 Apical dendrites, 209, 344 
 Apical end, 269 
  Aplysia , 870 b –872 b ,  871 , 888 b  
 Apoptosis, 804 
 Appetite, 562–566 

 marijuana and,  563 , 563 b  

 Aqueous humor, 298,  299  
 Arachidonic acid, 602 

 Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), 161 b  
 Arachnoid membrane, 185,  186  
 Arcuate fasciculus, 702, 704–705 
 Arcuate nucleus, 557 
 Area 1, 431,  492 , 493 
 Area 2, 431,  492 , 493 
 Area 3,  492 , 493, 791, 794 
 Area 3b, 431,  431  
 Area 4, 492,  492  
 Area 5,  492  
 Area 6, 492,  492 , 494, 495, 498 
 Area 7,  492 , 493 
 Area 17, 333, 341, 791 
 Area A1.  See  Primary auditory cortex 
 Area IT, 360–362 

 attention and, 731 
 receptive field and, 363 
 synapses in, 886,  886  
 vision memory and,  868 , 868–869 

 Area LIP.  See  Lateral intraparietal cortex 
 Area MT, 493 

 MST and, 358–359 
 receptive fields and, 363 
 Area V1.  See  Striate cortex 
 Area V4, 29–30, 731,  744  

 receptive fields in, attention and, 733,  734  

 Aristotle, 5 
 Aromatase, 584 
 Arousal 

 in dimensional theories of emotion, 627 
 in sexual response cycle, 587–588 

 Ascending pain pathways, 443–446,  445  
 Ascending reticular activating system, 

542, 667–668 

 Ascending sensory pathways, 243,  243  
 ASD.  See  Autism spectrum disorder 
 Aserinsky, Eugene, 659 
 ASL.  See  American Sign Language 
 Aspinous neurons, 46 
 Aspirin, for hyperplasia, 440 
 Association areas, 214, 224,  224  
 Associative learning, 827–828 
 Astereognosia, 437 
 Astigmatism, 302 b  
 Aston-Jones, Gary, 543 b  
 Astrocytes, 49,  52 , 76,  77 , 786–788 
 Asymmetrical cell division, 785 
 Asymmetrical synapses, 117,  119  
 Ataxia, 511 
 Atonia, 659 
 ATP.  See  Adenosine triphosphate 
 Atrophy, 463, 488 b  
 Atropine, 150, 538 
 Attention, 719, 723–742,  725 ,  737  

 area V4 and, 733,  734  
 behavior and, 725–728 
 brain and, 734–742 
 divided-attention experiments, 730,  730  
 frontoparietal attention network, 

740–742,  741  

 parietal lobe and,  731 , 731–733,  732  
 physiological effects of, 728–733 
 reaction time and, 727–728,  728  
 receptive fields in area V4 and, 733,  734  
 selective-attention experiments, 730,  730  
 spotlight of, 728,  729  
 visual sensitivity and, 725–727,  726 ,  727  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   954
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   954

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder 

(ADHD), 724 b  

 Attenuation reflex, 376–377 
 Atypical neuroleptics, 776 
 Aubertin, Simon Alexandre Ernest, 695 
 Audition, 370 
 Auditory canal, 373,  373  
 Auditory cortex, 237 

 ablation of, 402–403 
 of animals, 400 b –401 b  
 lesions of, 402–403 
 tonotopy and, 380 
 Wernicke–Geschwind model and, 702 
 Auditory nerve,  381 , 382, 392–393,  403  

 axons of, hair cells and, 386,  386  

 Auditory relay nuclei, 380 
 Auditory system, 369–403 

 A1 and, 374, 399,  399  
 brain stem and, 389 
 central auditory processes of, 388–391 
 disorders of, 402 b  
 encoding in, 391–393 
 hearing loss and, 402 b  
 inner ear and, 374,  376 , 377–388 
 middle ear and,  373 , 374–377,  375 ,  376  
 pathways in, 389–391,  390  
 sound and, 370–372,  371  
 localization of, 394–399 
 structure of, 373–374,  374  
 visual system and,  374  

 Auditory-vestibular nerve,  246 , 247, 382 
 Aura, 658 
 Autism, 19 t  
 Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 803 b  
 Autonomic ganglia,  532 , 533 
 Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 185, 
244,  244 , 522–523, 531–538,  532  

 aggression and, 636 
 anxiety disorders and, 756 
 emotion and, 619 
 enteric division of, 535–537,  536  
 heart and, 454 
 hypothalamus and, 198–199 
 neurotransmitters and, 537–538 
 parasympathetic division of, 245,  245 , 

532,  532 , 533–534,  534  

 sexual response cycle and, 588 

 sympathetic division of, 245,  245 , 532, 

 532 , 533–534,  534  

 sexual response cycle and, 588 

 Autoradiography, 147, 345,  346  
 Autoreceptors, 129–130 
 Autostereogram,  365 , 365 b  
 Axel, Richard, 282 
 Axial muscles, 456 
 Axoaxonic synapse, 115,  116  
 Axodendritic synapse, 115,  116  
 Axon collaterals, 39–40,  42  
 Axon hillock, 39, 41,  42 ,  85 , 135 
 Axons, 26 

 action potential and, 104–105 
 afferent axons, 185 

 pain and, 446 
 for taste, 269 

 of auditory nerve, hair cells and, 

386,  386  

 A ␤  axons, 423, 426,  427 , 428, 441 

 of CNS, non-regeneration of, 800 b  
 collections of, 192 t  
 efferent axons, 185 
 glia on, 49 
 guidance of, 797–801 
 in hindbrain, 202 
 Ia axons, 469, 470, 472 b ,  474  
 Ib axons, 475–476 
 of neurons, 26,  26 , 39–44, 42, 56–57 
 pioneer axons, 797 
 primary afferent axons, 422–423,  423 , 

442–443 

 as wires, 56–57 

 Axon terminal, 41–42,  42 , 43 
 Axoplasmic transport, 43–44 
 Axosomatic synapse, 115, 116 
 Axospinous synapse, 115 
 A ␤  axons, 423, 426,  427 , 428, 441 
 A ␦  fibers, 439, 443, 451 

B
 Babinski, Joseph, 488 b  
 Babinski sign, 488 b  
 Bacteria, 131 b  
 Bal, Ramazan, 394 b  
 Balance 

 energy, 553–554,  554  
 vestibular nuclei for, 240 

 Bálint’s syndrome, 722 
 Ballism, 504 
 Bamberg, Ernst, 86 b  
 Barbiturates, 168 
 Bard, Philip, 617–619,  618  
 Barlow, Horace, 319 
 Barrels, of cerebral cortex, 434 b , 794 
 Barry, Caswell, 851 
 Bartels, Andreas, 594 
 Basal cells, 279 
 Basal forebrain, 232,  232 ,  234 , 249 

 sleep and, 667 

 Basal forebrain complex, 545 
 Basal ganglia, 233,  233 , 498–505,  499 ,  500 , 

 501 , 861 

 Basal lamina, 801 
 Basal nucleus of Meynert, 545 
 Basal telencephalon, 197 
 Basic emotions, 626,  627  
 Basic theories of emotion, 626,  627  
 Basilar artery, 248,  248  
 Basilar membrane, 377,  377 ,  378 ,  381  

 sound and,  379 , 379–380,  380  
 stereocilia and, 382–383,  383  

 Basolateral nuclei, 631,  631  
 Baynes, Kathleen, 708–709 
 BC.  See  Bulbocavernosus muscles 
 BCM theory, 880, 880 b –881 b  
 BDNF.  See  Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
 Bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, 760 
 Behavior.  See also  Motivated behavior 

 adaptations for, 12 
 attention and, 725–728 
 gender and,  580  
 genetics and, 603–606 
 phrenology and, 10 
 procedural memory for, 825 
 sex and, 587–595 
 sex hormones and, 599–603 

INDEX

955

 Behavioral neurophysiology, 495 b  
 Behavioral neuroscience, 13–14 
 Behaviorism, 753 
 Bekoff, Anne, 572 b  
 Bell, Charles, 9, 15, 17, 184 
 Benzer, Seymour, 888 b  
 Benzodiazepines, 168, 599,  761 , 761–762, 

 762  

 Berlioz, Hector, 765 b  
 Berry, Halle,  840 , 840–841 
 Berson, David, 678 
 Betz, Vladimir, 506 
 Betz cells, 506 
 Bichler, Edyta, 472 b  
 Bienenstock, Elie, 880, 880 b –881 b  
 Bilateral symmetry, 182 
 Bilinguals, aphasia and, 705 
 Binocular competition, 811–812,  812  
 Binocular neurons, 348, 351, 364 b –365 b  
 Binocular receptive fields, 348 
 Binocular rivalry, consciousness and, 

743–748,  746 ,  747  

 Binocular vision, 809 
 Binocular visual field, 334,  335  
 Biological clocks, 674–676,  676  
 Bipolar cells, 304,  305 , 321–323,  322  
 Bipolar disorder, 764 
 Bipolar neurons, 46 
 Bitemporal hemianopia, 337 b  
 Bitterness 

 ATP and, 270 
 of poisons, 267 
 transduction of, 273,  274  

 Bleuler, Eugen, 771 
 Blob pathway, 354–355,  355  
 Blobs, 347,  348 , 353–354 
 Blood-brain barrier, 76, 537 
 Blood supply, to brain,  248 , 248–249,  249  
 Bloom, Floyd, 542 b –543 b  
 Body fat,  554 , 554–556 
 Bonaparte, Napoleon, 279 b  
 Bottom-up attention, 725 
 Botulinum toxins, 131 b  
 Bouillaud, Jean-Baptiste, 695 
 Boutons en passant, 42, 43 
 Boyden, Ed, 87 b  
 Bradykinesia, 501 
 Bradykinin, 438, 439, 440 
 Braille, 715 b  
 Brain,  8 , 183.  See also   specific structures  

 attention and, 734–742 
 blood supply to,  248 , 248–249,  249  
 cross-sectional anatomy of,  231 , 231–240 
 default mode network of,  721 , 721–723 
 diffuse modulatory system of, 523, 

538–548, 540 b ,  544  

 dorsal anatomical reference for,  229 , 

229–230,  230  

 dreams and, 14 
 electrical stimulation of, language and, 

711–712,  712  

 electrical synapses in, 113 
 emotion and, 615–642,  633  
 on endocannabinoids, 161 b  
 functional states of, 658–660, 659 t  
 gender and, differences of, 595–612 
 genetics and, 603–606 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   955
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   955

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

956

INDEX

Brain (continued)
 in Greece, ancient, 5 
 imaging of, 186–190, 189 b , 190 b , 191 
 kidneys and, 527,  527  
 language in, 694–697,  697 , 698 b , 

711–712,  712  

 localization in, 10–11,  11 , 12,  12  
 love and,  594 , 594–595 
 of mammals, 181 
 maps of, 850 b –851 b  
 masculinization of, 600–601 
 memory acquisition and, 867 
 mental illness and, 752–756 
 in molecular neuroscience, 13 
 motor system and, 483–516 
 neurogenesis in, 785–795, 787 b  
 neurons in, 24, 783–820 
 in nineteenth century, 8–13 
 pathway formation in, 795–802,  796  
 in Renaissance, 6–7 
 reproductive organs and,  586  
 resting state activity in, 720–723,  723  
 in Roman Empire, 5–6 
 self-stimulation of, 567 b  
 sex and, 579–612 
 sex hormones and, 599–603 
 sexual dimorphisms of, 597–598 
 stress response and, 531 b  
 surface anatomy of, 220–230,  221  
 synchronous rhythms in,  653 , 653–654 
 tumors of, amnesia from, 829 
 ventral anatomical reference of, 228,  228  
 ventricles in, 196, 200, 205, 227,  227  
 ventricular system of, 204–205, 205 t , 207 
 vesicles of, 195–196 
 working memory and, 833–834,  834 ,  835  
 Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 

804 

 Brain rhythms 

 cerebral cortex and, 655,  655  
 EEG and,  646 , 646–658, 647,  648 ,  649  
 functions of, 655 
 sleep and, 658–673, 659 t  
 synchronous,  653 , 653–654 
 thalamus and,  655  

 Brain stem, 8, 183 

 ACh and,  545 , 545–546 
 auditory system and, 389 
 cross-sectional view of, 231,  231  
 Korsakoff’s syndrome and, 845 b  
 LGN and, 341 
 medial anatomical reference for, 225,  225  
 pupillary light reflex and, 303 
 sleep and, 666, 667 

 Breast cancer, 609–610 
 Brenner, Sidney, 211 
 Broca, Paul, 10, 11, 695, 698 b  

 clinical neuroscientists and, 14 
 frontal lobe and, 15 
 limbic lobe of, 622,  622  

 Broca’s aphasia, 697 t , 699–700 
 Broca’s area, 695, 702, 703, 704–705 
 Brodmann, Korbinian, 210,  210 , 211–212 
 Brown–Séquard syndrome, 445 
 Buck, Linda, 282 
 Bucy, Paul, 630–631, 637 b  
 Bulbocavernosus muscles (BC), 596 

 Bulimia nervosa, 571 
 Bullinger, Katie, 472 b  
 Bundle, 192 t  
 Burgess, Neil, 851 
 Byrne, Richard, 689 

C
 CA1, 874,  875 , 875–879,  879 , 882–884 

 LTP in, learning and, 887,  887  

 CA3, 874 
 Cabanis, Emanuel, 698 b  
  Caenorhabditis elegans , 211 
 Caffeine, 671 
 CAH.  See  Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
 Cajal, Santiago Ramón y, 27,  27 , 211, 872 b  
 Calcarine fissure,  226  
 Calcium 

 cortisol and, 531 b  
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

464–465 

 glutamate receptors and, 877 
 light adaptation and, 318,  318  
 LTD and,  884  
 LTP and,  884  
 protein phosphatases and, 884 
 from SR,  465 , 467 
 taste of, 268 b  
 troponin and, 467 

 Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein 

kinase (CaMK), 174, 878, 891,  892 , 
892–893 

 Calcium channel, 122–124, 136, 465,  465  
 Calcium imaging, 350 b –351 b  
 Calcium pump, 71 
 Calcium release channel, 465,  465  
 Call-echo delays, 400 b –401 b  
 CaMK.  See  Calcium-calmodulin-dependent 

protein kinase 

 cAMP.  See  Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
 Campbell, Alfred Walter, 492 
 cAMP-gated channels, for smell, 283–284 
 CAMs.  See  Cell-adhesion molecules 
 Candolle, Augustin de, 675 
 Cannabinoid receptor (CB), 161 b , 170 t  
  Cannabis sativa , 161 b  
 Cannon, Walter, 617–619,  618 , 891 
 Cannon–Bard theory, 617–619,  618  
 Capecchi, Mario, 33, 34 b –35 b  
 Capsaicin,  440 , 440 b  
 Capsule, 192 t , 198,  233 ,  235 ,  487  
 Carbonation, taste of, 268 b  
 Carbon monoxide (CO), 162 
 Carboxyl group, 60 
 Cardiac muscle, 149, 454 
 Carlsson, Arvid, 543 
 Carotid arteries, 248,  248  
 CART.  See  Cocaine- and amphetamine- 

regulated transcript 

 Carter, Sue, 592 b  
 Catabolism, 553,  554  
 Cataplexy, 669 b  
 Cataracts,  300 , 300 b  
 Catecholamines,  156 , 156–158,  157 , 547 
 Cathodes, 64 
 Cations, 59 
 Caton, Richard, 646 
 Cauda equina, 425 

 Caudal anatomical reference, 180, 238,  238  
 Caudate nucleus, 233,  233 ,  235 , 498,  499 , 703 
 CB.  See  Cannabinoid receptor 
 CCK.  See  Cholecystokinin 
 Cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs), 797,  797  
 Cell assembly, 836–837,  837  
 Cell body, 26 
 Cell death.  See  Programmed cell death 
 Cell differentiation, in neurogenesis, 

789–790 

 Cell membranes, 59, 68,  68  
 Cell migration, 788–789,  789  
 Cell proliferation, 785–788,  786 ,  787  
 Cell theory, 12 
 Cellular neuroscience, 13 
 Cellular respiration, 38,  38  
 Center-surround receptive fields, 323, 363 
 Central auditory processes, 388–391 
 Central motor system.  See  Motor system 
 Central nervous system (CNS),  8 , 183–184. 

 See also  Brain; Spinal cord 

 amino acid-gated channels and, 164 
 ATP in, 160 
 axons of, non-regeneration of, 800 b  
 chemical synapses of,  115 , 115–119,  116  
 development of, 192–207 
 electrical synapses in, 112,  113  
 GABA and, 167 
 muscle fibers and, 454 
 neural outputs of,  532  
 neurotransmitters in, 148, 523 
 nociceptors and, 439 
 oligodendroglial cells in, 49 
 sexual dimorphisms and, 596–598,  597  
 special features for humans, 

205–207,  206  

 spinal cord in,  8  
 synapses in, formation of, 801–802,  802  
 synaptic transmission in, 110 
 vibration and, 420 

 Central nucleus, 631,  631  
 Central pathways 

 for smell, 284–287,  287  
 for taste, 274–276 

 Central pattern generators, 479 
 Central sulcus,  8 , 207,  207 ,  229 , 430,  431  
 Central visual system, 331–366 

 lateral geniculate nucleus and,  338 , 

338–341 

 motion processing in, 358–359 
 parietal lobe and, 358–359 
 retinofugal projection, 333–338,  334 ,  336  
 striate cortex and 

 anatomy of, 341–347 
 physiology of, 347–356 

 ventral stream in, 359–362 
 visual perception and, 362–364 

 Cephalic phase, 562 
 Cerebellar peduncle, 230,  230  
 Cerebellum,  8 , 183, 202, 225,  225 , 

511–516,  513  

 cross-section of, 239,  239  
 estradiol in, 585 
 Galen and, 5–6 
 hemispheres of, 513–514 
 Korsakoff’s syndrome and, 845 b  
 motor loop through, 514–515,  515  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   956
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   956

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Cerebral aqueduct, 200, 205 t , 227,  227 , 

 236 , 238,  238  

 Cholecystokinin (CCK), 121 t , 564,  564  
 Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT),  50 ,  51 , 

 Cerebral cortex, 192 t ,  208 , 208–214,  209 , 

154–156, 358 b –359 b  

 214 .  See also   specific structures and 
areas  

 association areas of, 224,  224  
 barrels of, 434 b , 794 
 brain rhythms and, 655,  655  
 cytoarchitectural map of, 210,  210  
 differentiation of, 791–792,  795  
 engrams in, 836, 868 
 inside-out assembly of, 789,  790  
 motor areas of, 224,  224  
 neurons in, 106 b  
 plasticity of,  435 , 435–436 
 sensory areas of, 224,  224  
 somatotopy of, 431–433,  433 ,  434  
 synapses of, plasticity of, 814–818 
 transcription factors in, 791,  794  
 vision and, 294 
 white matter of, 197–198 

 Cerebral hemispheres, 183, 206, 229,  229 , 

 230 , 233,  233  

 language and,  696 , 696 b , 706–710,  708  
 visual hemifield and, 334,  335  

 Cerebral palsy, 19 t  
 Cerebral peduncle, 486,  487  
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 186 

 cauda equina and, 425 
 cerebral aqueduct for, 200 
 hydrocephalus and, 187 b  
 in spinal canal, 203 

 Cerebrum,  8 , 183 

 dorsal anatomical reference for, 229,  229  
 Flourens and, 16 
 Galen and, 5–6 
 lobes of,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223  
 localization in, 16 
 memory and, 6 

 Cervical nerves, 240,  241  
 Cervical vertebrae, 240,  241 , 423–426,  424  
 C fibers, 422, 442, 451 
 CGMP.  See  Cyclic guanosine monophosphate 
 Chalmers, David, 742, 744 b  
 Channelopathy, 96 
 Channel proteins, 62–63 
 Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), 86 b –87 b , 

87, 858 

 Characteristic frequency, 390 
 Charcot, Jean-Martin, 463 b  
 ChAT.  See  Choline acetyltransferase 
 Chemical nociceptors, 439 
 Chemical senses, 265–291.  See also  Smell; 

Taste 

 Chemical synapses, 110, 113–119 

 of CNS,  115 , 115–119,  116  
 neurotransmitters and, 120–130 
 synaptic transmission of, 119–132 
 for taste, 269 

 Chemoaffinity hypothesis, 799 
 Chemoattraction, 797, 798 
 Chemokines, 439 
 Chemoreceptors, 266 
 Chemorepulsion, 798,  798  
  Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , 86 b –87 b  
 Chlorpromazine, 776, 779 
 Cho, Z. H., 190 b  

 Cholinergic motor neurons, 49 
 Cholinergic neurons, 154–156 
 Cholinergic system, 144 
 Chorea, 503 
 ChR2.  See  Channelrhodopsin-2 
 Chromosomes,  581 , 581–583 
 Chun, Marvin, 360 b  
 Churchill, Winston, 765 b  
 Churchland, Patricia, 744 b  
 Ciliary muscle, 298,  299  
 Cingulate gyrus,  226  
 Circadian rhythms, 525, 673–681,  674  

 SCN and, 676–681,  677 , 678 b ,  681  
 of sleep,  675  
 of wakefulness,  675  

 Circle of Willis, 248 
 Cirelli, Chiara, 673 
 CLARITY, 187 
 Clark, Brian, 472 b  
 Classical conditioning, 827,  828  
 Claustrum, 745 b  
 Clinical neuroscientists, 14 
 Clioquinol, 830 
 Clitoris, 587–588, 660 
 Clock genes, 679,  680  
  Clostridium botulinum , 131 b  
 Clozapine, 776 
 CNS.  See  Central nervous system 
  CNTNAP2  gene, 694 
 CO.  See  Carbon monoxide 
 Cobain, Kurt, 765 b  
 Cocaine, 102 b , 158, 547 
 Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated 

transcript (CART), 557–558 

 Cochlea, 373,  373 , 375,  377 , 377–388,  403  
 Cochlear amplifier, 386–388 
 Cochlear fluid, 375 
 Cochlear implants, 382 b –383 b ,  384  
 Cochlear nuclei, 202, 239,  239 , 389 
 Cocktail party effect, 724 
 Cognition 

 deficits of, amnesia and, 829 
 sexual dimorphisms of, 598,  598  
 sleep and, 663 

 Cognitive map theory, 852 
 Cognitive neuroscience, 14 
 Cohen, Stanley, 804 
 Coincidence detection, 394 b  
 Cole, Kenneth C., 92 
 Coleman, Douglas, 555 
 Color blindness, 581 
 Color-opponent ganglion cells, 325–327 
 Colors, perception of, 295, 308 b –309 b , 

316,  316  

 genetics of, 316 b  

 Commissure lemniscus, 192 t  
 Commissures, 706 
 Communication.  See also  Language 

 in nervous system,  523  

 Complex cells, receptive field and, 

352–354,  353  

 Computed tomography (CT), 188 
 Concentration gradient, 64, 67, 70–72,  71  
 Concussion, amnesia from, 829 

INDEX

957

 Conditional stimulus (CS), 827,  838  
 Conditioned response (CR), 827,  838  
 Conditioning, 827–828,  828  
 Conductance, amino acid-gated channels 

and, 165 

 Conduction aphasia, 697 t , 704–705 
 Conduction deafness, 402 b  
 Cone photoreceptors, 306–309,  307  

 distribution of, 310–311,  311  
 photopigments in, 316,  316  
 phototransduction in, 315–319 

 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 603 
 Congenital insensitivity, to pain, 438 b  
 Conjunctiva,  296 , 297 
 Connectome, 211, 212 b –213 b  
 Connexins, 111 
 Connexon, 111 
 Connors, Barry, 113 
 Consciousness, 742–749 

 binocular rivalry and, 743–748,  746 ,  747  
 NCC, 743–749,  745  
 neural mechanisms of, 744 b –745 b  
 vision and, 746–747,  748  
 wakefulness and, 742 

 Constantine-Paton, Martha, 808 b  
 Content words, 699 
 Contralateral anatomical reference, 182 
 Contrast enhancement, 429 b  
 Convergence, 629 b  

 of neurotransmitter systems,  176 , 

176–177 

 of nociceptors,  443  
 of synapses, 809–811 

 Convulsants, 656 
 Cooper, Leon, 880, 880 b –881 b  
 Cooperativity, 876 
 Cope, Timothy C., 472 b –473 b  
 Corkin, Suzanne, 841 
 Cormack, Allan, 188 
 Cornea, 296,  296 ,  299 , 299–300,  300  
 Coronal plane, 182,  182  
 Corpus callosum, 198, 226,  226 , 229,  229 , 

233,  233 ,  235 ,  237 , 706,  706  

 estradiol in, 585 
 sexual dimorphism and, 597 
 Cortical modules, 356–357,  357  
 Cortical plate, 789,  789 ,  790 , 791,  793  
 Corticomedial nuclei, 631,  631  
 Corticospinal tract, 202, 239,  243 , 486,  487  
 Corticotropin.  See  Adrenocorticotropic 

 hormone 

 Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 

529,  530 , 759,  759 , 769 
 Cortisol, 528, 529–531, 531 b  
 Co-transmitters, 153, 160 
 COX.  See  Cyclooxygenase 
 CR.  See  Conditioned response 
 Cranial nerves, 185,  228 , 246,  246 , 247, 
428, 489.  See also   specific nerves  

 taste and, 274–276 

 Cre, 50 b –51 b  
 CREB.  See  Cyclic AMP response element 

binding protein 

 CRH.  See  Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 Cribriform plate, 280 
 Crick, Francis, 744 b –745 b  
 Cristae, 36 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   957
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   957

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

958

INDEX

 Critical period, 809, 810 b  
 Crossed-extensor reflex, 478,  479  
 CS.  See  Conditional stimulus 
 CSF.  See  Cerebrospinal fluid 
 CT.  See  Computed tomography 
 Cuatrecasas, Pedro, 152 b  
 Cupula, 407,  407  
 Curare, 130–131, 150 
 Cushing disease, 530–531 
 Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 

 139 , 139–140 

 second messenger cascade and, 172 
 signal amplification and, 175 
 sleep and, 672–673 
 smell and, 382 

 Cyclic AMP response element binding 

protein (CREB), 894–896,  896  

 Default mode network, of brain,  721 , 721–723 
 Dehaene-Lambertz, Ghislaine, 691 
  De humani corporis  (Vesalius),  6  
 Deisseroth, Karl, 87 b  
 Déjà vu, 658 
 Delayed non-match to sample (DNMS), 

 824 ,  833 , 843–844 

 Delayed rectifier, 98 
 Delayed-response task, 831 
 Delayed-saccade task, 834–835,  835  
 Delta rhythms, 651, 668 
 Dement, William, 659 
 Dementia, 19, 19 t , 503.  See also  

Alzheimer’s disease 

 Dendrites 

 action potential and, 104–105 
 of neurons,  26 , 26–27, 44–46 

 Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), 

 classification by, 46–48 

284 b , 312–315,  315 , 318,  318  

 Cyclooxygenase (COX), 602 
 Cyclothymia, 764 
 Cytoarchitectural map, of cerebral cortex, 

210,  210  

 Cytoarchitecture 
 of neurons, 25 
 of striate cortex, 343,  344  

 Cytochrome oxidase, 347,  348  
 Cytokines 

 hyperplasia and, 439 
 sleep and, 672 

 Cytoplasm 

 of dendrites, 46 
 neuronal membrane and, 38 
 protein synthesis in, 29 

 Cytoskeleton, 59 

 synapses of, 44–46,  46 , 115–117 

 integration of, 134–136 

 Dendritic cables, 133–135,  135  
 Dendritic spines, 46,  46 , 47 b , 608 
 Dendritic tree, 25 b , 44,  49  
 Dendrodedtritic synapses, 117 
 Denervation supersensitivity, 891 
 Denk, Winfried, 212 b –213 b  
 Dense-core vesicles, of chemical synapses, 114 
 Dentate gyrus, 874 
 Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 29 

 ASD and, 803 b  
 Cre and, 50 b –51 b  
 folic acid and, 194 
 genome and, 32 
 obesity and, 555 
 sex and, 581–583 

 Alzheimer’s disease and, 39, 40 b –41 b  
 microtubules of, 38–39,  39 , 43,  44  

 Dephosphorylation, 174,  174  
 Depolarization 

 Cytosol, 29, 57–59, 71 

 DBH in, 158 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

465,  465  

 serotonergic neurons and, 159 

D
 DA.  See  Dopamine 
 DAG.  See  Diacylglycerol 
 Dale, Henry, 144, 148 
 Dale’s principle, 153 
 Damasio, Antonio, 625 b , 628, 629 b , 632 
 Damasio, Hanna, 625 b  
 Dark adaptation, 316–318 
 Darwin, Charles, 11,  616 , 616–617, 

626,  627  

 Das, Gopal, 787 b  
 Daughter cells, 785,  786  
 DBH.  See  Dopamine  ␤ -hydroxylase 
 DBS.  See  Deep brain stimulation 
 Deafness, 402 b , 705 
 Declarative memory, 824–825,  825 , 

828–829, 835–841 

 cell assembly and, 836–837,  837  
 medial temporal lobe and, 837–841,  838  
 neocortex and, 835–837 

 Decussation, 202,  202 , 333–334, 444,  487  
 Deep brain stimulation (DBS), 504 b –505 b , 

771, 772 b ,  773  

 of action potential, 84,  85  
 dendritic cables and, 134,  135  
 generator potential and, 83–84 
 of hair cells, 385,  385  
 mechanosensitive ion channels and, 420 
 of membrane potential, 75,  75  
 neurotransmitters and, 148 
 sodium channel and, 92,  94 ,  96  
 of T tubules, excitation-contraction 

 coupling and, 467 

 voltage-gated potassium channels and, 98 

 Depression, 19–20, 19 t , 763–771, 765 b , 

772 b .  See also  Long-term depression 

 with eating disorders, 571 
 frontal lobotomy for, 637 b  

 Dermatomes, 424,  425 ,  426 , 426 b  
 Dermis, 416,  417  
 Descartes, René, 7,  7 , 752 
 Descending motor pathways, 243,  243  
 Descending pain-control pathways, 

446–447,  447  

 Descending tracts, of spinal cord, 485–491, 

 486 ,  491  

 Desensitization, 130 
 Detached retina, 300 b  
 Diabetes insipidus, 574 
 Diabetes mellitus,  565 , 565 b  
 Diacylglycerol (DAG), 173, 420 
 Diathesis-stress hypothesis of affective 

 Deep cerebellar nuclei, 239,  239 , 513 

disorders, 766–767 

 Diazepam (Valium), 168, 761 
 Dichromats, 316 b  
 Diencephalon, 196, 205, 845 b  
 Differentiation 

 of cells, 789–790 
 of cerebral cortex, 791–792,  795  
 defined, 195 
 of forebrain, 196–199 
 of hindbrain, 200–203,  202  
 membrane, 115 
 of midbrain,  199 , 199–200 
 of sex, 583–584,  584  
 of spinal cord,  203 , 203–204 

 Diffuse modulatory system 

 affective disorders and, 766,  767  
 of brain, 523, 538–548, 540 b ,  544  
 nutrition and, 540 b  
 psychoactive drugs and, 546–548,  547  
 serotonergic neurons and,  544  
 sleep and, 666,  667 , 672–673 

 Diffusion 

 of ions, 64,  64  
 of neurotransmitters, 130 

 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 188,  188  
 Digit span, 829, 831–832 
 Dimensional theories of emotion, 

627–628,  628  

 Diopter, 299 
 Direction selectivity, 351,  352  
 Direction vector, 508,  508  
 Direct pathways, through basal ganglia, 

498–500,  501  

 Disgust, 626,  627 ,  628 , 632 
 Dissociated amnesia, 829 
 Distal muscles, 456 
 Distributed memory, 869–870,  870  
 Disynaptic pathway, 533 
 Divalent, 59 
 Divergence, 629 b  

 of neurotransmitter systems,  176 , 

176–177 

 Divided-attention experiments, 730,  730  
 DNA.  See  Deoxyribonucleic acid 
 DNMS.  See  Delayed non-match to sample 
 Doeller, Christian, 851 
 Dolan, Ray, 619 
 Donoghue, John, 509 
 Dopa, 157–158 
 Dopa decarboxylase, 157–158 
 Dopamine (DA), 121 t , 157 

 addiction and, 569 b  
 ATP and, 160 
 diffuse modulatory system and, 539 
 dopa for, 158 
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  
 lactation and, 607 
 midbrain and, 543–544 
 motivated behavior and, 568–571, 569 b  
 motivation and, 568–571 
 Parkinson’s disease and, 501–502 
 schizophrenia and,  775 , 775–777,  776  
 stimulants and, 547 
 substantia nigra and, 543, 544 
 in VTA,  569 , 569 b ,  570 , 607 

 Dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, 

 775 , 775–777,  776  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   958
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   958

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Dopamine  ␤ -hydroxylase (DBH), 158 
 Doppler shifts, 400 b  
 Dorsal anatomical reference, 180, 240 

 for brain,  229 , 229–230,  230  
 for cerebrum, 229,  229  
 for spinal cord, 240,  241  
 for spinal nerves, 240,  241  

 Dorsal cochlear nucleus, 239,  239 , 389 
 Dorsal column nuclei, 240,  240 , 428, 431 
 Dorsal columns, 203, 242,  242 , 243,  243 , 428 
 Dorsal horn, 203, 426, 451 
 Dorsal longitudinal fasciculus, 639 
 Dorsal root, 184,  242  
 Dorsal root ganglia, 185, 242,  242 , 426 b , 

429 b , 440 b  

 Dorsal stream, 356–359 
 Double-opponent cells, 354 
 Dowling, John, 320 
 Downing, Paul, 361 b  
 Down syndrome, 602 
 Drayton, Michael, 765 b  
 Dreams, 14, 664–666 
 Drinking behavior, 573–575 
 Drive reduction, for feeding behavior, 566 
 Dronkers, Nina, 698 b  
 Drugs.  See also   specific drugs and drug 

types  

 addiction to, 20, 572 b –573 b  
 GABA receptors and,  169 , 169–170 
 transient global amnesia from, 830 

 DTI.  See  Diffusion tensor imaging 
 Dualism, 742 
 Du Bois-Reymond, Emil, 9 
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 468 b , 581 
 Dudai, Yadin, 888 b  
 Duplex retina, 309 
 Duplex theory of sound localization, 396 
 Dura mater, 185,  186 ,  242  
 Dynein, 44 
 Dynorphin, 121 t  
 Dyskinesias, 503 
 Dyslexia, 693–694 
 Dysmetric, 511 
 Dyssynergia, 511 
 Dystrophin, 468 b  

E
 Ear 

 inner,  373 , 374,  376 , 377–388 
 middle,  373 , 374–377,  375 ,  376  
 outer,  373 , 374 

 Eardrum.  See  Tympanic membrane 
 Easy problems of consciousness, 742 
 Eating disorders, 571 
 EBA.  See  Extrastriate body area 
 Eccles, John, 110, 461 
 ECT.  See  Electroconvulsive therapy 
 Ectoderm, 193 
 EEG.  See  Electroencephalogram 
 Effectors, 124–130, 170–176, 312 
 Efferent axons, 185 
 Egg carton model of AMPA receptor 

 trafficking, 884–885,  885  

 Ehrlich, Paul, 754 
 Einstein, Albert, 690 
 Ejaculation, 588 
 Electrical charge, on cell membranes, 68,  68  

 Electrical conductance, 65 

 action potential and, 88–90,  89 ,  100 , 

100–104 

 velocity of, 101, 102 b  

 Electrical coupled gap junctions, 112 
 Electrical current, 64 

 action potential and, 88–90,  89  
 into neuron,  85  
 phospholipid bilayer and,  65  

 Electrical potential, 65 
 Electrical resistance, 65 
 Electrical self-stimulation, for feeding 

behavior, 566–567, 567 b  

 Electrical stimulation 

 of brain, language and, 711–712,  712  
 DBS, 504 b –505 b , 771, 772 b ,  773  
 of temporal lobes, 839–840 

 Electrical synapses, 110, 111–113,  114  

 in brain, 113 
 in CNS, 112,  113  
 for taste, 269 

 Electricity, ions and, 64–66,  65  
 Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 768, 

828, 856 

 Electroencephalogram (EEG),  646 , 

646–658 
 normal,  652  
 pyramidal cells and, 647,  648 , 651 b  
 rhythms of, 650–653,  652  
 for seizures of epilepsy, 655–658,  657  
 of sleep, 658–673,  662  
 standard positions for placement,  648  
 synchronous activity and, 647,  649  
 Electromagnetic radiation, 295,  295  
 Electromagnetic spectrum, 295,  295  
 Electron microscopy, 28,  28 ,  52 ,  116 ,  213  
 Electron-transport chain, 38 
 Emission, 588.  See also  Positron emission 

tomography 
 otoacoustic, 387 b  

 Emmetropia, 302 b ,  303  
 Emotion 

 ANS and, 619 
 basic theories of, 626,  627  
 body activation and, 620 b  
 brain and, 615–642,  633  
 dimensional theories of, 627–628,  628  
 early theories of, 616–621 
 limbic system and,  621 , 621–625 
 memory and, 633–635,  635  
 neural representations of, 625–630 
 spinal cord and, 619 
 thalamus and, 618 
 theories of, 625–630 
 unconscious and, 619–621,  621  

 Emx2, 791 
 Encephalitis, amnesia from, 829 
 Encephalon, 196 
 Endocannabinoids, 160–162, 161 b ,  162 , 439 
 Endocytosis, 124 
 Endoderm, 193 
 Endogenous attention, 725 
 Endolymph, 379,  385 , 407,  407  
 Endoplasmic reticulum, 36,  36 ,  37 , 71 
 Endorphins, 151, 448 
 Endplate potential, 459 
 Energy balance, 553–554,  554  

INDEX

959

 Engrams, 835 

 cell assembly and, 836–837,  837  
 in cerebral cortex, 836, 868 
 in medial temporal lobe, 840 
 memory consolidation and, 853–857,  855  
 in visual cortex, 868 

 Enkephalins (Enk), 121 t , 151, 170 t  
 Enteric division of, 535–537,  536  
 Entorhinal cortex, 838 
 Enzymes, 59, 71, 145–147 
 Ependymal cells, 52 
 Ephrins, 801 
 Epidermis, 416,  417  
 Epiglottis,  267  
 Epilepsy, 19 t  

 generalized epilepsy with febrile 

seizures, 96 

 seizures of, EEG for, 655–658,  657  

 Epinephrine (adrenaline), 121 t , 157, 158, 

537, 538 

 Episodic memory, 824 
 EPSP.  See  Excitatory postsynaptic 

 potential 

 EPSP summation, 133,  134  
 Epstein, Russell, 361 b  
 Equilibrium potentials,  67 , 67–70,  69 , 70 b  
 Erectile dysfunction, 588 
 Erection, 535, 587–588 
 Estradiol, 584,  585  

 disease and, 609–610 
 estrous cycle and, 608 
 GABA and, 608 
 hypothalamus and, 585, 608–609 
 Estrogen replacement therapy, 610 
 Estrogens, 584, 585,  608 , 608–610 
 Estrous cycle, 587, 596–597, 608,  610  
 Ethanol, GABA receptors and, 168 
 Eustachian tube, 374,  375  
 Evans, Martin, 33 
 Evarts, Edward, 495 b  
 Evolution, theory of, 11–12 
 Excitable dendrites, 136 
 Excitable membrane, 57 
 Excitation-contraction coupling, 464–468, 

 465  

 Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 

126,  128  
 ACh and, 459 
 ANS and, 537 
 dendritic cables and, 135 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

464, 467 

 G-protein-coupled receptors and, 537 
 LTP and, 875–876,  876  
 muscle contraction and, 472 b –473 b  
 NMDA and,  166  
 presynaptic action potential and,  134  
 quantal analysis of, 132–133 

 Excitotoxicity, 463 b  
 Execution, 484,  485 , 485 t  
 Exocytosis, 122–124,  123 , 125 b  
 Exogenous attention, 725 
 Exotropia,  300 , 300 b  
 Experimental ablation method, 10 
 Experimental neuroscientists, 14, 15 t  
  Experiments and Observations on 

Electricity  (Franklin), 9 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   959
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   959

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

960

INDEX

 Explicit memory, 825 
  The   Expression of the Emotions in Man 

and Animals  (Darwin),  616  

 Extension, 455–456,  456  
 Extensors, 456,  477  
 Extracellular fluid, 57–59, 439 
 Extracellular matrix, 797 
 Extracellular recording, of action potential, 

83 b  

 Extracellular space, 49 
 Extraocular muscles, 296,  296  
 Extrastriate body area (EBA), 361 b  
 Eye movements.  See also  Rapid eye 

movement sleep 

 FEF and,  735 , 735–736,  736  
 MST and, 359 
 tracking moving objects with, 294 

 Eyes, 293–329 

 blind regions of, 298 b  
 cleaning of, 294 
 cross-section of, 298,  299  
 disorders of, 300 b  
 early development of, 196,  196  
 gross anatomy of,  296 , 296–297 
 image formation by, 299–304 
 LGN and,  339 , 339–340 
 light properties and, 294–295 
 ophthalmoscope of, 297,  297  
 structure of, 296–298 

 EyeWire, 213 b  

F
 Face perception, 360 b –361 b ,  362  
 Facial nerve,  246 , 247, 274, 428 
 Falck, Bengt, 539 
 Falling phase, of action potential, 82, 98 
 False memories, 858 b –859 b ⫹   
 Fasciculation, 797,  797  
 Fast axoplasmic transport, 43–44 
 Fast fatigable fibers (FF), 461,  462  
 Fast motor units, 461 
 Fat 

 body fat,  554 , 554–556 
 taste of, 268 b  

 Fatigue-resistant fibers (FR), 461,  462  
 Fear,  627 ,  628  

 amygdala and, 626, 630–635 
 anxiety and, 758 
 learned, 633–635,  634  

 Feeding behavior 

 appetite and, 562–566 
 body fat and,  554 , 554–556 
 CCK and, 564,  564  
 eating disorders and, 571 
 electrical self-stimulation for, 

566–567, 567 b  

 hypothalamus and, 554–556,  557 ,  558  
 insulin and, 564–565,  566  
 lateral hypothalamic area and, 560–561 
 long-term regulation of, 553–561 
 reinforcement of, 566–567 
 reward for, 566–567 
 serotonin and, 571,  572  
 short-term regulation of, 561–566,  562  

 FEF.  See  Frontal eye fields 
 Feng Zhang, 87 b  
 Ferragamo, Michael, 394 b  

 Ferrier, David, 11, 492 
 Fesenko, E. E., 284 b  
  ␣ -Fetoprotein, 600–602 
 FF.  See  Fast fatigable fibers 
 FFA.  See  Fusiform face area 
 Filopodia, 796,  796  
 Firing frequency, of action potential, 85,  85  
 First pain, 442,  442  
 FISH.  See  Fluorescence  in situ  hybridization 
 Fissures, 7,  8 , 223,  223  
 Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 765 b  
 Flavor aversion learning, 276 b  
 Fleming, Alexander, 754 
 Flexion, 455,  456  
 Flexors, 456,  477  
 Flexor withdrawal reflex, 477–478,  478  
 Flourens, Marie-Jean-Pierre, 10, 16 
 Floxed DNA, 50 b –51 b  
 Fluorescence  in situ  hybridization 

(FISH), 147 

 Fluoxetine (Prozac), 159, 768 
 Flynn, John, 639 
  FMR1  gene, 803 b  
 FMRI.  See  Functional magnetic resonance 

imaging 

 Focal distance, 299 
 Foliate papillae, 267,  269  
 Folic acid, 194 
 Follicles, of hairs, 419 
 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 528 t , 

585–586 

 Foote, Steve, 543 b  
 Footplate, 374,  375 , 379 
 Ford, David, 699–700 
 Forebrain, 226,  226 , 639 
 ACh and,  545 , 545–546 
 basal forebrain, 232,  232 ,  234 , 249 

 sleep and, 667 

 brain vesicles in,  196  
 cross-sectional view of, 231,  231 ,  232 , 
232–238,  233 ,  234 ,  235 ,  236 ,  237 , 
 238  

 differentiation of, 196–199 
 features of,  197  
 sleep and, 666 

 Fornix, 226,  226 , 233,  233 ,  235 ,  845  
 Fourth ventricle, 200, 205, 205 t , 227,  227 , 

230,  230 , 239,  239  

 Fovea, 297,  297 ,  299 , 310,  311  
  FOXP2  gene,  692 , 692–694 
 FR.  See  Fatigue-resistant fibers 
 Fragile X syndrome (FXS), 32, 803 b  
 Franklin, Benjamin, 9, 64, 302 b  
 Freeman, Walter, 655 
 Free ribosomes, 36,  36 ,  37  
 Free-run, 675 
 Frequency 

 characteristic, 390 
 in electromagnetic radiation, 295 
 firing, 85,  85  
 mechanoreceptors and, 419,  419  
 sound, 391–393 
 of sound, 371,  371 , 391–393 

 Freud, Sigmund, 102 b , 616, 665, 753,  753  
 Frey, Julietta, 894 
 Friedman, Jeffrey, 555 
 Frisén, Jonas, 787 b  

 Fritsch, Gustav, 10–11, 492 
 Frontal eye fields (FEF),  735 , 735–736,  736  
 Frontal lobe,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223 , 232,  232  

 Broca and, 15 
 conduction aphasia and, 704–705 
 speech and, 15 
 working memory and, 833,  834  

 Frontal lobotomy, 636, 637 b  
 Frontoparietal attention network, 740–742, 

 741  

 FSH.  See  Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 Fugate, Bob, 308 b  
 Fulton, John, 637 b  
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging 

(fMRI), 190, 190 b  
 for attention, 728–730 
 for behavioral neurophysiology, 495 b  
 for default mode network,  721  
 for dorsal stream, 356 
 for emotions, 626, 633,  633  
 for face perception, 360–361 b ,  362  
 for hemispheric language dominance, 

 696 , 696 b  

 for language,  713 , 713–717 
 for language acquisition, 691 
 for love,  594 , 594–595 
 MEG and, 649–650 
 for mirror neurons, 496 
 for resting state activity, 720–721 
 for somatotopy, 432 
 for spatial memory, 851 

 Function words, 699 
 Fungiform papillae, 267,  269  
 Furosemide,  388  
 Furshpan, Edwin, 110 
 Fusiform face area (FFA),  361 , 361 b , 

362,  362  

 Fuxe, Kjell, 543 b  
 FXS.  See  Fragile X syndrome 

G
 GABA.  See  Gamma-aminobutyric acid 
 GABAergic system, 145 
 GABA-gated channels, 168–169 
 GABA receptors 

 drugs and,  169 , 169–170 
 IPSP and, 168 
 progesterone and, 599 
 GABA transaminase, 160 
 GAD.  See  Glutamic acid decarboxylase 
 Gage, Fred, 787 b  
 Gage, Phineas, 624 b –625 b , 831 
 Galen, 5–6 
 Gall, Franz Joseph, 10,  10  
 Galvani, Luigi, 9 
 Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA),  121 , 

121 t , 122, 159–160 

 anxiety disorders and, 761 
 ATP and, 160 
 CNS and, 167 
 estradiol and, 608 
 GABAergic system and, 145 
 from glutamate, 159,  159  
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  

 Gray’s type II synapses and, 138 
 mutations, epilepsy and, 656 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   960
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   960

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 pulvinar nucleus and, 735 
 receptors of, 151 t  
 SCN and, 679 
 for taste, 270 

 Gamma band, 744 b  
 Gamma motor neurons, 473–474,  474  
 Gamma rhythms, 652,  652  
 Ganglion cell layer, of retina, 305,  306  
 Ganglion cells, 304,  305  

 action potentials by, 319 
 center-surround receptive fields and, 363 
 LGN and,  339 , 339–340 
 photoreceptors of, 327–328 
 receptive fields of, 323–327 
 retinotopy and, 342 

 Gap junctions, 111–113,  112  
 Garcia, John, 276 b  
 Gardner, Allen, 689 
 Gardner, Beatrix, 689 
 Gardner, Howard, 699–700 
 Gardner, Randy, 664 b  
 Gastric phase, 562 
 Gate theory of pain, 446,  447  
 Gating, 63 
 Gazzaniga, Michael, 707, 708–709 
 GDP.  See  Guanosine diphosphate 
 Gelatinous cap,  403  
 Geminus, 428 
 Gender 

 behavior and,  580  
 brain and, differences of, 595–612 
 sex and, 580–584 

 Gender identity, 581, 604 b  
 Gene copy number variations, 32, 755 
 Gene expression, 29, 33 b , 48–49 
 Generalized anxiety disorder, 756 t  
 Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures, 96 
 Generalized seizure, 655 
 General paresis of the insane, 753–754 
 Generator potential, 83–84 
 Genes, 32, 96 
 Gene targeting, 34 b –35 b  
 Genetic engineering, 32–33 
 Genetics 

 ASD and, 803 b  
 behavior and, 603–606 
 brain and, 603–606 
 of color vision, 316 b  
 dyslexia and, 693–694 
 language and, 692–694 
 schizophrenia and,  774 , 774–775 
 of sex, 581–583, 603–606 
 sleep and, 672–673 
 wakefulness and, 672–673 

 Genetic sex, 581, 602–603 
 Gene transcription, 29–31,  31  
 Genome, 32, 33 b , 96 
 Genotype, 581–582 
 Georgopoulos, Apostolos, 507–508 
 Geschwind, Norman, 701–704, 709–710 
 Gesner, Johann, 694–695 
 GFP.  See  Green fluorescent protein 
 GH.  See  Growth hormone 
 Ghrelin, 564 
 Gigaohm seal, 95 b  
 Girdle muscles, 456 
 Glabrous skin, 416,  417  

 Glaucoma, 300 b  
 Glia, 49–53 

 astrocytes and, 49 
 potassium ions and, 76 
 Global aphasia, 697 t , 705 
 Globus pallidus, 233,  233 , 498,  499  
 Glomeruli, 285,  286  
 Glossopharyngeal nerve,  246 , 247, 274, 428 
 Glottis, 687,  687  
 Glu.  See  Glutamate 
 Glucocorticoid receptors, 761 
 GluR1, 885 
 Glutamate (Glu),  121 , 121 t , 122 

 ALS and, 463 b  
 ATP and, 160 
 GABA from, 159,  159  
 glutamatergic system and, 145 
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  

 hyperplasia and, 439 
 pain and, 442 
 as poison, 167 b  
 receptors of, 151 t  
 for taste, 270 

 Glutamate-gated channels, 165–167,  166 , 

 814 , 815 

 Glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia, 

 777 , 777–778,  778  

 Glutamate receptors 

 calcium and, 877 
 LTD and, 884–885 
 LTP and, 884–885 
 potassium channels and, 164 
 as tetramers, 164 

 Glutamatergic system, 145, 150,  150  
 Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), 159 
 Glycine (Gly),  121 , 121 t , 122, 159–160, 168 

 mutation and, 137 b  

 Glycine-gated channels, 168–169 
 Glycine receptors, 168 
 Glycogen, 553 
 GnRH.  See  Gonadotropin-releasing 

 hormone 

 Gold, Geoffrey, 283, 284 b  
 Golding, Nace, 394 b  
 Goldman equation, 72, 73 b ,  75  
 Golgi, Camillo, 26,  26 , 27, 36 
 Golgi apparatus, 36,  37  
 Golgi stain, 25–27,  26 , 47 b , 118 b  
 Golgi tendon organ, 474–477,  476  
 Golgi type I neurons, 48 
 Golgi type II neurons, 48 
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH), 585 
 Gonadotropins, 585 
 Gonads.  See  Reproductive organs 
 Gorgan, Philip, 700–701 
 Gould, Elizabeth, 607–608 
 GPe, 498 
 GPi, 498, 500, 504 b  
 G-protein-coupled receptors, 126–128,  129 , 

139,  169 , 169–175, 170 t  

 ATP and, 160 
 bitterness and, 273 
 CB and, 161 b  
 diffuse modulatory system and, 539 
 effectors and, 170–176 

INDEX

961

 EPSP and, 537 
 rod photoreceptors and, 312,  313  
 second messenger cascade of, 175,  175  
 signal amplification by, 175,  175  
 for smell, 282–283 

 G-proteins, 127, 170,  171  

 adenylyl cyclase and,  173  
 shortcut pathway for, 171–172,  172  

 Graceful degradation, 870 
 Grandmother cells, 363 
 Gray, Charlie, 744 b  
 Gray matter, 7,  7 , 192 t , 203, 242,  242 , 426 
 Gray’s type I synapses, 117,  119  
 Gray’s type II synapses, 119,  119 , 138 
 Greece, ancient, brain in, 5 
 Green fluorescent protein (GFP), 

48, 187,  187  

 Grenness, Carl-Erik, 850 b  
 Grid cells, 847–852,  852  
 Grillner, Sten, 479 
 Growth cone, 796,  796  
 Growth hormone (GH), 337 b , 528 t  
 Grundfest, Harry, 871 b  
 GTP.  See  Guanosine triphosphate 
 Guanosine diphosphate (GDP), 170,  171  
 Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), 170,  171  
 Guillain-Barré syndrome, 103 b  
 Gustation.  See  Taste 
 Gustatory nucleus, 240,  240  
 Gynandromorph, 603,  605  
 Gyri, 7, 205, 223,  223  

H
 H 2 S.  See  Hydrogen sulfide 
 Habits, learning, 861–862 
 Habituation, 827 
 Hair cells, 380–388,  381 ,  388  

 antibiotics and, 388 
 axons of auditory nerve and, 386,  386  
 depolarization of, 385,  385  
 receptor potential of, 384,  384 , 386 
 spiral ganglion and, 386,  386  
 transduction of, 382–386 

 Hairs, follicles of, 419 
 Hairy skin, 416,  417  
 Hallucinogens, 546, 742 
 Haloperidol, 779 
 Hämäläinen, Matti, 650 b  
 Happiness, 626, 627,  627 ,  628  
 Hard problem of consciousness, 743 
 Harlow, John, 624 b –625 b  
 Harris, Kristen M., 118 b  
 Hartline, Keffer, 319 
 Haxby, Jim, 360 b  
 HDAC2.  See  Histone deacetylase 2 
 Hearing loss, 402 b  
 Heart,  245  

 ANS and, 454 

 Heart muscle, 149 
 Heath, Robert, 567 b  
 Hebb, Donald, 836–837, 866, 878 b  
 Hebbian modifications, 807 
 Hebb synapses, 807,  807  
 Hegemann, Peter, 86 b  
 Helicotrema, 379,  379  
 Helmholtz, Hermann von, 316 
 Hemiballismus, 504 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   961
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   961

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

962

INDEX

 Hemispheres 

 of cerebellum, 513–514 
 of cerebrum, 183, 206, 229,  229 ,  230 , 

233,  233  

 language and,  696 , 696 b , 706–710,  708  
 visual hemifield and, 334,  335  

 Hemophilia, 581 
 Henneman, Elwood, 459 
 Hermunculus, 432 
 Herpes, 426 b  
 Hertz (Hz), 371 
 Hess, W. R., 638–639 
 Hetherington, A. W., 556 
 5-HIAA.  See  5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid 
 Hillarp, Nils-Åke, 539 
 Hindbrain, differentiation of, 200–203,  202  
 Hippocampus, 209,  226 , 237,  237 , 838,  838  

 anatomy of, 874–877 
 estrous cycle and, 608,  610  
 HPA and,  760 , 760–761,  761  
 LTD in,  882  
 memory and, 226, 609,  845 , 846–853 
 microcircuits of,  874  
 neurogenesis and, 787 b  
 neurons of,  840 , 840–841 
 NMDA receptors in, 609 
 place cells in,  848 , 848–849 
 retrograde amnesia and, 854 

 Hippocrates, 5 
 Histamine, 121 t , 439, 440, 442, 667 
 Histology, 25 
 Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), 859 b  
 Hitzig, Eduard, 10–11, 492 
 HIV/AIDS, 754 
 HLA.  See  Human leucocyte antigen 
 Hobaiter, Catherine, 689 
 Hobson, Allan, 665 
 Hodgkin, Alan, 92, 97–98, 101 
 Hoffer, Barry, 542 b  
 Hofmann, Albert, 546 
 Homeostasis 

 hypothalamus and, 524, 552–553, 639 
 motivated behavior and, 552–553 
 synaptic, 889–891 

 Homunculus, 432,  432  
 Horizontal cells, 305,  305  
 Horizontal connections, of LGN, 345,  345  
 Horizontal plane, 182,  182  
 Hormones, of anterior pituitary, 528 t  
 Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 45 b  
 Horsley, Victor, 504 b  
 Horvitz, Robert, 804 
 Hounsfields, Godfrey, 188 
 HPA.  See  Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 

axis 

 HRP.  See  Horseradish peroxidase 
 5-HT.  See  Serotonin 
 5-HTP.  See  5-Hydroxytryptophan 
 Hubel, David, 345, 349, 356, 431, 806, 809 
 Hudspeth, A. J., 384 
 Hughes, John, 152 b  
 Human Genome Project, 33 b  
 Human leucocyte antigen (HLA), 669 b  
 Humoral response, 552, 557–558 
 Humors, 6 
 Huntington disease, 502 b –503 b ,  503 , 

503–504 

 Huxley, Andrew, 92, 97–98, 101, 468 
 Huxley, Hugh, 468 
 Hydrocephalus, 187 b  
 Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S), 162 
 Hydrophilic, 59, 62 
 Hydrophobic, 59 
 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), 641 
 5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), 158 
 Hyperalgesia, 439–441,  441  
 Hyperekplexia, 137 b  
 Hyperkinesia, 501, 504 
 Hyperopia, 302 b ,  303  
 Hyperplasia, 439, 440, 603 
 Hyperpolarization, 312,  314 , 320, 321,  385  
 Hyperreflexia, 488 b  
 Hyperthymesia, 826 b  
 Hypertonia, 488 b  
 Hypertrophy, 463 
 pituitary, 337 b  

 Hypocretin, 561, 667, 669 b  
 Hypoglossal nerve,  246 , 247 
 Hypokinesia, 501 
 Hypomania, 764 
 Hypophysiotropic hormones, 528 
 Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis 

(HPA),  759 , 759–761 

 amygdala and,  760 , 760–761,  761  
 antidepressants and, 769 
 hippocampus and,  760 , 760–761,  761  

 Hypothalamo-pituitary portal circulation, 

528, 667 

 Hypothalamus, 197, 198–199, 225,  225 , 

 228 ,  232 ,  234 , 235,  235  

 aggression and, 638–639 
 anger and, 638–639 
 anterior pituitary and, 528–531 
 body fat and, 554–556 
 estradiol and, 585, 608–609 
 feeding behavior and, 554–556, 

 557 ,  558  

 homeostasis and, 524, 552–553, 639 
 leptin and, 557–560,  559  
 location of,  524  
 motivated behavior and, 552–553, 576 t  
 neurites in, 608,  608  
 pituitary gland and, 525–531 
 posterior pituitary and, 525–528 
 responses of, 576 t  
 retina and, 585 
 sex hormones and, 585–587,  586  
 stress response and, 759,  759  
 zones of, 524–525,  525  

 Hypotonia, 488 b  
 Hypovolemia, 573 
 Hz.  See  Hertz 

I
 Ia axons, 469, 470, 472 b ,  474  
 IACUC.  See  Institutional Animal Care and 

Use Committee 

 Ib axons, 475–476 
 Iba-Zizen, Marie-Thérèse, 698 b  
 Immediate early genes, 673 
 Immunocytochemistry, 145–147,  146  
 Implicit memory, 825 
 Imprinting, 810 b  
 IN-1.  See  Anti-nogo antibody 

 INAH.  See  Interstitial nuclei of the 

 anterior hypothalamus 

 Indirect pathways, through basal ganglia, 

498–500,  501  

 Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), 756 
 Inferior colliculus, 200, 230,  230 , 238,  238 , 

389 

 Inferior olive, 239,  239  
 Infiltration anesthesia, 102 b  
 Inflammation, hyperalgesia and, 439–441, 

 441  

 Inflammatory soup, 439 
 Infrasound, 372 b  
 Inhibition 

 lateral, 429 b  
 reciprocal, 477,  477  
 shunting, 136–137,  138  
 of synaptic transmission, 136–138,  138  

 Inhibitors, 130 

 SSRIs, 159, 762–763, 768, 769,  769  

 Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), 

126,  129 , 136–137,  138 , 168 
 Inner ear,  373 , 374,  376 , 377–388 
 Inner hair cells,  381  
 Inner nuclear layer, of retina, 305,  306  
 Inner plexiform layer, of retina, 

305–306,  306  

 Innervation, 42 
 Inositol-1, 4, 5-triphosphate (IP 3 ), 173, 420 
 Input specificity, 876 
 Insel, Thomas, 591, 592 b  
 Inside-out assembly, of cerebral cortex, 

789,  790  

  In situ  hybridization, 146–147,  147 ,  148  
 Institutional Animal Care and Use 

Committee (IACUC), 17 

 Instruction stimulus, 494 
 Instrumental conditioning, 827–828 
 Insula, 223,  223 ,  232 ,  234 , 710,  711  
 Insulin, feeding behavior and, 564–565, 

 566  

 Insulin shock, diabetes mellitus and, 

 565 , 565 b  

 Intellect, Descartes and, 7 
 Intellectual disability, dendritic 

spines and, 47 b  

 Intelligence quotient (IQ) 

 dendritic spines and, 47 b  
 verbal dyspraxia and, 693 

 Intensity, of sound,  371 , 371–372, 391–393 
 Interblobs, 347, 353, 354–355,  355  
 Intercellular recording, of action 

potential, 83 b  

 Interleukin-1, 672 
 Intermediate filaments, 39 
 Intermediate zone, 203, 426 
 Internal capsule, 198,  233 ,  235 ,  487  
 Internal carotid artery, 248,  248  
 Internal mentation hypothesis, 722 
 Internal resistance, 135 
 Interneurons, 48, 460, 476–480,  480  
 Interoceptive awareness, 619 
 Interpretation, in neuroscience scientific 

process, 15–16 

 Interstitial nuclei of the anterior hypothal-

amus (INAH), 597,  611 , 611–612 

 Intralaminar nuclei, 445 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   962
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   962

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Intrinsically photosensitive retinal gangli-

on cells (ipRGCs), 327–328,  328  

 Intrinsic signal imaging, 350 b –351 b  
 Involuntary movements, 512 b  
 Ion channels, 63,  63 .  See also   specific 

 channels  

 for smell, 284 b  
 thermoreceptors and, 449 

 Ionic driving force, 68 
 Ionic equilibrium potential.  See  

Equilibrium potentials 

 Ion pumps, 63, 70–72,  72 , 154 b  
 Ions, 58–59 

 diffusion of, 64,  64  
 electricity and, 64–66,  65  
 movement of, 64–66 
 protein and, 59 
 resting membrane potential and, 66–77 

 Ion selectivity, 63 
 IP 3 .  See  Inositol-1, 4, 5-triphosphate 
 IpRGCs.  See  Intrinsically photosensitive 

retinal ganglion cells 

 IPSCs.  See  Induced pluripotent stem cells 
 Ipsilateral anatomical reference, 182 
 IPSP.  See  Inhibitory postsynaptic potential 
 IQ.  See  Intelligence quotient 
 Iris, 296,  296  
 Isoleucine, 540 b  
 Itch, 441–442 
 Itti, Laurent, 736 
 IVB layer, 354–355,  355 , 358 
 IVC layer, 345, 348, 349, 354–355,  355  

J
 Jackson, John Hughlings, 657–658 
 Jacobsen, Carlyle, 637 b  
 Jaffe, Jerome, 152 b  
 James, William, 617 
 James–Lange theory, 617,  618  
 Jamison, Kay Redfield, 765 b  
 Joints, proprioception from, 476–477 
 Jones, Stephanie R., 650 b  
 Jordan, Michael, 840 
 Julesz, Bela, 364 b  
 Julius David, 440 b  
 Junzhong Liang, 308 b  

K
 Kainate receptors, 150,  150 , 165–166,  166  
 Kandel, Eric, 866, 870, 870 b –872 b  
 Kanwisher, Nancy, 360 b –361 b  
 Kapp, Bruce, 633–634 
 Karni, Avi, 665 
 Katz, Bernard, 110 
 Kauer, Julie, 572 b –573 b  
 Keats, John, 765 b  
 Kennedy, Gordon, 555 
 Kennedy, John F., 530 
 Ketamine, 777 
 Kevorkian, Jack, 78 b  
  KIAA0319  gene, 694 
 Kidney,  245  

 ANS and, 533 
 brain and, 527,  527  

 Kinocilium,  403 , 406 
 Kleitman, Nathaniel, 659 
 Klinefelter syndrome, 582 
 Klüver, Heinrich, 630–631, 637 b  
 Klüver–Bucy syndrome, 630–631 
 Knee-jerk reflex, 471,  471  
 Knock-in mice, 33 
 Knockout mice, 33 
 Koch, Christof, 736, 744 b –745 b , 747 
 Koniocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  

 Konorski, Jerzy, 872 b  
 Kopell, Nancy, 650 b –651 b  
 Korsakoff’s syndrome, 845 b  
 Kosterlitz, Hans, 152 b  
 Krause end bulbs, 417 
 Krebs, Hans, 38 
 Krebs cycle, 38 
 Kreiman, Gabriel, 747 
 Kuffler, Stephen, 319, 348–349 
 Kuypers, Hans, 487 

L
 Labeled line hypothesis, 277 
 Labia, 587 
 Labyrinth.  See  Vestibular labyrinth 
 Lactation 

 DA and, 607 
 somatosensory cortex and, 606–607,  607  

 Lactic acid, 439 
 Laminar organization, of retina, 305–306, 

 306  

 Lamination, of striate cortex, 343–344,  344  
 Laminin, 797,  797  
 Lange, Carl, 617 
 Language, 685–718 

 anatomical asymmetry of,  709 , 

709–710,  710  

 in animals, 688–690,  690  
 aphasia and, 697–705 
 ASL, 689, 705,  705 , 715 b  
 in brain, 694–697,  697 , 698 b , 

711–712,  712  

 cerebral hemispheres and,  696 , 696 b , 

706–710,  708  

 cognitive neuroscience and, 14 
 electrical stimulation of brain and, 

711–712,  712  

 fMRI for,  713 , 713–717 
 genetics and, 692–694 
 PET for, 713–717,  716  
 split-brain studies and, 707,  707  
 thinking in different languages, 688 b  
 Language acquisition, 690–691,  691 ,  692  
 Large intestine, ANS and, 533 
 Larynx, 687,  687  
 Laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), 

302 b ,  303  

 Lashley, Karl, 835–836,  837  
 LASIK.  See  Laser in situ keratomileusis 
 Lateral anatomical reference, 182 
 Lateral columns, 203, 242,  242  
 Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), 237, 
 237 , 332–333, 784,  784 , 795–796 

 Kinesin, 43–44 
 Kinetics, amino acid-gated channels and, 164 
 Kininogen, nociceptors and, 438 

 area 17 and, 791 
 autoradiography for, 345,  346  
 eyes and,  339 , 339–340 

INDEX

963

 ganglion cells and,  339 , 339–340 
 horizontal connections of, 345,  345  
 koniocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  
 layer IV and, 809 
 magnocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  

 nonretinal inputs to, 341 
 ocular dominance columns and,  346  
 ocular dominance columns in, 345–347, 

 346  

 parvocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  

 radial connections of, 345,  345  
 receptive field and, 340–341 
 retina and, synaptic segregation and, 

806–807 

 striate cortex and, synaptic segregation 

and, 808–809, 808 b ,  809  

 vision and, 294 

 Lateral hypothalamic area, 560–561 
 Lateral hypothalamic syndrome, 556 
 Lateral inhibition, 429 b  
 Lateral intraparietal cortex (area LIP),  737  
 priority maps in,  736 , 737–740,  739 ,  740  
 working memory and, 833–835,  835  

 Lateral line organs, 403 
 Lateral pathway, 243,  243 , 486–488, 

 487 ,  499  

 Lateral ventricles, 196, 205 t , 227,  227 , 232, 

 232 ,  234 , 236,  236  

 schizophrenia and, 775,  775  

 Lateral zone, of hypothalamus, 524,  525  
 Lawrence, Donald, 487 
 Layer I, 209 
 Layer IV, LGN and, 809 
 Layer of photoreceptor outer segments, 

of retina, 306,  306  

 Layer V, 506–507 
 Layer VI, 786, 788 
 L-Dopa, 504 b  
 Learned fear, 633–635,  634  
 Learning.  See also  Memory 

 associative, 827–828 
 flavor aversion learning, 276 b  
 forebrain and, 545 
 habits, 861–862 
 LTP in CA1 and, 887,  887  
 memory and, 824 
 NMDA receptors and, 887 
 nonassociative, 827,  827  
 sleep-learning, 666 
 synapses and, 43,  897  

 Leary, Timothy, 546 
 LeDoux, Joseph, 634 
 Left visual hemifield, 334,  335  
 Length constant, 134–135 
 Lens, 298,  299 ,  301 , 301–302 
 Leptin 

 AgRP and, 561 
 hypothalamus and, 557–560,  559  
 NPY and, 561 
 obesity and, 555,  555 ,  556 , 556 b  
 pregnancy and, 606 
 Lethal injection, 78 b  
 Leucine, 540 b  
 LeVay, Simon, 611 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   963
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   963

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

964

INDEX

 Levi-Montalcini, Rita, 804 
 Levitsky, Walter, 709–710 
 Lewis, Donald, 856 
 LGN.  See  Lateral geniculate nucleus 
 LH.  See  Luteinizing hormone 
 Lidocaine, 102 b  
 Ligand-binding method, 151–152 
 Light 

 melatonin and, 585 
 properties of, 294–295 

 Light adaptation, 316–319,  318 ,  319  
 Lily, John, 689 
 Limbic lobe, 622,  622  
 Limbic system,  621 , 621–625, 637 b  
 Lindstrom, Jon, 464 b  
 Lipid, 59 
 Lipostatic hypothesis, 555 
 Lithium, 770–771,  771  
 Lobectomy, 630–631, 841–843,  842  
 Lobes, of cerebrum, 7,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223 . 

 See also  Frontal lobe; Parietal lobe; 
Temporal lobe 

 limbic, 622,  622  
 occipital,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223  

 Local anesthesia, 102 b  
 Localization 

 in brain, 10–11,  11 , 12,  12  
 in cerebrum, 16 
 sleep and, 666 
 of sound, 394–399 

 Locus coeruleus, 539–541,  540 ,  541 , 667 
 Loewi, Otto, 110, 111 b , 144, 148 
 Logothetis, Nikos, 743–746, 744 b  
 Long, Michael, 113 
 Longitudinal cerebral fissure,  229  
 Long-term depression (LTD), 881–888 

 in CA1, 882–884 
 calcium and,  884  
 glutamate receptors and, 884–885 
 in hippocampus,  882  
 memory and, 886–889 
 NMDA receptors and, 882–884 
 synaptic scaling and, 891 
 synaptic transmission and, 881 

 Long-term memory, 828,  867  
 Long-term potentiation (LTP), 572 b –573 b , 

874–879 

 AMPA receptors and, 878–879 
 of CA1,  875 , 875–879,  879  

 learning and, 887,  887  

 calcium and,  884  
 EPSP and, 875–876,  876  
 glutamate receptors and, 884–885 
 memory and, 886–889 
 NMDA receptors and,  877 , 

877–879, 878 b  

 synaptic scaling and, 891 
 Lorenz, Konrad,  810 , 810 b  
 Loudness.  See  Intensity 
 Lou Gehrig disease.  See  Amyotrophic later-

al sclerosis 

 Love, brain and,  594 , 594–595 
 Lowell, Robert, 765 b  
 Lowenstein, Werner, 420 
 Lower motor neurons, 456–463,  457 ,  458 , 

 459  

 LSD.  See  Lysergic acid diethylamide 

 LTD.  See  Long-term depression 
 LTP.  See  Long-term potentiation 
 Lumbar puncture, 425 
 Lumbar vertebrae, 240,  241 , 423–426,  424  
 Luria, Alexander, 826 b  
 Luteinizing hormone (LH), 528 t , 585–586 
 Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 546 

M
MM M1.  See  Primary motor cortex 
 MAChR.  See  Muscarinic ACh receptors 
 MacKinnon, Roderick, 73–74 
 MacLeod, Don, 308 b  
 Macula, 297,  297 ,  406  
 Macular degeneration, 300 b  
 Magendie, François, 9, 17 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 103 b , 

188, 189 b  

 Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 648–650, 

 649 , 650 b –651 b  

 Magnocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  

 Magnocellular neurosecretory cells, 525,  526  
 Magnocellular pathway, 354–355,  355  
 Mairan, Jean Jacques d’Ortous de, 675 
 Major depression, 763–764 
 Malleable motor map,  509 , 509–510 
 Malleus, 374,  375  
 Mammillary body,  228 , 235,  235 ,  845  
 Mania, 764 
 Manic-depressive disorder, 764 
 MAO.  See  Monamine oxidase 
 MAPs.  See  Microtubule-associated proteins 
 Marginal zone (MZ), 785,  793  
 Marijuana, appetite and,  563 , 563 b  
 Masashi Yanagisawa, 669 b  
 Masculinization, of brain, 600–601 
 Mast cells, 439 
 Materialism, 742 
 Mating strategies, sex and, 590 
 Matrix, 36, 114 

 extracellular, 797 

 Mayberg, Helen, 771, 772 b  
 MC4 receptor, 560,  560 ⫹   
 McCarley, Robert, 665 
 McCarthy, Greg,  361 , 361 b  
 McClintock, Martha, 279 b  
 McDermott, Josh, 360 b  
 McEwen, Bruce, 531 b , 608 
 McGinley, Matthew, 394 b  
 MCH.  See  Melanin-concentrating hormone 
 McIlwain, James, 508–509, 510 b –511 b  
 Mechanical nociceptors, 439 
 Mechanoreceptors 

 frequency and, 419,  419  
 receptive fields of,  418  
 of skin,  417 , 417–422,  418 , 428 

 Mechanosensitive ion channels, 420,  421  
 Medial anatomical reference, 182, 225,  225  
 Medial forebrain bundle, 639 
 Medial geniculate nucleus (MGN), 237, 

 237 , 374, 380, 389 

 Medial lemniscal pathway, 426,  427  
 Medial lemniscus, 240,  240 , 428 
 Medial longitudinal fasciculus,  408 , 409 
 Medial prefrontal cortex, sadness and, 626 
 Medial superior temporal (MST), 358–359 

 Medial temporal lobe,  829  

 declarative memory and, 837–841,  838  
 engrams in, 840 
 sexual arousal and, 588–589 

 Medial zone, of hypothalamus, 524,  525  
 Medulla, adrenal, 528 
 Medulla oblongata, 200, 225,  225 , 

228,  228 , 444 

 rostral anatomical reference for, 239,  239  
 spinal cord and, 240,  240  
 white matter and, 202 

 Medullary pyramids, 200, 239,  239 ,  240 , 

486,  487  

 Medullary reticular formation,  240  
 Medullary reticulospinal tract,  243 , 

 490 , 491 

 MEG.  See  Magnetoencephalography 
 Meissner’s corpuscles, 417,  417 , 418, 419 
 Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), 561 
 Melanopsin, 678 
 Melatonin, 230, 585, 672 
 Melzack, Ronald, 446,  447  
 Membrane differentiation, 115 
 Membrane potential, 66.  See also  Resting 

membrane potential 
 depolarization of, 75,  75  
 potassium ions and, 75–77 
 relative ionic permeability and, 90,  91  

 Membrane resistance, 135 
 Membrane trafficking, 125 b  
 Memory, 823–863.  See also   specific types  

 acquisition of, 867–891 
 amygdala and, 633–635,  635 ,  845  
 basal ganglia and, 861 
 cerebrum and, 6 
 CREB and, 894–896,  896  
 emotion and, 633–635,  635  
 estrogen and, 608–610 
 extraordinary examples of, 826 b  
 forebrain and, 545 
 hippocampus and, 226, 609,  845 , 

846–853 

 Korsakoff’s syndrome and, 845 b  
 learning and, 824 
 LTD and, 886–889 
 LTP and, 886–889 
 mammillary body and,  845  
 midline and,  845  
 molecular mechanisms of, 865–898 
 neurons and, 867–870 
 proteins and, 888 b  
 reconsolidation of, 856–857, 858 b –859 b  
 REM sleep and, 665 
 structural plasticity and, 896–897 
 in synapses, 43, 870, 870 b –872 b ,  871 , 

 872 , 894,  895 ,  897  

 taste and, 276 b  
 types of, 824–829 
 vision and, area IT and,  868 , 868–869 

 Memory consolidation, 828,  828 , 867, 

891–897 

 CaMK and,  892 , 892–893 
 engrams and, 853–857,  855  
 models for, 854–856,  855  
 protein kinases and, 892–893 
 protein synthesis and, 893–897 

 Memory traces.  See  Engrams 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   964
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   964

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Mendell, Lorne, 469, 472 b  
 Meninges, 185–186,  186  
 Menstrual cycle, 586 
 Mental illness, 751–780.  See also   specific 

illnesses  

 biological approaches to, 753–756 
 brain and, 752–756 
 psychosocial approaches to, 753 
 synapse and, 43 

 Mirror neurons, 495–498,  497  
 Misanin, James, 856 
 Mitochondria,  42  
 ATP and, 38,  38  
 calcium pump and, 71 
 MAO on, 158 
 in soma, 36–37,  38  

 Modiolus,  381  
 Modulation.  See also  Diffuse modulatory 

 Mental imagery, cognitive neuroscience 

system 

INDEX

965

 lower, 456–463,  457 ,  458 ,  459  
 neurotransmitters and, 49 
 in ventral horn,  459 , 459–460 

 Motor programs, 454, 478–481,  479  
 Motor proteins, 386 
 Motor strip, 505 
 Motor system 

 brain and, 483–516 
 control hierarchy for, 484,  484 , 484 t  
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

464–468 

 lower motor neurons and, 456–463,

  457 ,  458  

 somatic motor system and, 454–456 
 spinal cord and, 453–481 
 in systems neuroscience, 13 

 Motor units, 458,  460  

 spinal cord and, 469–481 
 types of, 461–463,  462  
 Mouth, anatomy of,  267  
 Movement field, 510 b  
 MPP, 502 b  
 MPTP, 502 b  
 MRI.  See  Magnetic resonance imaging 
 MRNA.  See  Messenger ribonucleic acid 
 MS.  See  Multiple sclerosis 
 MSG.  See  Monosodium glutamate 
  ␣ MSH.  See  Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating 

hormone 

 MST.  See  Medial superior temporal 
 M-type ganglion cells, 325,  325 ,  326 , 

354–355,  355  

 Mucus, 279 
 Müllerian duct, 583–584, 603 
 Müllerian-inhibiting factor, 584, 603 
 Multinucleated muscle fiber, 464 
 Multiple sclerosis (MS), 19 t , 103 b , 610 
 Multiple trace model of consolidation, 

854–856,  855  

 Multipolar neurons, 46 
 Munk, Hermann, 11 
 Munro, Paul, 880, 880 b –881 b  
 Mu rhythms, 651–652 
 Muscarine, 150,  150  
 Muscarinic ACh receptors (mAChR), 

150, 537 

 Muscle contraction, 459–461,  460  

 EPSP and, 472 b –473 b  
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

 LGN and, 341 
 of NE,  139  
 by peptides, 537–538 
 of synapses, 812–813,  813  
 of synaptic transmission, 138–140, 

 139  

 Molaison, Henry, 841 
 Molarity, 65 
 Molecular medicine, 754–756,  755  
 Molecular neurobiologists, 15, 15 t  
 Molecular neuroscience, 13 
 Molecular switch hypothesis, 893 
 Moles, 65 
 Monamine hypothesis of mood disorders, 

764–766 

 Monamine oxidase (MAO), 158, 764–766, 

768,  769  

 Money, John, 604 b  
 Moniz, Egas, 637 b  
 Monochromats, 316 b  
 Monocular deprivation, 809,  809  
 Monogamy, 590 
 Monosodium glutamate (MSG), 267 
 Monosynaptic pathway, 533 
 Monosynaptic stretch reflex arc, 470 
 Monovalent, 59 
 Mood.  See also  Affective disorders 
 behavioral neuroscience and, 14 
 depression and, 19 

 Moore, Chris, 650 b  
 Morris, Richard, 847, 887, 894 
 Morris water maze, 847,  847  
 Moruzzi, Giuseppe, 667–668 
 Moscovitch, Morris, 854 
 Moser, Edvard, 850, 850 b –851 b  
 Moser, May-Britt, 850, 850 b –851 b  
 Motion perception, MST and, 359 
 Motion processing, in central visual 

 system, 358–359 

and, 14 

 Merkel cells, 420 
 Merkel’s disk, 417,  417 , 418, 420 
 Merzenich, Michael, 435 
 Mesocorticolimbic dopamine system, 544, 

775,  776  
 Mesoderm, 192 
 Mesopic conditions, 309 
 Messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), 

29–32, 33 b , 146–147,  147 ,  148 , 157 

 Metabotropic glutamate receptors 

(mGluRs), 882 

 Metabotropic receptors, 127 
 Metaplasticity, 889–891,  890  
 Metencephalon, 200 
 Metric system, 25 t  
 MGluRs.  See  Metabotropic glutamate 

receptors 

 MGN.  See  Medial geniculate nucleus 
 Microelectrode, 66 
 Microfilaments, 39,  39  
 Microglia, 52 
 Microiontophoresis, 148,  149  
 Microscopy, 28, 304–312 

 electron, 28,  28 ,  52 ,  116 ,  213  

 Microtome, 25 
 Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), 39 
 Microtubules, of cytoskeleton, 38–39, 

 39 , 43,  44  

 Microvilli, 269 
 Midbrain, 225,  225 , 228,  228 , 230,  230 ,  487  

 aggression and, 639–640 
 caudal anatomical reference for, 238, 

 238  

 DA and, 543–544 
 differentiation of,  199 , 199–200 
 estradiol in, 585 
 rostral anatomical reference for, 238, 

 238  

 sleep and, 667 
 spinothalamic pain pathway and, 444 
 thalamus and,  236 , 236–237,  237  

 Middle cerebral artery, 248,  248 , 249,  249  
 Middle ear,  373 , 374–377,  375 ,  376  
 Midline, 182,  845  
 Mid-medulla, cross section of, 240,  240  
 Midsagittal plane, 182,  182  
 Mignot, Emmanuel, 669 b  
 Miller, Chris, 73–74, 76 
 Miller, Don, 308 b  
 Miller, Ralph, 856 
 Milner, Brenda, 841 
 Milner, Peter, 566 
 Mind, map of, 792 b –793 b  
 Mind–brain problem, 7 
  The   Mind of a Mnemonist  (Luria), 826 b  
 Miniature postsynaptic potential, 133 

 Motivated behavior, 551–578.  See also  

464–468 

Feeding behavior 

 DA and, 568–571, 569 b  
 for drinking, 573–575 
 homeostasis and, 552–553 
 hypothalamus and, 552–553, 576 t  
 temperature regulation, 575–576 

 Motor areas, 212, 224,  224  
 Motor cortex, 486, 488, 492–493 
 Motor end-plate, 119,  120  
 Motor loop, 498–499,  499 , 514–515,  515  
 Motor nerves, 9–10 
 Motor neuron pool, 459,  460  
 Motor neurons, 48, 56 

 alpha, 458–461,  460 ,  461 , 469,  474 , 477 
 cholinergic, 49 
 corticospinal tract and, 506,  506  
 gamma, 473–474,  474  

 molecular basis of, 466–468,  467  
 nerve regeneration and, 472 b –473 b  
 sliding-filament model of,  466 , 466–467 

 Muscle fibers 

 CNS and, 454 
 structure of, 464–465,  465  

 Muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), 801 
 Muscle spindles, 460,  469 , 469–471 
 MuSK.  See  Muscle-specific kinase 
 Mutation, 32 

 ALS and, 463 b  
 of amino acids, 96 
 GABA, epilepsy and, 656 
 Gly and, 137 b  
 poisons and, 137 b  

 Myasthenia gravis, 464 b  
 Myelencephalon, 200 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   965
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   965

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

966

INDEX

 Myelin, 49,  52  

 action potential and, 103–104 
 MS and, 103 b  
 saltatory conduction and, 103–104, 103 b , 

 104  

 Myelin sheath, 49, 103, 104 b  

 Schwann cells and, 103 

 Myenteric plexus, 536 
 Myofibrils, 465,  465 ,  466  
 Myopia, 302 b ,  303  
 Myosin, 386, 467 
 Myotatic reflex.  See  Stretch reflex 
 MZ.  See  Marginal zone 

N
 NA.  See  Nucleus accumbens 
  N -acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), 121 t  
 NAChR.  See  Nicotinic ACh receptors 
 Nadel, Lynn, 854 
 Naloxone, 448 
 Napoleon Bonaparte, 279 b  
 Narcolepsy, 667, 669 b  
 Nasal passages, anatomy of,  267  
 Nasal retina, 297,  297  
 National Institute of Mental Health 

(NIMH), 20 

 Natural selection, 11,  11  
 Navigation, MST and, 359 
 NCC.  See  Neural correlates of consciousness 
 NE.  See  Norepinephrine 
 Necrosis, 804 
 Negative symptoms, for schizophrenia, 773 
 Neglect syndrome, 437,  437 , 737,  738 , 738 b  
 Neher, Erwin, 95 b  
 Neocortex, 209–214,  492 , 791 

 declarative memory and, 835–837 
 Korsakoff’s syndrome and, 845 b  

 Nernst equation, 69–70, 70 b  
 Nerve cells, 12–13 
 Nerve deafness, 402 b  
 Nerve fibers, 9 
 Nerve growth factor (NGF), 804 
 Nerve impulse, 41 
 Nerves.  See also   specific nerves  

 as wires, 9–10 

 Nervous system.  See also  Autonomic 

 nervous system; Central nervous 
system; Peripheral nervous system 
 anatomical references for, 180–183,  182  
 anatomical subdivisions of,  8  
 communication in,  523  
 evolution of, 11–12 
 major disorders of, 19–20, 19 t  
 Renaissance and, 7 
 structure of, 179–215 

 Netrin, 797–798 
 Neural coding, 350 b –351 b  

 of taste, 277–279 

 Neural correlates of consciousness (NCC), 

743–749,  745  

 Neural crest,  193 , 194 
 Neural folds, 194 
 Neural groove, 192 
 Neural plate, 193 
 Neural precursor cells, 786,  786 , 788, 790, 

 790 ,  793  

 pyramidal cells and, 790,  790  

 Neural space, 288 
 Neural tube,  193 , 193–195, 194 b ,  195 , 231 
 Neuraxis, 231, 236 
 Neuregulin, 801 
 Neurites, 26,  26 ,  28 ,  213  
 estrogen and, 608,  608  
 gap junctions and,  112  
 in hypothalamus, 608,  608  
 neuron classification by, 46,  48  

 Neuroanatomists, 14 
 Neurofibrillary tangles, 40 b  
 Neurofilaments, of cytoskeleton, 39,  39  
 Neurogenesis, 769 

 in brain, 785–795, 787 b  
 cell differentiation in, 789–790 
 cell migration in, 788–789,  789  
 cell proliferation in, 785–788,  787  
 cerebral cortex differentiation in, 

791–792,  795  
 Neurohormones, 525 
 Neuroleptic drugs,  776 , 776–777 
 Neurologists, 14 t  
 Neuromuscular junction, 119,  120  

 ACh and, 130 
 myasthenia gravis and, 464 b  
 synapses and 

 elimination of, 804–805 
 formation of, 801 

 Neuronal membrane, 29, 59,  60  

 concentration gradient and, 70–72,  71  
 cytoplasm and, 38 
 ion channels in, 63 
 selective permeability of, 72, 73 b  

 Neuronal membrane transporter, 154 b  
 Neuron doctrine, 27 
 Neurons, 12–13, 23–49 

 in Alzheimer’s disease, 41 b  
 axons of, 26,  26 , 39–44,  42 , 56–57 
 in brain, 24, 783–820 
 in cerebral cortex, 106 b  
 classification of, 46–49,  48  
 collections of, 192 t  
 cytoarchitecture of, 25 
 cytoskeleton of, 38–39,  39 , 40 b , 59 
 dendrites of,  26 , 26–27, 44–46 
 electrical behavior of, 106 b  
 electrical current into,  85  
 genes in, 32 
 of hippocampus,  840 , 840–841 
 internal structure of,  30  
 memory and, 867–870 
 neurotransmitters and, 48–49 
 parts of, 26,  26  
 reduction of, 802–805 
 rough ER in, 36,  36  
 smooth ER in, 36 
 soma of, 26,  26 , 29–38 
 in systems neuroscience, 13 

 Neuropathologists, 14 t  
 Neuropeptide Y (NPY), 121 t , 537, 558, 

560, 561 

 Neuropharmacologists, 14–15 
 Neuropharmacology,  50 , 130–132, 

150–151 

 Neurophysiologists, 14 
 Neuroscience 

 current state of, 13–20 

 origins of, 4–13 
 scientific process in, 15–16 

 Neuroscience research, animals in, 

16–18,  18  

 rights of, 17–18 
 welfare of, 17 

 Neuroscientists, 14–15 
 Neurosecretory neurons, 525 
 Neuroses, frontal lobotomy for, 637 b  
 Neurosteroids, 170 
 Neurosurgeons, 14 t  
 Neurotransmitter receptors, 151 t  

 ligand-binding method for, 151–152 
 molecular analysis of, 152–153 
 neuropharmacology and, 150–151 
 for opiates, 152 b  

 Neurotransmitters, 121 t .  See also   specific 

neurotransmitters  

 amino acids and, 159–160 
 amino acids as, 120,  121 , 144,  159 , 159–160 
 ANS and, 537–538 
 chemical synapses and, 120–130 
 chemistry of, 153–163 
 in CNS, 148, 523 
 depolarization and, 148 
 diffusion of, 130 
 effectors for, 124–130 
 enzymes and, 145–147 
 hyperplasia and, 439 
 ion pumps and, 154 b  
 motor neurons and, 49 
 neuromuscular junction and,  120  
 neurons and, 48–49 
 peptides as, 120 
 photoreceptors and, 320 
 postganglionic neurons and, 538 
 receptors for, 59, 124–130, 149–153 
 recovery and degradation of, 130 
 release of, 122–123,  126 , 148 
 steroids and, 599,  600  
 synapse and, 43 
 synthesis and storage of, 122, 123 
 for taste, 270 
 transporters of,  155  

 Neurotransmitter systems, 143–177,  144  

 convergence of,  176 , 176–177 
 divergence of,  176 , 176–177 

 Neurotrophins, 804 

 hyperplasia and, 439 

 Neurulation,  194 , 194–195, 194 b  
 Newsome, William, 358 
 Newton, Isaac, 295 
 NGF.  See  Nerve growth factor 
 Niacin, 754 
 Nicotine, in tobacco, 149–150 
 Nicotinic ACh receptors (nAChR), 132, 150 

 ANS and, 537 
 ethanol and, 168 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 467 
 GABA receptors and, 168 
 glycine receptors and, 168 
 as transmitter-gated ion channel, 

163–164,  164  

 Niemann, Albert, 102 b  
 Night terrors, 661 b  
 NIMH.  See  National Institute of Mental 

Health 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   966
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   966

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Nineteenth century, brain in, 8–13 
 Nissl, Franz, 25 
 Nissl bodies, 25 
 Nissl stain, 25,  25  

 of cerebral cortex, 209 
 of striate cortex, 343 

 Nitric oxide (NO), 162–163, 588 

 for sleep, 672 

 NMDA.  See   N -methyl-D-aspartate 
 NMDA-gated channels, 165–167,  166 ,  167  
 NMDA receptors, 150,  150 ,  777 , 777–778, 

 778 ,  815 , 815–818,  816 ,  817 ,  818  

 glutamate-gated channels, 165–167,  166  
 in hippocampus, 609 
 learning and, 887 
 LTD and, 882–884 
 LTP and,  877 , 877–879, 878 b  
 spinal interneurons and, 479–480,  480  
 synaptic plasticity and, 882–884,  884  
 synaptic scaling and, 891 

  N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 168 
 NO.  See  Nitric oxide 
 Nociception, 437–438 
 Nociceptors, 438–441 
 convergence of,  443  

 Node of Ranvier, 49 

 myelin sheath and, 103, 104 b  

 Nonassociative learning, 827,  827  
 Nondeclarative memory, 824–825,  825  
 NonM–nonP ganglion cells, 325 
 Nonpolar covalent bonds, 59 
 Non-REM sleep, 658–659, 659 t ,  660 , 668 
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 440 
 Noradrenergic system, 144 
 Norepinephrine (NE),  121 , 121 t , 139, 157, 538 

 diffuse modulatory system and, 539 
 falling asleep and, 668 
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  

 locus coeruleus and, 539–541,  540 ,  541  
 modulation of,  139  
 noradrenergic system and, 144 
 Purkinje cells and, 542 b –543 b  
 receptors of, 151 t  
 second messenger cascade and, 172–173 
 sleep and, 666, 667 
 stimulants and, 547 

 Nottebohm, Fernando, 787 b  
 NPY.  See  Neuropeptide Y 
 NT-3, 804 
 NT-4, 804 
 Nuclear envelope, 29 
 Nucleus, 192 t  

 of soma, 29–32 

 Nucleus accumbens (NA), 607 
 Nucleus of the solitary tract, 537 

 appetite and, 564 

 Nutrition 

 diffuse modulatory system and, 540 b  
 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, 845 b  
 neural tube and, 194 b  

O
 Obesity, 553 

 DNA and, 555 
 leptin and, 555,  555 ,  556 , 556 b  

  Ob  gene, 555 

 Observation, in neuroscience scientific 

process, 15 

 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 757 
 Occipital face area (FFA),  362  
 Occipital face area (OFA),  361  
 Occipital lobe,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223  
 OCD.  See  Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
 Ocular dominance columns,  350 , 350 b ,  803 , 

808–809, 808 b ,  809  

 binocular receptive fields and, 348 
 binocular vision and, 809 
 in cortical modules, 356–357,  357  
 in LGN, 345–347,  346  
 plasticity of, 809 

 Ocular dominance shift, 810–811,  811  
 Oculomotor nerve,  246 , 247 
 Odorants, 279 
 Oertel, Donata, 394 b  
 OFA.  See  Occipital face area 
 OFF bipolar cells, 322–323 
 OFF-center ganglion cells, 323–324,  324  

 directional selectivity and, 352 

 Öhman, Arne, 619 
 Ohms, 65 
 Ohm’s law, 65, 88 
 Ojemann, George, 712 
 O’Keefe, John, 848, 852 
 Olds, James, 566 
 O’Leary, Dennis, 794 
 Olfaction.  See  Smell 
 Olfactory bulb, 196, 198,  226 ,  228 , 279 b , 

280,  285 ,  286  
 estradiol in, 585 
 olfactory maps and,  288  

 Olfactory cortex, 209 
 Olfactory epithelium,  278 , 278–280 
 Olfactory maps, 288–290 
 olfactory bulb and,  288  

 Olfactory nerve,  246 , 247, 280 
 Olfactory receptor cells, 278–279,  283  
 Olfactory receptor neurons, 280–284,  286  
 Olfactory receptor proteins, 282–283 
 Olfactory system, 220, 279 b  
 Oligodendroglial cells, 49,  52  
 Olson, Lars, 542 b –543 b  
 Olton, David, 846, 852 
 ON bipolar cells, 322 
 ON-center ganglion cells, 323–324 

 directional selectivity and, 352 

  On the Origin of Species  (Darwin), 11 
 Onuf’s nucleus, 596 
 Ophthalmoscope, of eyes, 297,  297  
 Opiates 

 ligand-binding method for, 151,  151  
 neurotransmitter receptors for, 152 b  

 Opioid receptors, 448 
 Opioids, 151, 448 
 Opsin, 313, 315–316 
 Optic chiasm,  226 ,  228 , 333–334, 799 
 Optic disc, 297,  297  
 Optic nerve, 196,  228 ,  246 , 247,  296 , 297, 

 299 , 333–334 
 Optic radiation, 339 
 Optics, 295–296 
 Optic tectum, 338 
 Optic tract,  228 , 333–334 

 targets of, 335–338 

INDEX

967

 Optogenetics, 86–88,  88 , 148 
 Orexigenic peptides, 560 
 Orexin, 561, 667 
 Organelles, 29 
 Organizational effects, of steroid 

hormones, 599 

  The   Organization of Behavior  (Hebb), 836 
 Organ of Corti, 377,  377 , 380–382,  381  
 Orgasm, in sexual response cycle, 587, 

588–589 

 Orientation columns, 349, 358 
 Orientation selectivity, 348–350,  349  
 Oscilloscope, 82,  84  
 Osmometric thirst, 574,  575  
 Ossicles, 373,  373 ,  375  

 sound amplification by, 375–377 

 Otoacoustic emissions, 387 b  
 Otolith organs, 403,  403  
 Outer ear,  373 , 374 
 Outer hair cells,  381  

 sound amplification by, 386–388,  388  
 Outer nuclear layer, of retina, 305,  306  
 Outer plexiform layer, of retina, 306,  306  
 Oval window, 373,  373 , 375, 379,  379  
 Overshoot, of action potential, 82, 98 
 OVLT.  See  Vascular organ of the lamina 

terminalis 

 Oxytocin, 526 

 sex and, 591–594, 592 b ,  593  

P
  P2  gene, 285,  286  
 Pacemaker, 653 
 Pacinian corpuscle, 417,  417 , 418 

 vibration and,  419 , 419–420 

 PAG.  See  Periaqueductal gray matter 
 Pain, 438–448 

 ascending pathways for, 443–446,  445  
 congenital insensitivity to, 438 b  
 descending pathways for, 446–447,  447  
 first pain, 442,  442  
 gate theory of, 446,  447  
 placebo effect and, 448 b  
 referred, 443 
 regulation of, 446–448 
 second pain, 442,  442  
 spinothalamic pathway for,  444 , 444–445 
 threshold for, 439 
 transduction of, 438–441 
 trigeminal pathway for, 445 

 Palate,  267  
 Panic disorder, 756 t , 757, 758 b ,  762  
 Papez, James, 622–624,  623  
 Papez circuit, 622–624,  623 , 845 b  
 Papillae, on tongue, 267–269,  269  
 Pappenheimer, John, 672 
 Parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA), 640 
 Parahippocampal cortex, 838–839 
 Parahippocampal place area (PPA), 361 b  
 Parallel pathways, 354–355,  355  
 Parallel processing, 328 

 visual perception and, 363–364 

 Paralysis, 488 b  
 Paraphasic errors, 699, 705 
 Parasympathetic division, of ANS, 245, 

 245 , 532,  532 , 533–534,  534  

 erection and, 588 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   967
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   967

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

968

INDEX

 Paraventricular nucleus, 558 
 Paresis, 488 b  
 Parietal lobe,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223 , 234, 

 234 ,  236 , 493 

 attention and,  731 , 731–733,  732  
 central visual system and, 358–359 
 conduction aphasia and, 704–705 
 neglect syndrome and, 738 b  

 Parkinson’s disease, 19, 19 t , 502 b –503 b , 

 503  

 amnesia and, 861–862,  862  
 basal ganglia and, 501–503 
 DBS for, 504 b –505 b  
 dopa for, 158 
 estrogen replacement therapy and, 610 
 substantia nigra and, 235, 543 

 Partial seizure, 655, 657–658 
 Parvocellular LGN layers, 340,  340 , 345, 

354–355,  355  

 Parvocellular neurosecretory cells, 

528–529,  529  

 Parvo-interblob pathway, 354–355,  355  
 Patch clamp, 94, 95 b , 132,  132  
 Pathophysiology, 754–756 
 Pathway formation, in brain, 795–802,  796  
 Pathway selection, 796 
 Patrick, Jim, 464 b  
 Pavlov, Ivan, 827 
 Pax6, 791 
 PCP.  See  Phencyclidine 
 PCPA.  See  Parachlorophenylalanine 
 PDE.  See  Phosphodiesterase 
 Penfield, Wilder, 431–432, 492, 711–712, 

839 

 Penis, 535, 587–588, 660 
 Peptide bonds, 60,  62  
 Peptidergic system, 145 
 Peptides.  See also  Polypeptides 

 AgRP, 558, 560 
 anorectic peptides, 558 
 hyperplasia and, 439 
 modulation by, 537–538 
 as neurotransmitters, 120, 144 
 NPY, 121 t , 558, 560 

 leptin and, 561 

 orexigenic peptides, 560 
 peptidergic system and, 145 
 Perceptual illusions,  332 , 333 
 Perforant path, 874 
 Periaqueductal gray matter (PAG), 238, 

447–448, 640 

 Perikaryon, 26 
 Perilymph, 379 
 Peripheral nervous system (PNS),  8 , 184–185 

 ATP in, 160 
 Schwann cells in, 49–51 
 spinal nerves in, 240 
 Perirhinal cortex, 838 
 Periventricular zone, of hypothalamus, 

524–525,  525  
 Pert, Candace, 151 
 PET.  See  Positron emission tomography 
 Peters, Alan, 49 
 Phantom limb sensations, 436 
 Pharmacology, 164.  See also  Drugs 
 Pharynx,  267 , 687,  687  
 Phase locking, 392–393, 394 b  

 Phelps, M. E., 190 b  
 Phencyclidine (PCP),  777 , 777–778 
 Phenelzine, 768 
 Phenobarbital, 168 
 Phenotype, 462 
 Phentolamine  N -methyltransferase 

(PNMT), 158 
 Phenylalanine, 540 b  
 Phenylketonuria (PKU), 47 b  
 Pheromones, 279 b  
 Phobias, 756 t  
 Phonemes, 687 
 Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 

(PIP 2 ), 173,  174  

 Phosphodiesterase (PDE), 313, 315,  315  
 Phospholipase C (PLC), 173 
 Phospholipid bilayers 

 electrical current and,  65  
 potassium channels and, 67–68 
 resting membrane potential and, 59,  60  

 Phospholipids, 59 
 Phosphorylation, 139, 174,  174  
 Photomap hypothesis, 792 b –793 b  
 Photopic conditions, 309 
 Photopigments, 306, 316,  316 , 318, 678 
 Photoreceptors, 294, 304,  305 .  See also  

Cone photoreceptors; Rod 
 photoreceptors 

 of ganglion cells, 327–328 
 hyperpolarization of, 312,  314 , 320 
 layer of photoreceptor outer segments, of 

retina, 306,  306  

 neurotransmitters and, 320 
 receptive field and, 363 
 SCN and, 678 
 structure of, 306–309 

 Photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), 302 b  
 Phototransduction, 312–319,  313  
 Phrenology, 10,  10  
 Pia mater, 186,  186 ,  242 , 344 
 Pineal body, 225,  225 , 230,  230  
 Pineal gland,  7 , 585 
 Pinna, 373 
 Pioneer axons, 797 
 PIP 2 .  See  Phosphatidylinositol-4,

5-bisphosphate 

 Pitch, 372, 394 b  
 Pitcher, David, 361 b  
 Pituitary gland, 528 t .  See also  

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis 

 estradiol in, 585 
 hypothalamus and, 525–531 
 location of,  524  
 sex hormones and, 585–587,  586  

 Pituitary hypertrophy, 337 b  
 PKA.  See  Protein kinase A 
 PKC.  See  Protein kinase C 
 PKM ␨ .  See  Protein kinase M zeta 
 PKU.  See  Phenylketonuria 
 Placebo effect, 448 b  
 Place cells, 847–852,  848 , 848–849,  852  
 Place code, 380 
 Planum temporale, 710,  710  
 Plasticity 

 of cerebral cortex,  435 , 435–436 

 synapses of, 814–818 

 metaplasticity, 889–891,  890  

 of ocular dominance columns, 809 
 spike timing-dependent plasticity, 882, 

 882  

 structural, memory and, 896–897 
 synaptic, 878 b  
 synaptic, NMDA receptors and, 

882–884,  884  

 Plateau, in sexual response cycle, 587 
 PLC.  See  Phospholipase C 
 PMA.  See  Premotor area 
 PNMT.  See  Phentolamine 

 N -methyltransferase 

 PNS.  See  Peripheral nervous system 
 Poe, Edgar Allan, 765 b  
 Poisons, 137 b , 267 

 glutamate as, 167 b  

 Polar covalent bonds, 58 
 Polar solvent, water as, 57–59,  58  
 Polyandry, 590 
 Polygamy, 590 
 Polygyny, 590 
 Polymerization, 38 
 Polymers, 38 
 Polymodal nociceptors, 439 
 Polypeptides, 60,  62 , 98 

 VIP, 121 t , 537, 588 

 Polyribosomes, 36,  36 , 46,  46  
 Polysynaptic alpha motor neurons, 477 
 Pons, 200, 202, 225,  225 , 228,  228 , 230,  230  

 cross-section of, 239,  239  
 spinothalamic pain pathway and, 444 

 Pontine nuclei, 239,  239 , 515 
 Pontine reticular formation, 239,  239  
 Pontine reticulospinal tract,  490 , 490–491 
 Pontomesencephalotegmental complex, 545 
 Pop outs, 725,  725  
 Population coding, 507 

 for smell, 287–288 
 for taste, 277–278 

 Population vector, 508,  508 ,  509  
 Pore loop, of calcium channels, 73,  74  
 Positive symptoms, for schizophrenia, 772 
 Positron emission tomography (PET), 5 65 , 

190, 190 b ,  191 , 494 

 for attention, 730–731,  731  
 for behavioral neurophysiology, 495 b  
 for emotions, 626 
 for face recognition, 360 b  
 for language, 713–717,  716  
 MEG and, 650 
 for resting state activity, 720–721 
 of sleep,  670  
 for spatial memory, 849 
 for unconscious emotion, 619 
 of wakefulness,  670  
 for working memory, 832–833 
 Postcentral gyrus, 235,  235 , 430 
 Posterior anatomical reference, 180 
 Posterior cerebral artery, 248,  248 , 249, 

 249  

 Posterior communicating artery, 248,  248 , 

 249  

 Posterior parietal cortex, 430,  431 , 

437–438,  492 , 493–494 

 Posterior pituitary, 525–528 
 Postganglionic neurons,  532 , 533 

 neurotransmitters and, 538 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   968
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   968

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Postsynaptic axon terminal, 43 

 polyribosomes and, 46,  46  

 Postsynaptic density, 115 
 Postsynaptic membranes 

 of chemical synapses, 114 
 neuromuscular junction and,  120  

 Postsynaptic potential (PSP), 112–113 
 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 

757, 859 b  

 Potassium channel, 73–74,  74 ,  75  

 action potential and, 88 
 glutamate receptors and, 164 
 phospholipid bilayers and, 67–68 
 voltage-gated, 97–98, 136 

 Potassium chloride, for lethal injection, 78 b  
 Potassium ions, 75–77 
 Potassium spatial buffering, 76,  77  
 Potter, David, 110 
 PPA.  See  Parahippocampal place area 
 Prandial state, 553 
 Predatory aggression, 636, 639,  639  
 Prednisone, 529–530 
 Prefrontal cortex,  492 , 493–494 

 medial, sadness and, 626 
 neglect syndrome and, 738 b  
 working memory and,  831 , 831–833,  833  
 Preganglionic neurons,  532 , 533, 537–538 
 Pregnancy, leptin and, 606 
 Premotor area (PMA),  492 , 493, 494–495,  496  

 mirror neurons and, 496,  497  

 Preoptic area, 585, 596–597 
 Presbyopia, 302 b  
 Prestin, 386, 388 
 Presynaptic action potential,  134  
 Presynaptic axon terminal,  42 , 43 
 Presynaptic element, of chemical synapses, 

114 

 Presynaptic membranes, of chemical 

synapses, 114 

 Pribram, Karl, 636 
 Primary afferent axons, 422–423,  423 , 

442–443 

 Primary auditory cortex (A1), 374, 399,  399  
 Primary gustatory cortex, 276 
 Primary hyperplasia, 439 
 Primary motor cortex (M1), 492, 505–510,  507  
 Primary sensory areas, 211 
 Primary sensory neurons, 48 
 Primary somatosensory cortex (S1), 428, 

 431 , 431–432 

 MEG and, 650 b –651 b  
 receptive fields of, 432–433 

 Primary structure, of proteins, 60–61,  62  
 Primary visual cortex, 333, 341,  342  

 LGN and, 341 
 surface vasculature of,  350 , 350 b  

 Priority maps, 736,  736 , 737–740,  739 ,  740  
 PRK.  See  Photorefractive keratectomy 
 Procedural memory, 825–828 
 striatum and, 857–862,  860  
 temporal lobectomy and, 842 

 Progesterone, 585, 599 
 Progestins, 585 
 Programmed cell death, 502 b –503 b , 

803–804,  804  

 Prolactin, 528 t  
 Promoters, 31 

 Propranolol, 538, 859 b  
 Proprioception 

 from Golgi tendon organ, 474–477,  476  
 from joints, 476–477 
 from muscle spindles, 469–471 

 Proprioceptors, 469 
 Prosencephalon, 196 
 Prosopagnosia, 362, 869 
 Prostaglandins, 439, 440, 602 
 Prostate gland,  245  
 Proteases, 438, 439 
 Protein kinase A (PKA), 172 
 Protein kinase C (PKC), 173, 878 
 Protein kinase M zeta (PKM ␨ ), 893 
 Protein kinases, 139, 892–893 
 Protein phosphatases, 174, 884 
 Proteins.  See also   specific proteins  

 amino acids and, 163 
 levels of, 60–61,  62  
 memory and, 888 b  
 microtubules and, 38–39 
 resting membrane potential and, 

59–63 

 in rough ER, 36,  36  
 in voltage-gated potassium channels, 98 

 Protein synthesis, 29 

 dendrites and, 46 
 on free ribosomes,  37  
 memory consolidation and, 893–897 
 on rough ER,  37  

 Proximal muscles, 456 
 Prozac.  See  Fluoxetine 
  Psilocybe  mushrooms, 546 
 PSP.  See  Postsynaptic potential 
 Psychiatrists, 14 t  
 Psychoactive drugs, 43, 546–548,  547  
 Psychoanalysis, 753 
 Psychological constructionist theories of 

emotion, 628 
 Psychosis, 637 b , 775 
 Psychosurgery, 636 
 Psychotherapy, 753, 761, 768 
 PTSD.  See  Post-traumatic stress disorder 
 P-type ganglion cells, 325,  325 ,  326 , 

354–355,  355  
 Publish or perish, 16 
 Puce, Aina,  361 , 361 b  
 Pulvinar nucleus,  237 ,  734 , 734–735 
 Pupil, 296,  296  
 Pupillary light reflex, 303–304 
 Purinergic receptors, 160, 164 
 Purkinje cells, 513, 542 b –543 b  
 Putamen, 233,  233 ,  235 , 498,  499  
 Pyramidal cells, 46, 786–788 

 dendritic spines on, 608 
 EEG and, 647,  648 , 651 b  
 of layer V, 506–507 
 in layer VI, 786 
 neural precursor cells and, 790,  790  
 in striate cortex, 344,  344  

 Pyramidal decussation, 202,  202 ,  487  
 Pyramidal tract, 486 

Q
 Quantal analysis, of EPSP, 132–133 
 Quaternary structure, of proteins, 

61–62,  62  

INDEX

969

R
 Radial connections, of LGN, 345,  345  
 Radial glial cells, 785, 791 
 Radial keratotomy, 302 b  
 Radial unit hypothesis, 791 
 Rakic, Pasko, 792 b –793 b  
 Ramachandran, V. S., 744 b  
 Ranson, S. W., 556 
 Raphe nuclei, 239,  239 , 448 

 LSD and, 546 
 with serotonergic neurons, 541–542 
 sleep and, 667 

 Rapid eye movement sleep (REM sleep), 

658, 659 t  

 functions of, 664–666 
 mechanisms of, 670–671,  671  
 physiology of, 659–660,  660  

 Rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors, 418 
 Rate-limiting step, 156 
 Rays, 295–296 
 Reaction time, 727–728,  728  
 Receptive field center, 323 
 Receptive fields, 320–321,  321  

 in area V4, attention and, 733,  734  
 binocular, 348 
 of bipolar cells, 321–323,  322  
 blobs and, 353–354 
 center-surround, 323, 363 
 complex cells and, 352–354,  353  
 of ganglion cells, 323–327 
 hierarchy of, 363,  366  
 LGN and, 340–341 
 of mechanoreceptors,  418  
 retinotopy and, 342 
 of S1, 432–433 
 simple cells and, 352–354,  353  
 of somatic sensory receptors, 418,  418  
 striate cortex and, 348, 363 
 Receptive field surround, 323 
 Receptor agonists, 132, 149–150 
 Receptor antagonists, 130 
 Receptor potential, 270, 384,  384 , 386 
 Receptors.  See also   specific receptors  
 neuromuscular junction and,  120  
 for neurotransmitters, 59, 124–130, 

149–153 

 Receptor subtypes, 149–150, 153 
 Reciprocal inhibition, 477,  477  
 Recognition memory,  843 , 843–844 
 Reconsolidation, of memory, 856–857, 

858 b –859 b  

 Recurrent collaterals, 40 
 Red nucleus, 238, 486,  487 ,  499  
 Reductionist approach, 13 
 Referred pain, 443 
 Reflection, of light, 296,  296  
 Refraction, of light, 296,  296  

 by cornea, 299–300,  300  
 Reimer, David,  604 , 604 b  
 Reinforcement, of feeding behavior, 

566–567 

 Reissner’s membrane, 377,  377 , 379 
 Relative ionic permeability, membrane 

potential and, 90,  91  

 Relative refractory period, 86, 98 
 Relay nuclei, 428 
 REM rebound, 665 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   969
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   969

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

970

INDEX

 REM sleep.  See  Rapid eye movement sleep 
 REM sleep behavior disorder, 671 
 Renaissance, brain in, 6–7 
 Renin, 527 
 Replication, in neuroscience scientific 

process, 15 

 Reproductive organs 

 brain and,  586  
 control of, 587–589,  589  
 development of, 584–587, 603 
 sex hormones and, 599 

 Reserpine, 764 
 Resolution, in sexual response cycle, 587, 

589 

 Resting membrane potential, 57–63 

 cytosol and, 57–59 
 extracellular fluid and, 57–59 
 ion pumps and, 72 
 ions and, 66–77 
 measurement of, 66,  66  
 phospholipid bilayer and, 59,  60  
 protein and, 59–63 

 Resting state activity, in brain, 720–723,  723  
 Restoration, sleep and, 663 
 Reticular formation, 239,  239 ,  240  
 Retina, 196, 294, 297,  297 ,  299  

 detached, 300 b  
 duplex, 309 
 hypothalamus and, 585 
 laminar organization of, 305–306,  306  
 LGN and, synaptic segregation and, 

806–807 

 microscopy of, 304–312 
 processing and output of, 319–328 
 pupillary light reflex and, 303 
 regional differences in,  310 , 310–312 
 SCN and, 678 

 Retinal, 313 
 Retinitis pigmentosa, 300 b  
 Retinofugal projection, 333–338,  334 ,  336  
 Retinogeniculocortical pathway, 

 784 , 809, 813 

 Retinotectal projection, 338 
 Retinotopy, 342–343,  343 , 348, 799,  801  
 Retrograde amnesia,  829 , 830, 845 b , 854 
 Retrograde messengers, 160 
 Retrograde signaling, 160,  162  
 Retrograde transport, 44, 45 b  
 Reward, for feeding behavior, 566–567 
 R group, 60–61, 63 
 Rhinal fissure, 209 
 Rhode, Bill, 394 b  
 Rhodopsin, 313,  314 , 315 
 Ribosomes, 36,  36 , 60 
 Rich, Nola, 387 
 Rigidity, 501 
 Rigor mortis, 468 
 Riluzole, 463 b  
 Ripples, 651,  652  
 Rising phase, of action potential, 82, 98 
 Ritalin, 724 b  
 Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 495 
 RNA polymerase, 31 
 RNA splicing, 31–32 
 Rod photoreceptors, 306–309,  307  

 distribution of, 310–311,  311  
 phototransduction in, 312–315 

 Rods of Corti,  381 , 382 
 Roland, Per, 494 
 Roman Empire, brain in, 5–6 
 Rostral anatomical reference, 180, 238, 

 238 , 239,  239  

 Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER), 

 Second messenger cascade, 172–174,  173  
 of G-protein-coupled receptors, 175,  175  

 Second messengers, 127,  174  
 Second-order sensory neurons, 426 
 Second pain, 442,  442  
 Secretory granules, of chemical synapses, 

36,  36 ,  37  

 Round window, 377,  377 ,  379  
 Rubrospinal tract,  243 , 486,  487  
 Ruffini’s endings, 417,  417 , 418 
 Ruggero, Mario, 387 

S
 S1.  See  Primary somatosensory cortex 
 Saccule, 403,  403  
 Sacks, Oliver, 437 
 Sacral spinal nerves, 245,  245  
 Sacral vertebrae, 423–426,  424  
 Sadness, 626,  627 ,  628  
 Saffran, Jenny, 691 
 Sagittal plane, 182,  182  
 Sagvolden, Terje, 850 b  
 Sakmann, Bert, 95 b  
 Salience maps, 736,  737  
 Saltatory conduction, myelin and, 103–104, 

103 b ,  104  

 Saltiness, 267 

 serotonin and, 270 
 transduction of, 271–272,  272  

 Sanes, Jerome, 509 
 Sapolsky, Robert, 531 b  
 Sarcolemma, 464,  465  
 Sarcomere, 466 
 Sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), 36, 465, 

 465 , 467 

 Satiety signals, 562 
 Savage-Rumbaugh, Sue, 689 
 Saxe, Rebecca, 361 b  
 Saxitoxin, 97 
 Scala media, 377,  377  
 Scala tympani, 377,  377 , 379,  379  
 Scala vestibuli, 377,  377 , 379,  379  
 Scarpa’s ganglion,  403  
 Schaffer collateral, 874 
 Scharrer, Berta, 525 
 Scharrer, Ernst, 525 
 Schizophrenia, 19–20, 19 t , 771–779 

 DA and,  775 , 775–777,  776  
 genetics and,  774 , 774–775 
 glutamate and,  777 , 777–778,  778  
 lateral ventricles and, 775,  775  
 treatment for, 779 
 Schlaggar, Brad, 794 
 Schultz, Wolfram, 568 
 Schwab, Martin, 800 f  
 Schwann, Theodor, 12 
 Schwann cells, 49, 103, 800 f  
 Scientific process, in neuroscience, 

15–16 

 Sclera, 296,  296 ,  299  
 SCN.  See  Suprachiasmatic nucleus 
  SCN9A  gene, 438 b  
 Scotopic conditions, 309 
 SDN.  See  Sexually dimorphic nucleus 
 Secondary hyperplasia, 439 
 Secondary sensory areas, 212 
 Secondary structure, of proteins, 60,  62  

114 

 Secretory hypothalamus, 522 
 Seiji Nishino, 669 b  
 Seizures 

 of epilepsy, EEG for, 655–658,  657  
 generalized epilepsy with febrile 

 seizures, 96 

 transient global amnesia from, 830 

 Selective-attention experiments, 730,  730  
 Selective permeability, of neuronal 

membrane, 72, 73 b  

 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 

(SSRIs), 159, 762–763, 768, 769,  769  

 Selectivity 

 amino acid-gated channels and, 165 
 direction, 351,  352  
 ion, 63 
 orientation, 348–350,  349  
 stimulus, 869 

 Selectivity filter, sodium channel and, 92,  94  
 Self-awareness, 14 
 Self-stimulation 

 for feeding behavior, 566–567, 567 b  
 of septal area,  567 , 567 b  

 Semantic memory, 824 
 Semaphorin 3A, 790,  790  
 Semen, 588 
 Semicircular canals, 403,  403 , 406–408,  407  
 Sensitization, 827 
 Sensorimotor system, 485 
 Sensory areas, of cerebral cortex, 224,  224  
 Sensory maps, 288 
 Sensory nerves, 9–10 
 Sentinel hypothesis, 722 
 Septal area, 233,  233 ,  567 , 567 b  
 Serotonergic neurons, 158–159 

 diffuse modulatory system and,  544  
 raphe nuclei with, 541–542 
 sleep and, 667 

 Serotonin (5-HT), 121 t  

 aggression and, 640–641 
 anger and, 640–641 
 diffuse modulatory system and, 539 
 falling asleep and, 668 
 feeding behavior and, 571,  572  
 as G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter 

receptor, 170 t  

 hyperplasia and, 439 
 raphe nuclei and, 448 
 saltiness and, 270 
 sleep and, 666 
 sourness and, 270 
 from tryptophan, 158,  159 , 540 b  

 Serotonin deficiency hypothesis, 641 
 Serotonin receptors, ethanol and, 168 
 Seung, Sebastian, 212 b –213 b  
 Sex 

 ANS and, 533 
 behavior and, 587–595 
 brain and, 579–612 
 chromosomes and,  581 , 581–583 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   970
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   970

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 development and differentiation of, 

583–584,  584  

 DNA and, 581–583 
 dreams and, 665 
 gender and, 580–584 
 genetics of, 581–583, 603–606 
 mating strategies and, 590 
 neurochemistry of, 590–594 
 oxytocin and, 591–594, 592 b ,  593  
 pineal body and, 230 
 transient global amnesia from, 830 
 vasopressin and, 591–594, 592 b ,  593  

 Sex-determining region of the 

Y chromosome (SRY), 582,  582  

 Sex hormones, 584–587,  586  

 activational effects of, 606–610,  607 ,  608 , 

 609 ,  610  

 aggression and, 635 
 behavior and, 599–603 
 brain and, 599–603 
 genetic sex and, 602–603 
 multiple sclerosis and, 610 
 Sexual arousal cycle, 587–588 
 Sexual dimorphisms, 595–599,  596  

 of brain, 597–598 
 CNS and, 596–598,  597  
 of cognition, 598,  598  

 Sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN), 597, 

 597 , 611 

 Sexual orientation, 610–612 
 Sham rage, 638,  638  
 Shatz, Carla, 807 
 Sheinberg, David, 743–746 
 Sherrington, Charles, 110, 454, 470, 492 
 Shingles,  426 , 426 b  
 Shortcut pathway, for G-proteins, 171–172, 

 172  

 Short-term memory, 828 
 Shunting inhibition, IPSP and, 136–137,  138  
 Siggins, George, 542 b  
 Signal amplification, by G-protein-coupled 

receptors, 175,  175  

 Sildenafil (Viagra), 588 
 Silent-biting attack, 639 
 Silva, Alcino, 888, 888 b  
 Simantov, Rabi, 152 b  
 Simple cells, receptive field and, 352–354, 

 353  

 Simple reflex, 56,  56 , 204 
 Simultagnosia, 722 
 Singer, Wolf, 744 b  
 Single nucleotide polymorphisms, 32 
 Size principle, 459 
 Skeletal muscle, 454,  455  

 alpha motor neurons and, 459 
 receptor subtypes in, 149 
 somatic motor nerves and, 195 

 Skin 

 mechanoreceptors of,  417 , 417–422,  418 , 

428 

 somatic sensory receptors in, 416,  417  

 Skinner, B. F., 753 
 Sleep 

 brain rhythms and, 658–673, 659 t  
 circadian rhythm of,  675  
 diffuse modulatory system and, 666,  667 , 

672–673 

 EEG of, 658–673,  662  
 falling into, 668 
 genetics and, 672–673 
 neural mechanisms of, 666–673 
 non-REM sleep, 658–659, 659 t ,  660 , 668 
 PET of,  670  
 pineal body and, 230 
 promoting factors for, 671–672 
 purpose of, 662–664 
 REM sleep, 658, 659 t  

 functions of, 664–666 
 mechanisms of, 670–671,  671  
 physiology of, 659–660,  660  
 reticular formation and, 239 
 thalamus and,  668  

 Sleep cycle, 660–662,  662  
 Sleep deprivation, 664 b  
 Sleep-learning, 666 
 Sleep paralysis, 669 b  
 Sleep spindle, 661 

 falling asleep and, 668 

 Sleep talking, 661 b  
 Sleep terrors, 661 b  
 Sleep walking, 661 b  
 SLI.  See  specific language impairment 
 Sliding-filament model, of muscle 

contraction,  466 , 466–467 

 Slot proteins, 884 
 Slow axoplasmic transport, 43 
 Slow fibers, 461,  462  
 Slowly adapting mechanoreceptors, 418 
 Slow motor units, 461 
 SMA.  See  Supplementary motor area 
 Small intestine,  245  
 Smell, 266, 278–291 
 adaptation to, 282 
 cAMP-gated channels for, 283–284 
 central pathways for, 284–287,  287  
 G-protein-coupled receptors for, 282–283 
 ion channels for, 284 b  
 organs of,  278 , 278–280 
 population coding for, 287–288 
 spatial representations from, 287–290 
 temporal coding in,  290 , 290–291 
 transduction of, 280–282,  281  

 Smith, Phil, 394 b  
 Smithies, Oliver, 33 
 Smooth endoplasmic reticulum 

(smooth ER), 36 

 Smooth muscle, 454 
 SNARE, 125 b , 131 b  
 Snyder, Solomon, 151, 152 b  
 Social phobias, 756 t  
 Society for Neuroscience, 4 
 Sodium channel 

 depolarization and, 92,  94 ,  96  
 excitable dendrites and, 136 
 genes and, 96 
 rod photoreceptors and, 315 
 selectivity filter and, 92,  94  
 toxins and, 96–97,  97  
 voltage-gated, 92–97,  93 , 136, 464, 467 

 Sodium-potassium pump, 71,  72  
 Solitary nucleus, 240,  240  
 Soma, 26,  26 , 29–38 

 mitochondria in, 36–37,  38  
 nucleus of, 29–32 

INDEX

971

 rough ER in, 36,  36  
 smooth ER in, 36 

 Somatic motor nerves, 195 
 Somatic motor response, 553, 558 
 Somatic motor system, 454–456,  532  

 aggression and, 636 
 ANS and, 532 

 Somatic PNS, 184–185 
 Somatic sensation, 416 
 Somatic sensory receptors 

 receptive fields of, 418,  418  
 in skin, 416,  417  
 of thalamus, 445–446,  446  

 Somatic sensory system, 415–451 

 pain, 438–448 
 temperature and, 448–450 
 touch, 416–437 

 Somatosensory cortex, 430–437,  431  

 lactation and, 606–607,  607  
 reproductive organs and, 588 

 Somatostatin, 121 t  
 Somatotopy, of cerebral cortex, 431–433, 

 433 ,  434  

 Somites, 193 
 Somnambulism, 661 b  
 SOR.  See  Starfire Optical Range 
 Soul, Descartes and, 7 
 Sound, 370–372.  See also  Auditory system 
 amplification of, 375–376, 386–388,  388  
 basilar membrane and,  379 , 379–380, 

 380  

 frequency of, 371,  371 , 391–393 
 intensity of,  371 , 371–372, 391–393 
 localization of, 394–399 
 speech and, 686–687,  687  
 temporal code for, 394 b  

 Sourness, 267 

 serotonin and, 270 
 transduction of,  272 , 272–273 

 Spalding, Kirsty, 787 b  
 Sparks, David, 508–509 
 Spasticity, 488 b  
 Spatial memory, 847–852 
 Spatial summation, 133 
 Specific language impairment (SLI), 

693–694 

 Specific phobias, 756 t  
 Speech 

 frontal lobe and, 15 
 sound and, 686–687,  687  
 tongue and, 694 

 Spemann, Hans, 810 b  
 Spencer, Alden, 871 b  
 Sperry, Roger, 706, 799 
 Spheres of hydration, 58 
 Spicy food, 440 b  
 Spike-initiation zone, 105,  105 , 133 
 Spike timing–dependent plasticity, 882,  882  
 Spinal accessory nerve,  246 , 247 
 Spinal arachnoid,  242  
 Spinal canal, 203, 227,  227 , 240,  240 , 242, 

 242  

 Spinal cord, 183–184,  184 ,  230 ,  422 , 

423–426 

 in CNS,  8  
 cross-sectional anatomy of, 243,  243  
 descending tracts of, 485–491,  486 ,  491  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   971
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   971

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

972

INDEX

 differentiation of,  203 , 203–204 
 dorsal anatomical reference for, 240,  241  
 emotion and, 619 
 excitation-contraction coupling and, 

464–468 

 interneurons in, 460 
 interneurons of, 476–480,  480  
 itch and, 442 
 lower motor neurons, 456–463,  457 ,  458  
 medulla oblongata and, 240,  240  
 motor system and, 453–481 
 motor units and, 469–481 
 somatic motor system and, 454–456 
 substance P in,  443  
 ventral-lateral anatomic reference for, 

242,  242  

 Spinal nerves,  9 , 9–10, 184, 245,  245  

 dorsal anatomical reference for, 240,  241  

 Spinal paralysis, 19 t  
 Spinal segments, 423–426,  424  
 Spindles, 652,  652  
 Spinothalamic pain pathway,  444 , 

444–445 

 Spinothalamic tract, 243,  243 , 444 
 Spiny neurons, 46 
 Spiny stellate cells, in striate cortex, 344 
 Spiral ganglion,  381 , 382, 386,  386  
 Spirituality, Descartes and, 7 
 Split-brain studies, 706, 707,  707  
 Spontaneous cognition, 722 
 Spotlight of attention, 728,  729  
 SR.  See  Sarcoplasmic reticulum 
 SRY.  See  Sex-determining region of the 

Y chromosome 

 LGN and, synaptic segregation and, 

808–809, 808 b ,  809  
 physiology of, 347–356 
 pia mater and, 344 
 pyramidal cells in, 344,  344  
 receptive fields and, 348, 363 
 retinotopy and, 342–343,  343  
 spiny stellate cells in, 344 
 Wernicke–Geschwind model and, 702 

 Striated muscle, 454 
 Stria terminalis, 632 
 Striatum, 498,  499  

 procedural memory and, 857–862,  860  

 Stria vascularis, 379 
 Stroke, 19 t , 20 

 amnesia from, 829 
 conduction aphasia and, 705 
 estradiol and, 610 
 motor cortex and, 488 
 neglect syndrome and,  738 , 738 b  
 Wernicke–Geschwind model and, 703 

 Structural plasticity, memory and, 896–897 
 Strychnine, 137 b  
 Subarachnoid space, 186 
 Subdural hematoma, 185 
 Subfornical organ, 527,  527  
 Submucous plexus, 536 
 Subplate, 788 
 Substance P,  121 , 121 t  

 hyperplasia and, 439, 440 
 pain and, 442–443 
 in spinal cord,  443  

 Substantia, 192 t  
 Substantia gelatinosa, 442,  442 , 443 

 SSRIs.  See  Selective serotonin reuptake 

 temperature and, 451 

inhibitors 

 Standard model of memory consolidation, 

854–856,  855  

 Stapes, 374,  375 , 379,  379  
 Starch, taste of, 268 b  
 Starfire Optical Range (SOR), 308 b  
 Starvation, 554 
 Stellate cells, 46 
 Stem cells, 756 
 Stereocilia, 382–383,  383 , 384 
 Stereogram,  364 , 364 b ,  365  
 Stern, Kathleen, 279 b  
 Steroids, 529–530, 584,  584  
 aggression and, 635–636 
 neurotransmitters and, 599,  600  

 Stimulants, 546–548,  547  
 Stimulus intensity, 391 
 Stimulus selectivity, 869 
 Stomach,  245  
 Stop sequence, 31 
 Strabismus, 300 b , 811–812 
 Strategy, 484,  485 , 485 t  
 Stress response, 528,  530 , 531 b ,  760  

 anxiety and, 758, 759 
 transient global amnesia from, 830 

 Stretch reflex,  470 , 470–471 
 Striate cortex (area V1), 333 

 anatomy of, 341–347 
 apical dendrites in, 344 
 cytoarchitecture of, 343,  344  
 inputs and outputs of, 344–347,  345  
 lamination of, 343–344,  344  

 Substantia nigra,  235 , 238, 498,  499 ,  500  

 DA and, 543, 544 
 Parkinson’s disease and, 235, 543 

 Substrate phase, 562 
 Subthalamic nucleus, 498,  499  
 Subthalamus, 235,  235 ,  500  
 Subunits, 62 
 Subventricular zone (SVZ), 788, 792 b ,  793  
 Suicide, depression and, 20 
 Sulci, 7,  8 , 205, 207,  207 , 223,

  223 ,  229 , 430,  431  

 Superior cerebellar artery, 248,  248  
 Superior colliculus, 200, 230,  230 , 238, 

 238 ,  499  

 distributed coding by, 510 b –511 b  
 optic tract and,  337 , 337–338 

 Superior olive, 239,  239 , 389 
 Superoxide dismutase, 463 b  
 Supplementary motor area (SMA),  492 , 

493, 494–495 

 Huntington disease and, 504 
 Parkinson’s disease and, 501–502 
 VL and, 500 

 Supporting cells, 279 
 Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), 525 

 circadian rhythms and, 676–681,  677 , 

678 b ,  681  

 photoreceptors and, 678 
 retina and, 678 
 TTX and, 679, 680 

 Supraoptic nucleus, 525 
 Surprise, 626,  627  

 Susumu Tonegawa, 888, 888 b  
 SVZ.  See  Subventricular zone 
 Sweetness, 267 
 ATP and, 270 
 transduction of, 273–274,  274  
 Sylvian fissure,  8 , 232,  232 ,  234  

 asymmetry of,  709  

 Symmetrical cell division, 785 
 Symmetrical synapses, 117–119,  119  
 Sympathetic chain, 533 
 Sympathetic division, of ANS, 245,  245 , 

532,  532 , 533–534,  534  

 sexual response cycle and, 588 

 Synapses, 42,  42 , 43 

 in area IT, 886,  886  
 astrocytes and,  52  
 asymmetrical, 117,  119  
 axoaxonic, 115,  116  
 axodendritic, 115,  116  
 axosomatic, 115, 116 
 axospinous, 115 
 of cerebral cortex, plasticity of, 

814–818 

 chemical, 110, 113–119,  115  
 of CNS,  115 , 115–119,  116  
 neurotransmitters and, 120–130 
 synaptic transmission of, 119–132 
 for taste, 269 

 in CNS 

 chemical,  115 , 115–119,  116  
 formation of, 801–802,  802  

 convergence of, 809–811 
 of dendrites, 44–46,  46 , 115–117 

 integration of, 134–136 

 dendrodendritic synapses, 117 
 electrical, 110, 111–113,  113 ,  114  

 in brain, 113 
 in CNS, 112,  113  
 for taste, 269 

 Gray’s type I, 117,  119  
 Gray’s type II, 119,  119 , 138 
 Hebb, 807,  807  
 learning and, 43,  897  
 memory in, 43, 870, 870 b –872 b ,  871 ,  872 , 

894,  895 ,  897  

 modulation of, 812–813,  813  
 reduction of, 802–805 
 strengthening, 874–879 
 symmetrical synapses, 117–119,  119  
 types of, 111–119 
 voltage of, EEG and, 647 
 weakening, 880–885 

 Synaptic capacity, 804–805,  805  
 Synaptic cleft, 43 

 of chemical synapses, 114 
 NE in, 139 

 Synaptic competition, 811–812 
 Synaptic consolidation, 854 
 Synaptic homeostasis, 889–891 
 Synaptic integration, 132–140 
 Synaptic mimicry, 148–149 
 Synaptic modification threshold, 889–891, 

 890  

 Synaptic plasticity, 878 b  

 NMDA receptors and, 882–884,  884  
 Synaptic rearrangement, 805–806,  806  
 Synaptic scaling, 891 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   972
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   972

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

 Synaptic segregation, 806–809 

 LGN and 

 retina and, 806–807 
 striate cortex and, 808–809, 808 b ,  809  

 Synaptic transmission, 43, 109–141 

 of chemical synapses, 119–132 
 dendrites and, 46 
 inhibition of, 136–138,  138  
 LTD and, 881 
 modulation of, 138–140,  139  
 with transmitter-gated channels, 174–175 

 Synaptic vesicles, 42,  42  

 ATP in, 160 
 of chemical synapses, 114 
 EPSP and, 132–133 
 SNARE and, 125 b  
 Synaptotagmin, 125 b  
 Synchronous activity, EEG and, 647,  649  
 Synchronous rhythms, in brain,  653 , 653–654 
 Synergist muscle, 456 
 Synesthesia, 826 b  
 Systems consolidation, 854 
 Systems neuroscience, 13 

T
 T1R, 273–274 
 T2R, 273–274 
 Tactics, 484,  485 , 485 t  
 Tadashi Nakamura, 283, 284 b  
 Takahashi, Joseph, 679 
 Tamoxifen, 610 
 Tank, David, 212 b –213 b  
 Tardive dyskinesia, 779 
 Target selection, 796 
 Taste, 266–278 

 afferent axons for, 269 
 basic four, 267 
 central pathways for, 274–276 
 chemical synapses for, 269 
 cranial nerves and, 274–276 
 electrical synapses for, 269 
 gustatory nucleus for, 240 
 memory and, 276 b  
 neural coding of, 277–279 
 neurotransmitters for, 270 
 new types of, 268 b  
 organs of, 267–269 
 population coding for, 277–278 
 threshold for,  269  
 transduction of, 271–274,  272 ,  273 ,  274  

 Taste buds, 269,  269  
 Taste pore, 269 
 Taste receptor cells, 269–271,  270  
 Tau, 39 

 Alzheimer’s disease and, 41 b  

 TDF.  See  Testis-determining factor 
 Tears, 294 
 Tectorial membrane, 378,  381 , 382 
 Tectospinal tract, 489–490 
 Tectum, 199, 200, 225,  225 , 238,  238  
 Tegmentum, 200, 225,  225  

 sleep and, 667 

 Telencephalon, 196–198,  197 , 212, 234, 

 234 , 235,  235 , 527 

 thalamus and,  232 , 232–233,  233  

 Temperature, 448–450 

 regulation of, 575–576 

 Temporal coding 

 for smell,  290 , 290–291 
 for sound, 394 b  

 Temporal lobe,  8 , 207,  207 , 223,  223 , 232, 

 232 , 234,  234 ,  236  

 amnesia and, 841–843,  842  
 antegrade amnesia and, 841–843,  842  
 conduction aphasia and, 704–705 
 electrical stimulation of, 839–840 
 lobectomy of, 630–631, 841–843,  842  
 medial,  829  

 declarative memory and, 837–841,  838  
 engrams in, 840 
 sexual arousal and, 588–589 

 Temporal retina, 297,  297  
 Temporal summation, 133 
 Terminal arbor, 42 
 Terminal bouton.  See  Axon terminal 
 Terminator, 31 
 Ter-Pogossian, M. M., 190 b  
 Tertiary structure, of proteins, 60–61,  62  
 Testis-determining factor (TDF), 599 
 Testosterone, 584–585, 635 
 Tetanus, 875 
 Tetrad, of calcium channels, 465,  465  
 Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 161 b , 563 b  
 Tetramers, glutamate receptors as, 164 
 Tetrodotoxin (TTX), 96–97,  97 , 806 

 SCN and, 679, 680 
 synaptic scaling and, 891 

 Teyler, Timothy, 118 b  
 TH.  See  Tyrosine hydroxylase 
 Thalamus, 197, 198,  198 , 225,  225 , 230, 

 230 ,  234 , 240,  240 , 333 

 brain rhythms and,  655  
 emotion and, 618 
 LGN and, 341 
 memory and,  845  
 midbrain and,  236 , 236–237,  237  
 sleep and,  668  
 somatic sensory receptors of, 445–446,  446  
 telencephalon and,  232 , 232–233,  233  
 Wernicke–Geschwind model and, 703 

 THC.  See  Tetrahydrocannabinol 
 Theophylline, 671 
 Theoretical neuroscientists, 14 
 Thermoreceptors, 449–450,  450  
 Theta rhythms, 651,  652  
 Thick filaments, 466 
 Thin filaments, 466 
 Third ventricle, 196, 205 t , 227,  227 , 232, 

 232 , 234,  234 ,  236  

 Thirst,  527 , 527–528 
 Thoracic vertebrae, 240,  241 , 423–426,  424  
 Threat attack, 639 
 3D, visual perception in,  364 , 364 b –365 b , 

 365  

 Three-dimensional electron microscopy 

(3DEM), 118 b  

 Threshold 

 of action potential, 84, 98 
 for pain, 439 
 for taste,  269  

 Throat, anatomy of,  267  
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 528 t  

 humoral response and, 557–558 
 NPY and, 560 

INDEX

973

 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone, 121 t  
 Tinnitus, 387 b , 402 b  
 Tip link, 384, 386 
 TMC.  See  Transmembrane protein-like 
 Tobacco, 132 

 nicotine in, 149–150 

 Tongue,  267  

 papillae on, 267–269,  269  
 speech and, 694 
 trigeminal nerves and, 428 

 Tonic bonds, 58 
 Tononi, Giulio, 673, 744 b  
 Tonotopy, 380, 391–392 
 Top-down attention, 725 
 Topical anesthesia, 102 b  
 Topographic maps, 799–801 
 Toran-Allerand, Dominique, 608 
 Touch, 416–437 

 dorsal column nuclei and, 240,  240 , 428, 

431 

 dorsal columns and, 203, 242,  242 , 243, 

 243 , 428 

 skin and, mechanoreceptors of,  417 , 

417–422,  418 , 428 

 somatosensory cortex and, 430–437 
 spinal cord and,  422  
 trigeminal nerve and, 428–430 

 Toxins.  See also  Poisons 

 sodium channel and, 96–97,  97  
 synapse and, 43 

 Tract, 192 t  
 Transcortical motor area aphasia, 697 t  
 Transcortical sensory aphasia, 697 t  
 Transcription, 29–31,  31  
 Transcription factors, 31, 786 
 in cerebral cortex, 791,  794  

 Transducin, 313, 315,  315  
 Transduction 

 of bitterness, 273,  274  
 of hair cells, 382–386 
 of pain, 438–441 
 phototransduction, 312–319 
 of saltiness, 271–272,  272  
 of smell, 280–282,  281  
 of sourness,  272 , 272–273 
 of sweetness, 273–274,  274  
 of taste, 271–274,  272 ,  273 ,  274  
 of umami, 274,  274  

 Transgenes, 33 
 Transient global amnesia, 830 
 Transient receptor potential (TRP), 273, 

440 b  

 thermoreceptors and, 449,  450  

 Translation, mRNA and, 32 
 Transmembrane protein-like (TMC), 384 
 Transmitter-gated ion channels, 124–126, 

 126 , 163–169,  165 , 174–175 

 nAChR as, 163–164,  164  
 patch clamp and, 132,  132  

 Transporters, 122 

 of ACh, 154 
 of neurotransmitters,  155  

 Trepanation, 4–5,  5  
  Treponema pallidum , 754 
 Trichromats, 316 b  
 Tricyclic antidepressants, 669 b , 768 
 Trigeminal lemniscus, 445 

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   973
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   973

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

974

INDEX

 Trigeminal nerve,  246 , 247, 428–430, 

 430  

 Trigeminal pain pathway, 445 
 Trigger stimulus, 494 
 Trk receptors, 804 
 Trochlear nerve,  246 , 247 
 Trophic factors, 803 
 Tropomyosin, 467 
 Troponin, 467 
 TRP.  See  Transient receptor potential 
 TRPV1, 440 b  

 itch and, 442 
 thermoreceptors and, 449,  450  

 Tryptophan, 158,  159 , 540 b  
 Tryptophan hydroxylase, 158 
 TSH.  See  Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 T tubules, 465,  465  

 depolarization of, excitation-contraction 

coupling and, 467 

 TTX.  See  Tetrodotoxin 
 Tubulin, 38 
 Tumors, of brain, amnesia from, 829 
 Tunnel vision, 300 b , 337 b  
 Turner syndrome, 582 
 Turnover rate, 640 
 Turrigiano, Gina, 891 
 Two-point discrimination, 420–422,  421  
 Tyler, Christopher, 365 b  
 Tympanic membrane, 373,  373  
 Tyrosine, 540 b  

 catecholamines from, 157,  157  
 Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), 157 

U
 Ultradian rhythms, 661 
 Ultrasound, 372 b  
 Umami, 267 

 ATP and, 270 
 transduction of, 274,  274  

 Unconditioned stimulus (US), 827,  838  
 Unconscious emotion, 619–621,  621  
 Undershoot, of action potential, 82, 98 
 Ungerleider, Leslie, 360 b  
 Unipolar neurons, 46 
 Urbach–Wiethe disease, 632–633 
 Urethra, 588 
 Urinary bladder,  245  

 ANS and, 533 

 US.  See  Unconditioned stimulus 
 Utricles, 403,  403 ,  406  

V
 Vagus nerve, 245,  245 ,  246 , 247, 428 

 appetite and, 564 
 taste and, 274 

 Valence, 627 
 Valine, 540 b  
 Valium.  See  Diazepam 
 Vallate papillae, 267,  269  
 Vallbo, Åke, 417–418 
 Van der Loos, H., 434 b  
 Varicella zoster, 426 b  
 Vascular organ of the lamina terminalis 

(OVLT), 574,  575  

 Vas deferens, 588 
 Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), 

121 t , 537, 588 

 Vasopressin, 526–527,  527  

 sex and, 591–594, 592 b ,  593  
 volumetric thirst and, 573 

 VCRs.  See  Vocal control regions 
 Ventral amygdalofugal pathway, 632 
 Ventral anatomical reference, 180, 228,  228  
 Ventral cochlear nucleus, 239,  239 , 389 
 Ventral columns, 203, 242,  242  
 Ventral horn, 203, 242,  242 , 426 

 alpha motor neurons of, 469 
 motor neurons and, 459–460 
 motor neurons in,  459 , 459–460 

 Ventral-lateral anatomic reference, for spi-

nal cord, 242,  242  

 Vilain, Eric, 605 
 VIP.  See  Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
 Visceral PNS, 185 
 Visceromotor response, 553, 558 
 Vision, 294 

 consciousness and, 746–747,  748  
 correction of,  302 , 302 b  
 memory and, area IT and,  868 , 868–869 

 Visual acuity, 304 
 Visual angle, 304,  304  
 Visual cortex, 211–212, 237 

 engrams in, 868 
 LGN and, 341 
 VP and, 794 

 Ventral lateral nucleus (VL), 498,  499  

 Visual field, 304,  304  

 SMA and, 500 

 Ventral posterior medial nucleus (VPM), 276 
 Ventral posterior nucleus (VP), 235,  235 , 

 408 , 409, 428 

 area 3 and, 791, 794 
 visual cortex and, 794 

 Ventral roots, 15, 184 
 Ventral stream, 359–362, 868–869 
 Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 543–544, 

572 b –573 b  

 aggression and, 639 
 DA in,  569 , 569 b ,  570 , 607 

 Ventricles, 6,  6  

 fourth, 200, 205, 205 t , 227,  227 , 230,  230 , 

239,  239  

 lateral, 196, 205 t , 227,  227 , 232,  232 , 

 234 , 236,  236  

 schizophrenia and, 775,  775  

 third, 196, 205 t , 227,  227 , 232,  232 , 234, 

 234 ,  236  

 Ventricular system, 186,  186  
 of brain, 204–205, 205 t ,  207  

 Ventricular zone (VZ), 785,  786 , 791, 792 b , 

 793  

 Ventromedial hypothalamic syndrome, 556 
 Ventromedial pathway, 243,  243 , 488–491, 

 489 ,  499  

 Verbal dyspraxia,  692 , 692–694 
 Verification, in neuroscience scientific 

process, 16 
 Vermis,  230 , 513 
 Vertebrae, 240,  241  
 Vertebral arteries, 248,  248  
 Vertebral column,  245  
 Vesalius, Andreas, 6,  6  
 Vesicles, of brain,  195 , 195–196 
 Vestibular labyrinth, 377, 403–404,  404 , 489 
 Vestibular nerve, 403,  403  
 Vestibular nuclei, 240,  240 , 408–409, 489 
 Vestibular system, 370, 403–411 

 pathology of, 410–411 
 vestibular labyrinth in, 377, 403–404,

  404 , 489 

 Vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), 409–410, 

 410  

 Vestibulospinal tract, 243,  243 ,  408 , 

408–409, 489 

 Viagra.  See  Sildenafil 
 Vibration 

 retinofugal projection and, 335,  336  
 retinotopy and, 342 

 Visual hemifields, 334,  335  
 Visual perception, 362–364 

 in 3D,  364 , 364 b –365 b ,  365  

 Visual sensitivity, attention and, 725–727, 

 726 ,  727  

 Visual system, 220, 238.  See also  Central 

visual system 

 auditory system and,  374  
 in systems neuroscience, 13 

 Vitreous humor, 298,  299  
 VL.  See  Ventral lateral nucleus 
 Vocal control regions (VCRs), 601 b  
 Vocal folds, 687,  687  
 Vocal tract,  687  
 Volley principle, 393 
 Volta, Alessandro, 382 b  
 Voltage, 64 

 NMDA and, 167 
 of synapses, EEG and, 647 

 Voltage clamp, 92 
 Voltage-gated calcium channels, 122–124, 136 
 Voltage-gated potassium channels, 97–98, 

136 

 Voltage-gated sodium channel, 92–97,  93 , 

136, 464, 467 

 Voltmeter, 66,  66  
 Volumetric thirst, 573–574,  574  
 Vomeronasal organ, 279 b , 282 
 Von Békésy, Georg, 379 
 VOR.  See  Vestibulo-ocular reflex 
 VP.  See  Ventral posterior nucleus 
 VPM.  See  Ventral posterior medial nucleus 
 VTA.  See  Ventral tegmental area 
 VZ.  See  Ventricular zone 

W
 Wada, Juhn, 696 b  
 Wada procedure, 695, 696 b , 709 
 Wakefulness 

 ascending reticular activating system 

and, 667–668 

 circadian rhythm of,  675  
 consciousness and, 742 
 genetics and, 672–673 
 PET of,  670  
 reticular formation and, 239 

 Walking 

 CNS and, 420 
 Pacinian corpuscle and,  419 , 419–420 

 Vibrissae, 418, 433,  433  

 motor programs for, 478–481,  479  
 sleep, 661 b  

 Wall, Patrick, 446,  447  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   974
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   974

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

INDEX

975

 Waller, Augustus, 43 
 Wallerian degeneration, 43 
 Watanabe, Akira, 110 
 Water 

 phospholipid bilayer and, 59 
 as polar solvent, 57–59,  58  
 taste of, 268 b  

 Wavelength 

 color vision and, 316 
 in electromagnetic radiation, 295,  295  

 Weinrich, Michael, 494 
 Weiss, Paul, 43 
 Werblin, Frank, 320 
 Wernicke, Karl, 695 
 Wernicke–Geschwind model, of aphasia, 

701–704,  702 ,  703 ,  704  

 Wernicke’s aphasia, 697 t , 700–701 
 Wernicke’s area, 695 

 conduction aphasia and, 704–705 
 Wernicke–Geschwind model and, 702 

 White matter, 7,  7 , 192 t ,  233 ,  237  

 of cerebral cortex, 197–198 
 medulla oblongata and, 202 

 Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 688 b  

 Wiesel, Torsten, 345, 349, 356, 431, 

806, 809 

 Williams, David, 308 b –309 b , 309 
 Wiltshire, Stephen, 826 b  
 Wires 

 axons as, 56–57 
 nerves as, 9–10 

 Wisconsin card-sorting test, 831–832,  832  
 Wise, Steven, 494 
 Wolf, Marina, 572 b  
 Wolffian duct, 583–584 
 Woolf, Virginia, 765 b  
 Woolley, Catherine, 608, 609 
 Woolsey, Thomas, 434 b  
 Working memory, 829, 830–835 

 area LIP and, 833–835,  835  
 brain and, 833–834,  834 ,  835  
 frontal lobe and, 833,  834  
 PET for, 832–833 
 prefrontal cortex and,  831 , 

831–833,  833  

 temporal lobectomy and, 842 

 Wurtman, Judith, 540 b  
 Wurtman, Richard, 540 b  

X
 X-linked disease, 581 
 XO genotype, 582 

Y
 Yakovlev, Paul, 792 b  
 Yeasts, 125 b  
 Yellow fluorescent protein (YFP), 87 b  
 Yoichi Sugita, 361 b  
 Young, J. Z., 101 
 Young, Larry, 592 b  
 Young, Thomas, 308 b , 316 
 Young-Helmholtz trichromacy theory, 

316 

Z
 Zeitgebers, 675–676 
 Zeki, Semir, 594 
 Zihl, Josef, 359 
 Z lines, 466 
 Zombie systems, 744 b  
 Zone of Lissauer, 442,  442 , 443 
 Zonule fibers,  299  
 Zuoxin Wang, 592 b  

955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   975
955–978_Bear_Index_revised_final.indd   975

12/20/14   7:41 AM
12/20/14   7:41 AM

