 

 

Modern Physics

Third Edition

RAYMOND A. SERWAY
Emeritus
James Madison University

CLEMENT J. MOSES
Emeritus
Utica College of Syracuse University

CURT A. MOYER
University of North Carolina-Wilmington

Australia • Canada • Mexico • Singapore • Spain
United Kingdom • United States

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Physics Editor: Chris Hall
Development Editor: Jay Campbell
Editor-in-Chief: Michelle Julet
Publisher: David Harris
Editorial Assistant: Seth Dobrin
Technology Project Manager: Sam Subity
Marketing Manager:  Kelley McAllister
Marketing Assistant: Leyla Jowza
Advertising Project Manager: Stacey Purviance
Project Manager, Editorial Production: Teri Hyde
Print/Media Buyer: Barbara Britton
Permissions Editor: Sarah Harkrader
Production Service: Progressive Publishing Alternatives
Text Designer: Patrick Devine

COPYRIGHT © 2005, 1997, 1989 by Raymond A. Serway.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by
the copyright hereon may be reproduced or used in any
form or by any means — graphic, electronic, or mechanical,
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, tap-
ing, Web distribution, information networks, or informa-
tion storage and retrieval systems — without the written per-
mission of the publisher.

Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 08 07 06 05 04

For more information about our products, contact us at:

Thomson Learning Academic Resource Center

1-800-423-0563

For permission to use material from this text 

or product, submit a request online at 

http://www.thomsonrights.com.

Any additional questions about permissions can be 
submitted by email to thomsonrights@thomson.com.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2004101232

Student’s Edition: ISBN 0-534-49339-4

International Student Edition: ISBN 0-534-40624-6

Art Director: Rob Hugel
Photo Researcher: Dena Digilio-Betz
Copy Editor: Progressive Publishing Alternatives
Illustrator:  Rolin  Graphics/Progressive  Information
Technologies
Cover Designer: Patrick Devine
Cover  Image:  Patrice  Loiez,  CERN/Science  Photo
Library,  Artiﬁcially  colored  bubble  chamber  photo
from CERN, the European particle physics laboratory
outside Geneva (1984).
Cover Printer: Coral Graphic Services
Compositor: Progressive Information Technologies
Printer: Quebecor World, Taunton

Brooks/Cole — Thomson Learning
10 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002
USA

Asia
Thomson Learning
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808

Australia/New Zealand
Thomson Learning
102 Dodds Street
Southbank, Victoria 3006
Australia

Canada
Nelson
1120 Birchmount Road
Toronto, Ontario M1K 5G4
Canada

Europe/Middle East/Africa
Thomson Learning
High Holborn House
50/51 Bedford Row
London WC1R 4LR
United Kingdom

Latin America
Thomson Learning
Seneca, 53
Colonia Polanco
11560 Mexico D.F.
Mexico

Spain/Portugal
Paraninfo
Calle/Magallanes, 25
28015 Madrid, Spain

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

 

About the Authors

Raymond A. Serway received his doctorate at Illinois Institute of Technology and
is Professor Emeritus at James Madison University.  Dr. Serway began his teaching
career at Clarkson University, where he conducted research and taught from
1967 to 1980. His second academic appointment was at James Madison Univer-
sity as Professor of Physics and Head of the Physics Department from 1980 to
1986. He remained at James Madison University until his retirement in 1997. He
was the recipient of the Madison Scholar Award at James Madison University in
1990, the Distinguished Teaching Award at Clarkson University in 1977, and the
Alumni Achievement Award from Utica College in 1985. As Guest Scientist at the
IBM Research Laboratory in Zurich, Switzerland, he worked with K. Alex Müller,
1987 Nobel Prize recipient. Dr. Serway also held research appointments at Rome
Air Development center from 1961 to 1963, at IIT Research Institute from 1963
to 1967, and as a visiting scientist at Argonne National Laboratory, where he col-
laborated with his mentor and friend, Sam Marshall. In addition to earlier edi-
tions of this textbook, Dr. Serway is the co-author of Physics for Scientists and Engi-
neers, 6th edition, Principles of Physics, 3rd edition, College Physics, 6th edition, and
the high-school textbook Physics, published by Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. In
addition, Dr. Serway has published more than 40 research papers in the ﬁeld of
condensed matter physics and has given more than 60 presentations at profes-
sional meetings. Dr. Serway and his wife Elizabeth enjoy traveling, golﬁng, ﬁsh-
ing, and spending quality time with their four children and seven grandchildren.

Clement J. Moses is Emeritus Professor of Physics at Utica College. He was
born and brought up in Utica, New York, and holds an A.B. from Hamilton
College, an M.S. from Cornell University, and a Ph.D. from State University of
New York at Binghamton. He has over 30 years of science writing and teaching
experience at the college level, and is a co-author of College Physics, 6th edition,
with Serway and Faughn.  His research work, both in industrial and university
settings, has dealt with defects in solids, solar cells, and the dynamics of atoms
at surfaces. In addition to science writing, Dr. Moses enjoys reading novels,
gardening, cooking, singing, and going to operas.

Curt A. Moyer has been Professor and Chair of the Department of Physics and
Physical Oceanography at the University of North Carolina-Wilmington since
1999.  Before his appointment to UNC-Wilmington, he taught in the Physics
Department at Clarkson University from 1974 to 1999. Dr. Moyer earned a B.S.
from Lehigh University and a Ph.D. from the State University of New York at
Stony Brook. He has published more than 45 research articles in the ﬁelds of
condensed matter physics and surface science.  In addition to being an experi-
enced teacher, Dr. Moyer is an advocate for the uses of computers in educa-
tion and developed the Web-based QMTools software that accompanies this
text. He and his wife, V. Sue, enjoy traveling and the special times they spend
with their four children and three grandchildren.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

iii

 

Preface

This book is intended as a modern physics text for science majors and engi-
neering students who have already completed an introductory calculus-based
physics course. The contents of this text may be subdivided into two broad cat-
egories:  an  introduction  to  the  theories  of  relativity,  quantum  and  statistical
physics (Chapters 1 through 10) and applications of elementary quantum the-
ory  to  molecular,  solid-state,  nuclear,  and  particle  physics  (Chapters  11
through 16).

OBJECTIVES

Our basic objectives in this book are threefold:

1. To  provide  simple,  clear,  and  mathematically  uncomplicated  explana-

tions of physical concepts and theories of modern physics.

2. To clarify and show support for these theories through a broad range of
current applications and examples. In this regard, we have attempted to
answer questions such as: What holds molecules together? How do elec-
trons tunnel through barriers? How do electrons move through solids?
How can currents persist indeﬁnitely in superconductors?

3. To enliven and humanize the text with brief sketches of the historical de-
velopment of 20th century physics, including anecdotes and quotations
from the key ﬁgures as well as interesting photographs of noted scientists
and original apparatus.

COVERAGE

Topics. The  material  covered  in  this  book  is  concerned  with  fundamental
topics in modern physics with extensive applications in science and engineer-
ing. Chapters 1 and 2 present an introduction to the special theory of relativ-
ity.  Chapter  2  also  contains  an  introduction  to  general  relativity.  Chapters  3
through 5 present an historical and conceptual introduction to early develop-
ments in quantum theory, including a discussion of key experiments that show
the quantum aspects of nature. Chapters 6 through 9 are an introduction to
the  real  “nuts  and  bolts”  of  quantum  mechanics,  covering  the  Schrödinger
equation,  tunneling  phenomena,  the  hydrogen  atom,  and  multielectron

iv

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PREFACE

v

atoms, while Chapter 10 contains an introduction to statistical physics. The re-
mainder of the book consists mainly of applications of the theory set forth in
earlier  chapters  to  more  specialized  areas  of  modern  physics.  In  particular,
Chapter 11 discusses the physics of molecules, while Chapter 12 is an introduc-
tion to the physics of solids and electronic devices. Chapters 13 and 14 cover
nuclear  physics,  methods  of  obtaining  energy  from  nuclear  reactions,
and medical  and  other  applications  of  nuclear  processes.  Chapter  15  treats
elementary particle physics, and Chapter 16 (available online at  http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e) covers cosmology.

CHANGES TO THE THIRD EDITION

The third edition contains two major changes from the second edition: First,
this edition has been extensively rewritten in order to clarify difﬁcult concepts,
aid understanding, and bring the text up to date with rapidly developing tech-
nical applications of quantum physics. Artwork and the order of presentation
of certain topics have been revised to help in this process. (Many new photos
of physicists have been added to the text, and a new collection of color pho-
tographs  of  modern  physics  phenomena  is  also  available  on  the  Book  Com-
panion Web Site.) Typically, each chapter contains new worked examples and
ﬁve new end-of-chapter questions and problems. Finally, the Suggestions for Fur-
ther Reading have been revised as needed.

Second, this  edition  refers  the  reader  to  a  new,  online  (platform  indepen-
dent)  simulation  package,  QMTools, developed  by  one  of  the  authors,  Curt
Moyer. We think these simulations clarify, enliven, and complement the analyt-
ical solutions presented in the text. Icons in the text highlight the problems
designed for use with this software, which provides modeling tools to help stu-
dents visualize abstract concepts. All instructions about the general use of the
software as well as speciﬁc instructions for each problem are contained on the
Book  Companion  Web  Site,  thereby  minimizing  interruptions  to  the  logical
ﬂow  of  the  text.  The  Book  Companion  Web  Site  at  http://info.brookscole.
mp3e also contains appendices and much supplemental information on cur-
rent  physics  research  and  applications,  allowing  interested  readers  to  dig
deeper into many topics.

Speciﬁc changes by chapter in this third edition are as follows:

• Chapter 1 in the previous editions, “Relativity,” has been extensively revised
and  divided  into  two  chapters.  The  new  Chapter  1, entitled  “Relativity  I,”
contains the history of relativity, new derivations of the Lorentz coordinate
and velocity transformations, and a new section on spacetime and causality.

• Chapter 2, entitled “Relativity II,” covers relativistic dynamics and energy
and  includes  new  material  on  general  relativity,  gravitational  radiation,
and  the  applications  GPS  (Global  Positioning  System)  and  LIGO  (the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory). 

• Chapter  3 has  been  streamlined  with  a  more  concise  treatment  of  the
Rayleigh-Jeans and Planck blackbody laws. Material necessary for a com-
plete derivation of these results has been placed on our Book Companion
Web Site. 

• Chapter 5 contains a new section on the invention and principles of op-

eration of transmission and scanning electron microscopes.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

vi

PREFACE

 

• Chapter  6, “Quantum  Mechanics  in  One  Dimension,”  features  a  new
application  on  the  principles  of  operation  and  utility  of  CCDs  (Charge-
Coupled Devices).

• Chapter 8, “Quantum Mechanics in Three Dimensions,” includes a new
discussion on the production and spectroscopic study of anti-hydrogen, a
study which has important consequences for several fundamental physical
questions.

• Chapter  10 presents  new  material  on  the  connection  of  wavefunction
symmetry to the Bose-Einstein condensation and the Pauli exclusion prin-
ciple, as well as describing potential applications of Bose-Einstein conden-
sates.

• Chapter  11 contains new material explaining Raman scattering, ﬂuores-
cence,  and  phosphorescence,  as  well  as  giving  applications  of  these
processes  to  pollution  detection  and  biomedical  research.  This  chapter
has also been streamlined with the discussion of overlap integrals being
moved to the Book Companion Web Site. 

• Chapter  12 has been carefully revised for clariﬁcation and features new
material on semiconductor devices, in particular MOSFETs and chips. In
addition,  the  most  important  facts  about  superconductivity  have  been
summarized,  updated,  and  included  in  Chapter  12.  For  those  desiring
more material on superconductivity, the entire superconductivity chapter
from  previous  editions  is  available  at  the  Book  Companion  Web  Site
along with essays on the history of the laser and solar cells.

• Chapter  13 contains  new  material  on  MRI  (Magnetic  Resonance  Imag-
ing)  and  an  interesting  history  of  the  determination  of  the  age  of  the
Earth.

• Chapter 14 presents updated sections on ﬁssion reactor safety and waste
disposal,  fusion  reactor  results,  and  applications  of  nuclear  physics  to
tracing, neutron activation analysis, radiation therapy, and other areas.

• Chapter  15 has  been  extensively  rewritten  in  an  attempt  to  convey  the
thrust toward uniﬁcation in particle physics. By way of achieving this goal,
new discussions of positrons, neutrino mass and oscillation, conservation
laws, and grand uniﬁed theories, including supersymmetry and string the-
ory, have been introduced.

• Chapter  16 is a new chapter devoted exclusively to the exciting topic of
the origin and evolution of the universe. Topics covered include the dis-
covery of the expanding universe, primordial radiation, inﬂation, the fu-
ture evolution of the universe, dark matter, dark energy, and the acceler-
ating  expansion  of  the  universe.  This  cosmology  chapter  is  available  on
our Book Companion Web Site. 

FEATURES OF THIS TEXT

QMTools Five  chapters  contain  several  new  problems  requiring  the  use  of
our simulation software, QMTools. QMTools is a sophisticated interactive learn-
ing tool with considerable ﬂexibility and scope. Using  QMTools, students can
compose  matter-wave  packets  and  study  their  time  evolution,  ﬁnd  stationary
state  energies  and  wavefunctions,  and  determine  the  probability  for  particle
transmission and reﬂection from nearly any potential well or barrier. Access to
QMTools is available online at http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PREFACE

vii

Style. We have attempted to write this book in a style that is clear and suc-
cinct yet somewhat informal, in the hope that readers will ﬁnd the text appeal-
ing and enjoyable to read. All new terms have been carefully deﬁned, and we
have tried to avoid jargon.

Worked Examples. A large number of worked examples of varying difﬁculty
are presented as an aid in understanding both concepts and the chain of rea-
soning needed to solve realistic problems. In many cases, these examples will
serve as models for solving some end-of-chapter problems. The examples are
set off with colored bars for ease of location, and most examples are given ti-
tles to describe their content.

Exercises  Following  Examples. As an added feature, many of the worked
examples are followed immediately by exercises with answers. These exercises
are  intended  to  make  the  textbook  more  interactive  with  the  student,  and
to test immediately the student’s understanding of key concepts and problem-
solving techniques. The exercises represent extensions of the worked examples
and are numbered in case the instructor wishes to assign them for homework.

Problems and Questions. An extensive set of questions and problems is in-
cluded at the end of each chapter. Most of the problems are listed by section
topic.  Answers  to  all  odd-numbered  problems  are  given  at  the  end  of  the
book.  Problems  span  a  range  of  difﬁculty  and  more  challenging  problems
have colored numbers. Most of the questions serve to test the student’s under-
standing of the concepts presented in a given chapter, and many can be used
to motivate classroom discussions.

Units. The  international  system  of  units  (SI)  is  used  throughout  the  text.
Occasionally, where common usage dictates, other units are used (such as the
angstrom, Å, and cm⫺1, commonly used by spectroscopists), but all such units
are carefully deﬁned in terms of SI units.

Chapter Format. Each chapter begins with a preview, which includes a brief
discussion of chapter objectives and content. Marginal notes set in color are used
to locate important concepts and equations in the text. Important statements are
italicized or highlighted, and  important  equations  are  set  in  a  colored  box  for
added  emphasis  and  ease  of  review.  Each  chapter  concludes  with  a  summary,
which reviews the important concepts and equations discussed in that chapter.

In addition, many chapters contain special topic sections which are clearly
marked optional. These sections expose the student to slightly more advanced
material either in the form of current interesting discoveries or as fuller devel-
opments of concepts or calculations discussed in that chapter. Many of these
special  topic  sections  will  be  of  particular  interest  to  certain  student  groups
such as chemistry majors, electrical engineers, and physics majors.

Guest Essays. Another feature of this text is the inclusion of interesting ma-
terial in the form of essays by guest authors. These essays cover a wide range of
topics and are intended to convey an insider’s view of exciting current devel-
opments in modern physics. Furthermore, the essay topics present extensions
and/or applications of the material discussed in speciﬁc chapters. Some of the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

viii

PREFACE

 

essay  topics  covered  are  recent  developments  in  general  relativity,  the  scan-
ning tunneling microscope, superconducting devices, the history of the laser,
laser cooling of atoms, solar cells, and how the top quark was detected. The
guest essays are either included in the text or referenced as being on our Web
site at appropriate points in the text.

Mathematical Level. Students using this text should have completed a com-
prehensive  one-year  calculus  course,  as  calculus  is  used  throughout  the  text.
However, we have made an attempt to keep physical ideas foremost so as not to
obscure our presentations with overly elegant mathematics. Most steps are shown
when basic equations are developed, but exceptionally long and detailed proofs
which interrupt the ﬂow of physical arguments have been placed in appendices.

Appendices and Endpapers. The appendices in this text serve several pur-
poses. Lengthy derivations of important results needed in physical discussions
have been placed on our Web site to avoid interrupting the main ﬂow of argu-
ments. Other appendices needed for quick reference are located at the end of
the book. These contain physical constants, a table of atomic masses, and a list
of Nobel prize winners. The endpapers inside the front cover of the book con-
tain important physical constants and standard abbreviations of units used in
the book, and conversion factors for quick reference, while a periodic table is
included in the rear cover endpapers.

Ancillaries. The  ancillaries  available  with  this  text  include  a  Student  Solu-
tions Manual, which has solutions to all odd-numbered problems in the book,
an Instructor’s Solutions Manual, consisting of solutions to all problems in the
text, and a Multimedia Manager, a CD-ROM lecture tool that contains digital
versions of all art and selected photographs in the text. 

TEACHING OPTIONS

As noted earlier, the text may be subdivided into two basic parts: Chapters 1
through 10, which contain an introduction to relativity, quantum physics, and
statistical  physics,  and  Chapters  11  through  16,  which  treat  applications  to
molecules,  the  solid  state,  nuclear  physics,  elementary  particles,  and  cosmol-
ogy. It is suggested that the ﬁrst part of the book be covered sequentially. How-
ever, the relativity chapters may actually be covered at any time because E 2 ⫽
p2c2 ⫹ m2c4 is the only formula from these chapters which is essential for sub-
sequent  chapters.  Chapters  11  through  16  are  independent  of  one  another
and  can  be  covered  in  any  order  with  one  exception:  Chapter  14,  “Nuclear
Physics Applications,” should follow Chapter 13, “Nuclear Structure.”

A traditional sophomore or junior level modern physics course for science,
mathematics,  and  engineering  students  should  cover  most  of  Chapters  1
through  10  and  several  of  the  remaining  chapters,  depending  on  the  student
major. For example, an audience consisting mainly of electrical engineering stu-
dents might cover most of Chapters 1 through 10 with particular emphasis on
tunneling and tunneling devices in Chapter 7, the Fermi-Dirac distribution in
Chapter 10, semiconductors in Chapter 12, and radiation detectors in Chapter
14. Chemistry and chemical engineering majors could cover most of Chapters 1
through 10 with special emphasis on atoms in Chapter 9, classical and quantum

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PREFACE

ix

statistics in Chapter 10, and molecular bonding and spectroscopy in Chapter 11.
Mathematics and physics majors should pay special attention to the unique de-
velopment of operator methods and the concept of sharp and fuzzy observables
introduced in Chapter 6. The deep connection of sharp observables with classi-
cally conserved quantities and the powerful role of sharp observables in shaping
the form of system wavefunctions is developed more fully in Chapter 8.

Our  experience  has  shown  that  there  is  more  material  contained  in  this
book  than  can  be  covered  in  a  standard  one  semester  three-credit-hour
course. For this reason, one has to “pick-and-choose” from topics in the sec-
ond part of the book as noted earlier. However, the text can also be used in a
two-semester sequence with some supplemental material, such as one of many
monographs on relativity, and/or selected readings in the areas of solid state,
nuclear,  and  elementary  particle  physics.  Some  selected  readings  are  sug-
gested at the end of each chapter.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank the users and reviewers of the ﬁrst and second editions who
generously  shared  with  us  their  comments  and  criticisms.  In  preparing  this
third edition we owe a special debt of gratitude to the following reviewers:

Melissa Franklin, Harvard University
Edward F. Gibson, California State University, Sacramento
Grant Hart, Brigham Young University
James Hetrick, University of the Paciﬁc
Andres H. La Rosa, Portland State University
Pui-tak (Peter) Leung, Portland State University
Peter Moeck, Portland State University
Timothy S. Sullivan, Kenyon College
William R. Wharton, Wheaton College

We thank the professional staff at Brooks-Cole Publishing for their ﬁne work
during the development and production of this text, especially Jay Campbell,
Chris  Hall,  Teri  Hyde,  Seth  Dobrin,  Sam  Subity,  Kelley  McAllister,  Stacey
Purviance,  Susan  Dust  Pashos,  and  Dena  Digilio-Betz.  We  thank  Suzon  O.
Kister for her helpful reference work, and all the authors of our guest essays:
Steven Chu, Melissa Franklin, Roger A. Freedman, Clark A. Hamilton, Paul K.
Hansma, David Kestenbaum, Sam Marshall, John Meakin, and Clifford M. Will. 
Finally, we thank all of our families for their patience and continual support.

Raymond A. Serway
Leesburg, VA 20176
Clement J. Moses
Durham, NC 27713
Curt A. Moyer
Wilmington, NC 28403

December 2003

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Contents Overview

1 Relativity I 1

2 Relativity II 41

3 The Quantum Theory of Light 65

4 The Particle Nature of Matter 106

5 Matter Waves 151

6 Quantum Mechanics in One Dimension 191

7 Tunneling Phenomena 231

8 Quantum Mechanics in Three Dimensions 260

9 Atomic Structure 295

10 Statistical Physics 334

11 Molecular Structure 372

12 The Solid State 404

13 Nuclear Structure 463

14 Nuclear Physics Applications 503

15 Elementary Particles 547

16 Cosmology (Web Only)

Appendix A Best Known Values for Physical Constants A.1

Appendix B Table of Selected Atomic Masses A.2

Appendix C Nobel Prizes A.7

Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems A.12

Index I.1

x

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Contents

1 RELATIVITY I 1

Special Relativity 2

1.1
1.2 The Principle of Relativity 3

The Speed of Light 6

1.3 The Michelson – Morley Experiment 7

Details of the Michelson – Morley 

Experiment 8

Postulates of Special Relativity 10

1.4
1.5 Consequences of Special Relativity 13

Simultaneity and the Relativity of Time 14
Time Dilation 15
Length Contraction 18
The Twins Paradox (Optional)  21
The Relativistic Doppler Shift 22

1.6  The Lorentz Transformation 25

Lorentz Velocity Transformation 29
Spacetime and Causality 31

1.7

Summary 35

2.1

2.2
2.3
2.4

2.5

2  RELATIVITY II 41

Relativistic Momentum and 
the Relativistic Form 
of Newton’s Laws 41
Relativistic Energy 44
Mass as a Measure of Energy 48
Conservation of Relativistic 
Momentum and Energy 52
General Relativity 53
Gravitational Radiation, or a Good Wave 

Is Hard to Find 56

Summary 59
Web Essay The Renaissance of General Relativity

Clifford M. Will

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3 THE QUANTUM THEORY

OF LIGHT 65

Hertz’s Experiments—Light as an 
Electromagnetic Wave 66
Blackbody Radiation 68
Enter Planck 72
The Quantum of Energy 74
The Rayleigh–Jeans Law and Planck’s 
Law (Optional)  77
Rayleigh–Jeans Law 77
Planck’s Law 79
Light Quantization and the Photoelectric 
Effect 80
The Compton Effect and X-Rays 86
X-Rays 86
The Compton Effect 89
Particle – Wave Complementarity 94
Does Gravity Affect Light? (Optional)  95

3.6
3.7
Summary 98
Web Appendix Calculation of the Number of Modes

of Waves in a Cavity
Planck’s Calculation of the Average
Energy of an Oscillator 

4.1
4.2

4.3

4 THE PARTICLE NATURE

OF MATTER 106

The Atomic Nature of Matter 106
The Composition of Atoms 108
Millikan’s Value of the Elementary Charge 113
Rutherford’s Model of the Atom 119
The Bohr Atom 125
Spectral Series 126
Bohr’s Quantum Model of the Atom 130

xi

xii

CONTENTS

 

4.4

4.5

Bohr’s Correspondence Principle, 
or Why Is Angular Momentum 
Quantized?  139
Direct Conﬁrmation of Atomic Energy 
Levels: The Franck – Hertz Experiment 141

Summary 143

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5 MATTER WAVES 151

The Pilot Waves of De Broglie 152
De Broglie’s Explanation of 

Quantization in the Bohr Model 153

The Davisson–Germer Experiment 154
The Electron Microscope 159
Wave Groups and Dispersion 164
Matter Wave Packets 169
Fourier Integrals (Optional)  170
Constructing Moving Wave Packets 173
The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 173
A Different View of the Uncertainty Principle 175
If Electrons Are Waves, What’s 
Waving?  178
The Wave–Particle Duality 179
The Description of Electron 

Diffraction in Terms of ⌿ 179

A Thought Experiment: Measuring 

Through Which Slit the Electron Passes 184

A Final Note 186

5.8
Summary 186

6 QUANTUM MECHANICS IN

ONE DIMENSION 191

The Born Interpretation 191
Wavefunction for a Free Particle 194
Wavefunctions in the Presence 
of Forces 197
The Particle in a Box 200
Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs)  205
The Finite Square Well (Optional)  209
The Quantum Oscillator 212
Expectation Values 217
Observables and Operators 221
Quantum Uncertainty and the Eigenvalue Property 

6.1
6.2
6.3

6.4

6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8

(Optional)  222

Summary 224

8.1
8.2

8.3
8.4

8.5

9.1

9.2
9.3

9.4

9.5

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

7 TUNNELING PHENOMENA 231

7.1
7.2

The Square Barrier 231
Barrier Penetration: Some 
Applications 238
Field Emission 239
␣Decay 242
Ammonia Inversion 245
Decay of Black Holes 247

Summary 248
Essay The Scanning Tunneling Microscope

Roger A. Freedman and Paul K. Hansma 253

8 QUANTUM MECHANICS IN

THREE DIMENSIONS 260

Particle in a Three-Dimensional Box 260
Central Forces and Angular 
Momentum 266
Space Quantization 271
Quantization of Angular Momentum and 
Energy (Optional) 273
Lz Is Sharp: The Magnetic Quantum Number 275
兩L兩 Is Sharp: The Orbital Quantum Number 276
E Is Sharp: The Radial Wave Equation 276
Atomic Hydrogen and Hydrogen-like 
Ions 277
The Ground State of Hydrogen-like Atoms 282
Excited States of Hydrogen-like Atoms 284
Antihydrogen 287

8.6
Summary 289

9 ATOMIC STRUCTURE 295

Orbital Magnetism and the 
Normal Zeeman Effect 296
The Spinning Electron 302
The Spin – Orbit Interaction and 
Other Magnetic Effects 309
Exchange Symmetry and the 
Exclusion Principle 312
Electron Interactions and Screening 
Effects (Optional)  316
The Periodic Table 319
X-Ray Spectra and Moseley’s Law 325

9.6
9.7
Summary 328

 

10 STATISTICAL PHYSICS 334

12 THE SOLID STATE 404

CONTENTS

xiii

10.1

The Maxwell – Boltzmann Distribution 335
The Maxwell Speed Distribution for 

12.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

10.5

Gas Molecules in Thermal Equilibrium at 
Temperature T 341

The Equipartition of Energy 343
Under What Physical Conditions Are 
Maxwell – Boltzmann Statistics 
Applicable?  344
Quantum Statistics 346
Wavefunctions and the Bose – Einstein 
Condensation and Pauli Exclusion 
Principle 346

Bose – Einstein and Fermi – Dirac 

Distributions 347

Applications of Bose – Einstein 
Statistics 351
Blackbody Radiation 351
Einstein’s Theory of Speciﬁc Heat 352
An Application of Fermi – Dirac Statistics: 
The Free-Electron Gas Theory 
of Metals 356

Summary 360
Essay Laser Manipulation of Atoms 

Steven Chu 366

11 MOLECULAR 

STRUCTURE 372

11.1

Bonding Mechanisms: A Survey 373
Ionic Bonds 374
Covalent Bonds 374
van der Waals Bonds 375
The Hydrogen Bond 377

11.2  Molecular Rotation and Vibration 377

11.3
11.4

11.5

Molecular Rotation 378
Molecular Vibration 381
Molecular Spectra 385
Electron Sharing and the 
Covalent Bond 390
The Hydrogen Molecular Ion 390
The Hydrogen Molecule 396
Bonding in Complex Molecules 
(Optional) 397

Summary 399
Web Appendix Overlap Integrals of Atomic

Wavefunctions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Bonding in Solids 405
Ionic Solids 405
Covalent Solids 408
Metallic Solids 409
Molecular Crystals 409
Amorphous Solids 410
Classical Free Electron Model 
of Metals 413
Ohm’s Law 414
Classical Free Electron Theory 

of Heat Conduction 418

Quantum Theory of Metals 420
Replacement of vrms with vF 421
Wiedemann – Franz Law Revisited 422
Quantum Mean Free Path of Electrons 423
Band Theory of Solids 425
Isolated-Atom Approach to Band Theory 425
Conduction in Metals, Insulators, and

Semiconductors 426

Energy Bands from Electron Wave Reﬂections 429
Semiconductor Devices 433
The p-n Junction 433
Light-Emitting and -Absorbing 

Diodes — LEDs and Solar Cells 436

The Junction Transistor 437
The Field-Effect Transistor (FET)  439
The Integrated Circuit 441
Superconductivity 443
Lasers 447
Absorption, Spontaneous Emission, 

and Stimulated Emission 447

Population Inversion and Laser Action 449
Semiconductor Lasers 451

12.2

12.3

12.4

12.5

12.6
12.7

Summary 454
Web Essay The Invention of the Laser 

S. A. Marshall

Web Essay Photovoltaic Conversion 

John D. Meakin

Web Chapter Superconductivity

13 NUCLEAR STRUCTURE 463

13.1

Some Properties of Nuclei 464
Charge and Mass 465
Size and Structure of Nuclei 466
Nuclear Stability 468
Nuclear Spin and Magnetic Moment 469
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and Magnetic 

Resonance Imaging 470

 

xiv

13.2
13.3

13.4
13.5

13.6 

CONTENTS

Binding Energy and Nuclear Forces 472
Nuclear Models 476
Liquid-Drop Model 476
Independent-Particle Model 478
Collective Model 479
Radioactivity 479
Decay Processes 484
Alpha Decay 484
Beta Decay 487
Carbon Dating 489
Gamma Decay 491
Natural Radioactivity 492
Four Radioactive Series 492
Determining the Age of the Earth 493

Summary 495

14 NUCLEAR PHYSICS 
APPLICATIONS 503

14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5

14.6

14.7

Nuclear Reactions 503
Reaction Cross Section 506
Interactions Involving Neutrons 508
Nuclear Fission 510
Nuclear Reactors 513
Neutron Leakage 515
Regulating Neutron Energies 515
Neutron Capture 515
Control of Power Level 515
Safety and Waste Disposal 516
Nuclear Fusion 517
Fusion Reactions 518
Magnetic Field Conﬁnement 521
Inertial Conﬁnement 523
Fusion Reactor Design 524
Advantages and Problems of Fusion 526
Interaction of Particles with Matter 526
Heavy Charged Particles 526
Electrons 528
Photons 528
Radiation Damage in Matter 530
Radiation Detectors 532

14.8
14.9
14.10 Uses of Radiation 536

Tracing 536
Neutron Activation Analysis 537
Radiation Therapy 538
Food Preservation 539

Summary 539

15.3  Mesons and the Beginning of 

Particle Physics 553
Classiﬁcation of Particles 556
Hadrons 556
Leptons 557
The Solar Neutrino Mystery and 

15.4 

15.5 

Neutrino Oscillations 558
Conservation Laws 559
Baryon Number 560
Lepton Number 560
Strange Particles and Strangeness 561

15.6 
15.7  How Are Elementary Particles Produced 
and Particle Properties Measured? 563
Resonance Particles 564
Energy Considerations in Particle Production 568
The Eightfold Way 571
Quarks 574
The Original Quark Model 574
Charm and Other Developments 575

15.8
15.9

15.10  Colored Quarks, or Quantum 

Chromodynamics 577
Experimental Evidence for Quarks 578
Explanation of Nuclear Force in Terms 

of Quarks 579

15.11  Electroweak Theory and the 

Standard Model 580

15.12  Beyond the Standard Model 582

Grand Uniﬁcation Theory and Supersymmetry 582
String Theory — A New Perspective 582

Summary 583
Essay How to Find a Top Quark 590

Melissa Franklin and David Kestenbaum

16 COSMOLOGY (Web Only)

APPENDIX A BEST KNOWN VALUES

FOR PHYSICAL
CONSTANTS A.1

APPENDIX B TABLE OF SELECTED
ATOMIC MASSES A.2

APPENDIX C NOBEL PRIZES A.7

ANSWERS TO ODD-NUMBERED
PROBLEMS A.12

15 ELEMENTARY PARTICLES 547

INDEX I.1

15.1 
15.2 

The Fundamental Forces in Nature 548
Positrons and Other Antiparticles 550

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QM Tools
Text References to the Software

Chapter 6
Section 6.2, after Example 6.4
Exercise 3, following Example 6.8

Problems 22, 27, 36

Chapter 7
Exercise 1, following Example 7.1
Section 7.2, after Example 7.6
Subsection on Ammonia Inversion in Section 7.2

Problems 8, 9, 10, 19, 20

Chapter 8
Problems 27, 28, 32, 33

Chapter 9
Problems 19, 20

Chapter 11
Subsection on The Hydrogen Molecular Ion in Section 11.4

Problems 16, 17, 22, 23

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

xv

  1. A. Piccard
  2. E. Henriot
  3. P. Ehrenfest
  4. E. Herzen
  5. Th. de Donder
  6. E. Schroedinger
  7. E. Verschaffelt
  8. W. Pauli 
  9. W. Heisenberg
10. R.H. Fowler

11. L. Brillouin
12. P. Debye
13. M. Knudsen
14. W.L. Bragg
15. H.A. Kramers
16. P.A.M. Dirac
17. A.H. Compton
18. L.V. de Broglie 
19. M. Born
20. N. Bohr

21. I. Langmuir
22. M. Planck
23. M. Curie
24. H.A. Lorentz
25. A. Einstein
26. P. Langevin
27. C.E. Guye
28. C.T.R. Wilson
29. O.W. Richardson

The “architects” of modern physics. This unique photograph shows many eminent 
scientists who participated in the Fifth International Congress of Physics held in 1927
by the Solvay Institute in Brussels. At this and similar conferences, held regularly from
1911 on, scientists were able to discuss and share the many dramatic developments
in atomic and nuclear physics. This elite company of scientists includes ﬁfteen Nobel
prize winners in physics and three in chemistry. (Photograph courtesy of AIP Niels Bohr
Library)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1
Relativity I

Chapter Outline

1.1 Special Relativity
1.2 The Principle of Relativity

The Speed of Light

1.3 The Michelson – Morley

Experiment
Details of the Michelson – Morley

Experiment

1.4 Postulates of Special Relativity
1.5 Consequences of Special Relativity

Simultaneity and the Relativity of Time
Time Dilation
Length Contraction
The Twins Paradox (Optional)
The Relativistic Doppler Shift

1.6 The Lorentz Transformation
Lorentz Velocity Transformation

1.7 Spacetime and Causality
Summary

At  the  end  of  the  19th  century,  scientists  believed  that  they  had  learned
most of what there was to know about physics. Newton’s laws of motion and
his  universal  theory  of  gravitation,  Maxwell’s  theoretical  work  in  unifying
electricity and magnetism, and the laws of thermodynamics and kinetic the-
ory employed mathematical methods to successfully explain a wide variety of
phenomena.

However,  at  the  turn  of  the  20th  century,  a  major  revolution  shook  the
world of physics. In 1900 Planck provided the basic ideas that led to the quan-
tum  theory,  and  in  1905  Einstein  formulated  his  special  theory  of  relativity.
The excitement of the times is captured in Einstein’s own words: “It was a mar-
velous  time  to  be  alive.”  Both  ideas  were  to  have  a  profound  effect  on  our
understanding  of  nature.  Within  a  few  decades,  these  theories  inspired  new
developments  and  theories  in  the  ﬁelds  of  atomic,  nuclear,  and  condensed-
matter physics.

Although modern physics has led to a multitude of important technological
achievements,  the  story  is  still  incomplete.  Discoveries  will  continue  to  be
made  during  our  lifetime,  many  of  which  will  deepen  or  reﬁne  our  under-
standing  of  nature  and  the  world  around  us.  It  is  still  a  “marvelous  time  to
be alive.”

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

1

2

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

1.1 SPECIAL RELATIVITY

Light waves and other forms of electromagnetic radiation travel through free
space  at  the  speed  c ⫽ 3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s.  As  we  shall  see  in  this  chapter,  the
speed  of  light  sets  an  upper  limit  for  the  speeds  of  particles,  waves,  and  the
transmission of information.

Most  of  our  everyday  experiences  deal  with  objects  that  move  at  speeds
much less than that of light. Newtonian mechanics and early ideas on space
and time were formulated to describe the motion of such objects, and this
formalism  is  very  successful  in  describing  a  wide  range  of  phenomena.  Al-
though Newtonian mechanics works very well at low speeds, it fails when ap-
plied to particles whose speeds approach that of light. Experimentally, one
can test the predictions of Newtonian theory at high speeds by accelerating
an electron through a large electric potential difference. For example, it is
possible  to  accelerate  an  electron  to  a  speed  of  0.99c by  using  a  potential
difference  of  several  million  volts.  According  to  Newtonian  mechanics,  if
the potential difference (as well as the corresponding energy) is increased
by a factor of 4, then the speed of the electron should be doubled to 1.98c.
However, experiments show that the speed of the electron — as well as the
speeds  of  all  other  particles  in  the  universe — always  remains  less  than  the
speed of light, regardless of the size of the accelerating voltage. In part be-
cause it places no upper limit on the speed that a particle can attain, New-
tonian mechanics is contrary to modern experimental results and is there-
fore clearly a limited theory.

In 1905, at the age of 26, Albert Einstein published his special theory of rela-

tivity. Regarding the theory, Einstein wrote,

The relativity theory arose from necessity, from serious and deep contradictions in
the old theory from which there seemed no escape. The strength of the new theory
lies in the consistency and simplicity with which it solves all these difﬁculties, using
only a few very convincing assumptions. . . .1

Although Einstein made many important contributions to science, the theory
of relativity alone represents one of the greatest intellectual achievements of
the 20th century. With this theory, one can correctly predict experimental ob-
servations over the range of speeds from rest to speeds approaching the speed
of  light.  Newtonian  mechanics,  which  was  accepted  for  over  200  years,  is  in
fact a limiting case of Einstein’s special theory of relativity. This chapter and
the  next  give  an  introduction  to  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  which  deals
with the analysis of physical events from coordinate systems moving with con-
stant  speed  in  straight  lines  with  respect  to  one  another.  Chapter  2  also  in-
cludes  a  short  introduction  to  general  relativity,  which  describes  physical
events  from  coordinate  systems  undergoing  general  or  accelerated  motion
with respect to each other.

In this chapter we show that the special theory of relativity follows from two

basic postulates:

1. The  laws  of  physics  are  the  same  in  all  reference  systems  that  move
uniformly  with  respect  to  one  another.  That  is,  basic  laws  such  as

1A. Einstein and L. Infeld, The Evolution of Physics, New York, Simon and Schuster, 1961.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.2

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

3

Inertial frame of reference

兺F ⫽ d p/dt have the same mathematical form for all observers moving
at constant velocity with respect to one another.

2. The speed of light in vacuum is always measured to be 3 ⫻ 108 m/s, and
the measured value is independent of the motion of the observer or of
the motion of the source of light. That is, the speed of light is the same
for all observers moving at constant velocities.

Although it is well known that relativity plays an essential role in theoretical
physics, it also has practical applications, for example, in the design of particle
accelerators,  global  positioning  system  (GPS)  units,  and  high-voltage  TV  dis-
plays.  Note  that  these  devices  simply  will  not  work  if  designed  according  to
Newtonian mechanics! We shall have occasion to use the outcomes of relativity
in many subsequent topics in this text.

1.2 THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

To describe a physical event, it is necessary to establish a frame of reference,
such as one that is ﬁxed in the laboratory. Recall from your studies in mechan-
ics that Newton’s laws are valid in inertial frames of reference. An inertial frame
is  one  in  which  an  object  subjected  to  no  forces  moves  in  a  straight  line  at  constant
speed — thus the name “inertial frame” because an object observed from such a
frame obeys Newton’s ﬁrst law, the law of inertia.2 Furthermore, any frame or
system  moving  with  constant  velocity  with  respect  to  an  inertial  system  must
also be an inertial system. Thus there is no single, preferred inertial frame for
applying Newton’s laws.

According to the principle of Newtonian relativity, the laws of mechanics
must be the same in all inertial frames of reference. For example, if you per-
form an experiment while at rest in a laboratory, and an observer in a passing
truck moving with constant velocity performs the same experiment, Newton’s
laws may be applied to both sets of observations. Speciﬁcally, in the laboratory
or in the truck a ball thrown up rises and returns to the thrower’s hand. More-
over,  both  events  are  measured  to  take  the  same  time  in  the  truck  or  in  the
laboratory, and Newton’s second law may be used in both frames to compute
this  time.  Although  these  experiments  look  different  to  different  observers
(see  Fig.  1.1,  in  which  the  Earth  observer  sees  a  different  path  for  the  ball)
and the observers measure different values of position and velocity for the ball
at the same times, both observers agree on the validity of Newton’s laws and
principles  such  as  conservation  of  energy  and  conservation  of  momentum.
This implies that no experiment involving mechanics can detect any essential
difference  between  the  two  inertial  frames.  The  only  thing  that  can  be
detected is the relative motion of one frame with respect to the other. That is,
the notion of absolute motion through space is meaningless, as is the notion of
a single, preferred reference frame. Indeed, one of the ﬁrm philosophical
principles  of  modern  science  is  that  all  observers  are  equivalent  and
that  the  laws  of  nature  must  take  the  same  mathematical  form  for  all
observers. Laws  of  physics  that  exhibit  the  same  mathematical  form  for
observers with different motions at different locations are said to be covariant.
Later in this section we will give speciﬁc examples of covariant physical laws.

2An example of a noninertial frame is a frame that accelerates in a straight line or rotates with re-
spect to an inertial frame.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

4

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

(a)

(b)

Figure  1.1 The  observer  in  the  truck  sees  the  ball  move  in  a  vertical  path  when
thrown upward. (b) The Earth observer views the path of the ball as a parabola.

y

0

S

S′

y′

v
P (event)

vt

x

x ′

x

0′

x ′

Figure 1.2 An event occurs at
a point P. The event is observed
by  two  observers 
inertial
frames  S  and  S⬘,  in  which  S⬘
moves  with  a  velocity  v relative
to S.

in 

In order to show the underlying equivalence of measurements made in dif-
ferent reference frames and hence the equivalence of different frames for do-
ing  physics,  we  need  a  mathematical  formula  that  systematically  relates  mea-
surements made in one reference frame to those in another. Such a relation
is called a transformation, and the one satisfying Newtonian relativity is the so-
called Galilean  transformation, which  owes  its  origin  to  Galileo.  It  can  be
derived as follows.

Consider  two  inertial  systems  or  frames  S  and  S⬘,  as  in  Figure  1.2.  The
frame S⬘ moves with a constant velocity v along the xx⬘ axes, where v is mea-
sured  relative  to  the  frame  S.  Clocks  in  S  and  S⬘ are  synchronized,  and  the
origins of S and S⬘ coincide at t ⫽ t⬘ ⫽ 0. We assume that a point event, a phys-
ical phenomenon such as a lightbulb ﬂash, occurs at the point P. An observer
in the system S would describe the event with space – time coordinates (x, y, z,
t),  whereas  an  observer  in  S⬘ would  use  (x⬘, y⬘, z⬘, t⬘)  to  describe  the  same
event.  As  we  can  see  from  Figure  1.2,  these  coordinates  are  related  by
the equations

x⬘ ⫽ x ⫺ vt

y⬘ ⫽ y

z⬘ ⫽ z

t⬘ ⫽ t

(1.1)

Galilean transformation of
coordinates

These equations constitute what is known as a Galilean transformation of
coordinates. Note  that  the  fourth  coordinate,  time,  is  assumed to  be  the
same in both inertial frames. That is, in classical mechanics, all clocks run at the
same rate regardless of their velocity, so that the time at which an event occurs
for an observer in S is the same as the time for the same event in S⬘. Conse-
quently, the time interval between two successive events should be the same

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

1.2

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

5

 

for both observers. Although this assumption may seem obvious, it turns out
to  be  incorrect when  treating  situations  in  which  v is  comparable  to  the
speed  of  light.  In  fact,  this  point  represents  one  of  the  most  profound
differences  between  Newtonian  concepts  and  the  ideas  contained  in
Einstein’s theory of relativity.

Exercise  1 Show that although observers in S and S⬘ measure different coordinates
for the ends of a stick at rest in S, they agree on the length of the stick. Assume the stick
has end coordinates x ⫽ a and x ⫽ a ⫹ l in S and use the Galilean transformation.

An immediate and important consequence of the invariance of the distance
between  two  points  under  the  Galilean  transformation  is  the  invariance  of

force.  For  example  if 

F ⫽

gives  the  electric  force  between  two

kqQ

(x 2 ⫺ x 1)2

charges q,Q located at  x1 and x 2 on the  x-axis in frame S,  F ⬘, the force mea-
sured in S⬘, is given by 
since x⬘2 ⫺ x⬘1 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x 1. In fact
any force would be invariant under the Galilean transformation as long as it 
involved only the relative positions of interacting particles.

(x ⬘2 ⫺ x ⬘1)2 ⫽ F

F ⬘ ⫽

kqQ

Now suppose two events are separated by a distance dx and a time interval
dt as  measured  by  an  observer  in  S.  It  follows  from  Equation  1.1  that  the
corresponding  displacement  dx⬘ measured  by  an  observer  in  S⬘ is  given  by
dx⬘ ⫽ dx ⫺ v  dt, where  dx is the displacement measured by an observer in S.
Because dt ⫽ dt ⬘, we ﬁnd that

or

dx⬘
dt ⬘

⫽

dx
dt

⫺ v

u ⬘x ⫽ ux ⫺ v

(1.2)

Galilean addition law for
velocities

where ux and u⬘x are  the  instantaneous  velocities  of  the  object  relative  to  S
and S⬘, respectively. This result, which is called the Galilean addition law for
velocities (or  Galilean  velocity  transformation),  is  used  in  everyday  observa-
tions and is consistent with our intuitive notions of time and space.

To obtain the relation between the accelerations measured by observers in
S and S⬘, we take a derivative of Equation 1.2 with respect to time and use the
results that dt ⫽ dt⬘ and v is constant:

du⬘x
dt⬘

⫽ a⬘x ⫽ ax

(1.3)

Thus observers in different inertial frames measure the same acceleration for
an  accelerating  object.  The  mathematical  terminology  is  to  say  that  lengths
(⌬x), time intervals, and accelerations are invariant under a Galilean transfor-
mation. Example 1.1 points up the distinction between invariant and covariant
and shows that transformation equations, in addition to converting mea-
surements made in one inertial frame to those in another, may be used
to show the covariance of physical laws.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

6

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

EXAMPLE 1.1 Fx

⫽ max Is Covariant Under a

Galilean Transformation

Assume  that  Newton’s  law  Fx ⫽ max has  been  shown  to
hold  by  an  observer  in  an  inertial  frame  S.  Show  that
Newton’s law also holds for an observer in S⬘ or is covari-
ant  under  the  Galilean  transformation,  that  is,  has  the
form F ⬘x ⫽ m⬘a⬘x.  Note  that  inertial  mass  is  an  invariant
quantity in Newtonian dynamics.

Solution Starting with the established law Fx ⫽ max, we
use the Galilean transformation a⬘x ⫽ ax and the fact that

m⬘ ⫽ m to obtain Fx ⫽ m⬘a⬘x. If we now assume that Fx de-
pends only on the relative positions of m and the particles
interacting with m, that is, Fx ⫽ f(x 2 ⫺ x 1, x 3 ⫺ x 1, . . .),
then Fx ⫽ F ⬘x,  because  the  ⌬x’s  are  invariant  quantities.
Thus  we  ﬁnd F ⬘x ⫽ m⬘a⬘x and  establish  the  covariance  of
Newton’s second law in this simple case.

Exercise 2 Conservation of Linear Momentum Is Covariant Under the Galilean Transforma-
tion. Assume that two masses m⬘1 and m⬘2 are moving in the positive x direction with ve-
locities v⬘1 and v⬘2 as measured by an observer in S⬘ before a collision. After the colli-
sion, the two masses stick together and move with a velocity v⬘ in S⬘. Show that if an
observer in S⬘ ﬁnds momentum to be conserved, so does an observer in S.

The Speed of Light
It  is  natural  to  ask  whether  the  concept  of  Newtonian  relativity  and  the
Galilean addition law for velocities in mechanics also apply to electricity, mag-
netism, and optics. Recall that Maxwell in the 1860s showed that the speed of
light in free space was given by c ⫽ (␮0␧0)⫺1/2 ⫽ 3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s. Physicists of
the  late  1800s  were  certain  that  light  waves  (like  familiar  sound  and  water
waves)  required  a  deﬁnite  medium  in  which  to  move,  called  the  ether,3 and
that the speed of light was c only with respect to the ether or a frame ﬁxed in
the ether called the ether frame. In any other frame moving at speed v relative
to the ether frame, the Galilean addition law was expected to hold. Thus, the
speed of light in this other frame was expected to be c ⫺ v for light traveling
in  the  same  direction  as  the  frame,  c ⫹ v for  light  traveling  opposite  to  the
frame, and in between these two values for light moving in an arbitrary direc-
tion with respect to the moving frame.

Because the existence of the ether and a preferred ether frame would show
that light was similar to other classical waves (in requiring a medium), consid-
erable  importance  was  attached  to  establishing  the  existence  of  the  special
ether  frame.  Because  the  speed  of  light  is  enormous,  experiments  involving
light traveling in media moving at then attainable laboratory speeds had not
been capable of detecting small changes of the size of c ⫾ v prior to the late
1800s. Scientists of the period, realizing that the Earth moved rapidly around

3It was proposed by Maxwell that light and other electromagnetic waves were waves in a luminifer-
ous  ether,  which  was  present  everywhere,  even  in  empty  space.  In  addition  to  an  overblown
name, the ether had contradictory properties since it had to have great rigidity to support the
high speed of light waves yet had to be tenuous enough to allow planets and other massive ob-
jects to pass freely through it, without resistance, as observed.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.3

THE MICHELSON – MORLEY EXPERIMENT

7

v

v

c

c

c + v

(a) Downwind

c – v

(b) Upwind

v

c

√
c 2 – v 2

(c) Across 

Figure  1.3 If  the  velocity  of
the  ether  wind  relative  to  the
Earth  is  v, and c is  the  velocity
of  light  relative  to  the  ether,
the speed  of  light  relative  to
the Earth  is  (a)  c ⫹ v in  the
downwind  direction,  (b)  c ⫺ v
in  the upwind  direction,  and
(c) (c 2 ⫺ v 2)1/2 in the direction
perpendicular to the wind.

the  Sun  at  30  km/s,  shrewdly  decided  to  use  the  Earth  itself  as  the  moving
frame in an attempt to improve their chances of detecting these small changes
in light velocity.

From our point of view of observers ﬁxed on Earth, we may say that we are
stationary and that the special ether frame moves past us with speed v. Deter-
mining the speed of light under these circumstances is just like determining
the speed of an aircraft in a moving air current or wind, and consequently we
speak  of  an  “ether  wind”  blowing  through  our  apparatus  ﬁxed  to  the  Earth.
If v is  the  velocity  of  the  ether  relative  to  the  Earth,  then  the  speed  of  light
should  have  its  maximum  value,  c ⫹ v,  when  propagating  downwind,  as
shown in  Figure  1.3a.  Likewise,  the  speed  of  light  should  have  its  minimum
value, c ⫺ v, when propagating upwind, as in Figure 1.3b, and an intermediate
value,  (c 2 ⫺ v 2)1/2,  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the  ether  wind,  as  in
Figure 1.3c. If the Sun is assumed to be at rest in the ether, then the velocity of the
ether wind would be equal to the orbital velocity of the Earth around the Sun,
which has a magnitude of about 3 ⫻ 104 m/s compared to c ⫽ 3 ⫻ 108 m/s.
Thus, the change in the speed of light would be about 1 part in 104 for mea-
surements  in  the  upwind  or  downwind  directions,  and  changes  of  this  size
should be detectable. However, as we show in the next section, all attempts to
detect such changes and establish the existence of the ether proved futile!

1.3 THE MICHELSON – MORLEY EXPERIMENT

The famous experiment designed to detect small changes in the speed of light
with  motion  of  an  observer  through  the  ether  was  performed  in  1887  by
American  physicist  Albert  A.  Michelson  (1852– 1931)  and  the  American
chemist Edward W. Morley (1838 – 1923).4 We should state at the outset that
the outcome of the experiment was negative, thus contradicting the ether hy-
pothesis.  The  highly  accurate  experimental  tool  perfected  by  these  pioneers
to  measure  small  changes  in  light  speed  was  the  Michelson  interferometer,
shown in Figure 1.4. One of the arms of the interferometer was aligned along
the direction of the motion of the Earth through the ether. The Earth moving
through the ether would be equivalent to the ether ﬂowing past the Earth in
the opposite direction with speed  v, as shown in Figure 1.4. This ether wind
blowing in the opposite direction should cause the speed of light measured in
the Earth’s frame of reference to be c ⫺ v as it approaches the mirror M2 in
Figure  1.4  and  c ⫹ v after  reﬂection.  The  speed  v is  the  speed  of  the  Earth
through space, and hence the speed of the ether wind, and c is the speed of
light  in  the  ether  frame.  The  two  beams  of  light  reﬂected  from  M1 and  M2
would recombine, and an interference pattern consisting of alternating dark
and bright bands, or fringes, would be formed.

During the experiment, the interference pattern was observed while the in-
terferometer was rotated through an angle of 90°. This rotation would change
the speed of the ether wind along the direction of the arms of the interferom-
eter. The effect of this rotation should have been to cause the fringe pattern to
shift slightly but measurably. Measurements failed to show any change in the

4A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, Am. J. Sci. 134:333, 1887.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

8

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

M1

Arm 2

L

Ether wind

v

Source

M0

Arm 1

M2

L

Telescope 

Figure  1.4 Diagram  of  the
Michelson  interferometer.  Ac-
cording  to  the  ether  wind  con-
cept,  the  speed  of  light  should
be c ⫺ v as 
the  beam  ap-
proaches  mirror  M2 and c ⫹ v
after reﬂection.

interference  pattern!  The  Michelson– Morley  experiment  was  repeated  by
other researchers under various conditions and at different times of the year
when the ether wind was expected to have changed direction and magnitude,
but the results were always the same: No fringe shift of the magnitude required was
ever observed.5

The negative results of the Michelson– Morley experiment not only meant
that the speed of light does not depend on the direction of light propagation
but  also  contradicted  the  ether  hypothesis.  The  negative  results  also  meant
that  it  was  impossible  to  measure  the  absolute  velocity  of  the  Earth  with
respect  to  the  ether  frame.  As  we  shall  see  in  the  next  section,  Einstein’s
postulates compactly explain these and a host of other perplexing questions,
relegating  the  idea  of  the  ether  to  the  ash  heap  of  history.  Light  is  now
understood  to  be  a  phenomenon  that  requires  no  medium  for  its  propagation.
As a result,  the  idea  of  an  ether  in  which  these  waves  could  travel  became
unnecessary.

Details of the Michelson – Morley Experiment
To  understand  the  outcome  of  the  Michelson– Morley  experiment,  let  us  as-
sume  that  the  interferometer  shown  in  Figure  1.4  has  two  arms  of  equal
length L.  First  consider  the  beam  traveling  parallel  to  the  direction  of  the
ether wind, which is taken to be horizontal in Figure 1.4. According to New-
tonian mechanics, as the beam moves to the right, its speed is reduced by the
wind and its speed with respect to the Earth is c ⫺ v. On its return journey, as
the light beam moves to the left downwind, its speed with respect to the Earth
is c ⫹ v.  Thus,  the  time  of  travel  to  the  right  is  L/(c ⫺ v),  and  the  time  of
travel to the left is L/(c ⫹ v). The total time of travel for the round-trip along
the horizontal path is

t1 ⫽

L

c ⫹ v

⫹

L

c ⫺ v

⫽

2Lc
c2 ⫺ v2 ⫽

2L

c 冢1 ⫺

v2

c2 冣⫺1

Now  consider  the  light  beam  traveling  perpendicular  to  the  wind,
as shown in  Figure  1.4.  Because  the  speed  of  the  beam  relative  to  the
Earth is  (c 2 ⫺ v 2)1/2 in  this  case  (see  Fig.  1.3c),  the  time  of  travel  for
each half of this trip is  L/(c 2 ⫺ v 2)1/2, and the total time of travel for the
round-trip is

t2 ⫽

2L

(c2 ⫺ v2)1/2 ⫽

2L

c 冢1 ⫺

v2

c2 冣⫺1/2

Thus,  the  time  difference  between  the  light  beam  traveling  horizontally  and
the beam traveling vertically is

⌬t ⫽ t1 ⫺ t2 ⫽

2L

c 冤冢1 ⫺

v2

c2 冣⫺1

⫺ 冢1 ⫺

v2

c2 冣⫺1/2冥

5From an Earth observer’s point of view, changes in the Earth’s speed and direction in the course
of a year are viewed as ether wind shifts. In fact, even if the speed of the Earth with respect to the
ether were zero at some point in the Earth’s orbit, six months later the speed of the Earth would
be 60 km/s with respect to the ether, and one should ﬁnd a clear fringe shift. None has ever been
observed, however.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.3

THE MICHELSON – MORLEY EXPERIMENT

9

Because v 2/c 2 ⬍⬍ 1, this expression can be simpliﬁed by using the following
binomial expansion after dropping all terms higher than second order:

(1 ⫺ x)n ⬇ 1 ⫺ nx

(for x ⬍⬍ 1)

In our case, x ⫽ v 2/c 2, and we ﬁnd

⌬t ⫽ t1 ⫺ t2 ⬇

Lv2
c3

(1.4)

The two light beams start out in phase and return to form an interference pat-
tern. Let us assume that the interferometer is adjusted for parallel fringes and
that  a  telescope  is  focused  on  one  of  these  fringes.  The  time  difference  be-
tween the two light beams gives rise to a phase difference between the beams,
producing the interference fringe pattern when they combine at the position
of  the  telescope.  A  difference  in  the  pattern  (Fig.  1.6)  should  be  detected
by rotating  the  interferometer  through  90⬚ in  a  horizontal  plane,  such  that
the two  beams  exchange  roles.  This  results  in  a  net  time  difference  of  twice
that  given  by  Equation  1.4.  The  path  difference  corresponding  to  this  time
difference is

⌬d ⫽ c(2⌬t) ⫽

2Lv2
c2

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

The corresponding fringe shift is equal to this path difference divided by the
wavelength of light, ␭, because a change in path of 1 wavelength corresponds
to a shift of 1 fringe.

Shift ⫽

2Lv2
␭c2

(1.5)

In the experiments by Michelson and Morley, each light beam was reﬂected
by  mirrors  many  times  to  give  an  increased  effective  path  length  L of  about
11 m. Using this value, and taking v to be equal to 3 ⫻ 104 m/s, the speed of
the Earth about the Sun, gives a path difference of

⌬d ⫽

2(11 m)(3 ⫻ 104 m/s)2

(3 ⫻ 108 m/s)2

⫽ 2.2 ⫻ 10⫺7 m

Fixed spacing
(one fringe)

Fixed
marker

(a)

(b)

Figure  1.6 Interference  fringe  schematic  showing  (a)  fringes  before  rotation  and
(b) expected fringe shift after a rotation of the interferometer by 90⬚.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

This  extra  distance  of  travel  should  produce  a  noticeable  shift  in  the  fringe
pattern. Speciﬁcally, using light of wavelength 500 nm, we ﬁnd a fringe shift
for rotation through 90⬚ of

Shift ⫽

⌬d
␭

⫽

2.2 ⫻ 10⫺7 m
5.0 ⫻ 10⫺7 m

⬇ 0.40

The precision instrument designed by Michelson and Morley had the capabil-
ity of detecting a shift in the fringe pattern as small as 0.01 fringe. However,
they  detected  no  shift  in  the  fringe  pattern. Since  then,  the  experiment  has  been
repeated  many  times  by  various  scientists  under  various  conditions,  and  no
fringe  shift  has  ever  been  detected.  Thus,  it  was  concluded  that  one  cannot
detect the motion of the Earth with respect to the ether.

Many  efforts  were  made  to  explain  the  null  results  of  the  Michelson–
Morley experiment and to save the ether concept and the Galilean addition law
for  the  velocity  of  light.  Because  all  these  proposals  have  been  shown  to  be
wrong,  we  consider  them  no  further  here  and  turn  instead  to  an  auspicious
proposal made by George F. Fitzgerald and Hendrik A. Lorentz. In the 1890s,
Fitzgerald and Lorentz tried to explain the null results by making the following
ad  hoc  assumption.  They  proposed  that  the  length  of  an  object  moving  at 
√1 ⫺ v2/c2
speed v would contract along the direction of travel by a factor of 
.
The net result of this contraction would be a change in length of one of the
arms of the interferometer such that no path difference would occur as the in-
terferometer was rotated.

Never  in  the  history  of  physics  were  such  valiant  efforts  devoted  to  trying
to explain  the  absence  of  an  expected  result  as  those  directed  at  the
Michelson – Morley  experiment.  The  difﬁculties  raised  by  this  null  result
were tremendous, not only implying that light waves were a new kind of wave
propagating  without  a  medium  but  that  the  Galilean  transformations
were ﬂawed  for  inertial  frames  moving  at  high  relative  speeds.  The  stage
was set for Albert Einstein, who solved these problems in 1905 with his special
theory of relativity.

1.4 POSTULATES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

In the previous section we noted the impossibility of measuring the speed of
the  ether  with  respect  to  the  Earth  and  the  failure  of  the  Galilean  velocity
transformation  in  the  case  of  light.  In  1905,  Albert  Einstein  (Fig.  1.7)  pro-
posed  a  theory  that  boldly  removed  these  difﬁculties  and  at  the  same  time
completely  altered  our  notion  of  space  and  time.6 Einstein  based  his  special
theory of relativity on two postulates.

1. The Principle of Relativity: All the laws of physics have the same form

in all inertial reference frames.

2. The Constancy of the Speed of Light: The speed of light in vacuum has
the same value, c ⫽ 3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s, in all inertial frames, regardless of the
velocity of the observer or the velocity of the source emitting the light.

6A. Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” Ann. Physik 17:891, 1905. For an English
translation  of  this  article  and  other  publications  by  Einstein,  see  the  book  by  H.  Lorentz,
A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativity, Dover, 1958.

Postulates of special relativity

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.4

POSTULATES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

11

special  theory  of  relativity.  In  1915,
Einstein  published  his  work  on  the
general theory of relativity, which re-
lates gravity to the structure of space
and  time.  One  of  the  remarkable
predictions  of  the  theory  is  that
strong  gravitational  forces  in  the
vicinity of very massive objects cause
light beams to deviate from straight-
line  paths.  This  and  other  predic-
tions  of  the  general  theory  of  rel-
ativity  have  been experimentally
veriﬁed  (see  the  essay  on  our  com-
panion Web site by Clifford Will).

the 

the  concept  of 

Einstein  made  many  other  im-
portant  contributions  to  the  devel-
opment  of  modern  physics,  includ-
ing 
light
quantum and the idea of stimulated
emission  of  radiation,  which  led  to
the  invention  of  the  laser  40  years
later.  However,  throughout  his  life,
he  rejected  the  probabilistic  inter-
pretation  of  quantum  mechanics
when  describing  events  on 
the
atomic  scale  in  favor  of  a  determin-
istic  view.  He  is  quoted  as  saying,
“God  does  not  play  dice  with  the
universe.”  This  comment  is  reputed
to  have  been  answered  by  Niels
Bohr,  one  of  the  founders  of  quan-
tum mechanics, with “Don’t tell God
what to do!”

In  1933,  Einstein  left  Germany
(by  then  under  Nazis  control)  and
spent  his  remaining  years  at  the  In-
stitute for Advanced Study in Prince-
ton, New Jersey. He devoted most of
his  later  years  to  an  unsuccessful
search for a uniﬁed theory of gravity
and electromagnetism.

A lbert  Einstein,  one  of  the

greatest physicists of all time,
was  born  in  Ulm,  Germany.
As  a  child,  Einstein  was  very  un-
happy with the discipline of German
schools and completed his early edu-
cation  in  Switzerland  at  age  16.  Be-
cause  he  was  unable  to  obtain  an
academic position following gradua-
tion  from  the  Swiss  Federal  Poly-
technic School in 1901, he accepted
a  job  at  the  Swiss  Patent  Ofﬁce  in
Berne.  During  his  spare  time,  he
continued  his  studies  in  theoretical
physics. In 1905, at the age of 26, he
published four scientiﬁc papers that

B I O G R A P H Y

ALBERT EINSTEIN

(1879 – 1955)

revolutionized physics. One of these
papers,  which  won  him  the  Nobel
prize  in  1921,  dealt  with  the  pho-
toelectric  effect.  Another  was  con-
cerned  with  Brownian  motion,  the
irregular  motion  of  small  particles
suspended  in  a  liquid.  The  remain-
ing two papers were concerned with
what  is  now  considered  his  most
important contribution  of  all,  the

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

12

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

The ﬁrst  postulate  asserts  that  all the  laws  of  physics,  those  dealing  with
electricity and magnetism, optics, thermodynamics, mechanics, and so on, will
have  the  same  mathematical  form  or  be  covariant  in  all  coordinate  frames
moving  with  constant  velocity  relative  to  one  another.  This  postulate  is  a
sweeping generalization of Newton’s principle of relativity, which refers only to
the laws of mechanics. From an experimental point of view, Einstein’s princi-
ple  of  relativity  means  that  no  experiment  of  any  type  can  establish  an
absolute rest frame, and that all inertial reference frames are experimentally
indistinguishable.

Note  that  postulate  2,  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  speed  of
light, is consistent with postulate 1: If the speed of light was not the same in
all inertial frames but was c in only one, it would be possible to distinguish
between inertial frames, and one could identify a preferred, absolute frame
in contradiction to postulate 1. Postulate 2 also does away with the problem
of measuring the speed of the ether by essentially denying the existence of
the ether and boldly asserting that light always moves with speed c with re-
spect to any inertial observer. Postulate 2 was a brilliant theoretical insight
on  Einstein’s  part  in  1905  and  has  since  been  directly  conﬁrmed  experi-
mentally  in  many  ways.  Perhaps  the  most  direct  demonstration  involved
measuring the speed of very high frequency electromagnetic waves (gamma
rays)  emitted  by  unstable  particles  (neutral  pions)  traveling  at  99.975%  of
the speed of light with respect to the laboratory. The measured gamma ray
speed relative to the laboratory agreed in this case to ﬁve signiﬁcant ﬁgures
with the speed of light in empty space.

The  Michelson – Morley  experiment  was  performed  before  Einstein  pub-
lished his work on relativity, and it is not clear that Einstein was aware of the
details of the experiment. Nonetheless, the null result of the experiment can
be readily understood within the framework of Einstein’s theory. According to
his principle of relativity, the premises of the Michelson– Morley experiment
were  incorrect.  In  the  process  of  trying  to  explain  the  expected  results,  we
stated that when light traveled against the ether wind its speed was c ⫺ v, in ac-
cordance with the Galilean addition law for velocities. However, if the state of
motion of the observer or of the source has no inﬂuence on the value found
for the speed of light, one will always measure the value to be c. Likewise, the
light makes the return trip after reﬂection from the mirror at a speed of c, and
not with the speed c ⫹ v. Thus, the motion of the Earth should not inﬂuence
the fringe pattern observed in the Michelson – Morley experiment, and a null
result should be expected.

Perhaps at this point you have rightly concluded that the Galilean velocity
and coordinate transformations are incorrect; that is, the Galilean transforma-
tions do not keep all the laws of physics in the same form for different inertial
frames. The correct coordinate and time transformations that preserve the co-
variant form of all physical laws in two coordinate systems moving uniformly
with respect to each other are called Lorentz transformations. These are derived
in  Section  1.6.  Although  the  Galilean  transformation  preserves  the  form  of
Newton’s  laws  in  two  frames  moving  uniformly  with  respect  to  each  other,
Newton’s laws of mechanics are limited laws that are valid only for low speeds.
In general, Newton’s laws must be replaced by Einstein’s relativistic laws of me-
chanics,  which  hold  for  all  speeds  and  are  invariant,  as  are  all  physical  laws,
under the Lorentz transformations.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

13

1.5 CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

Almost  everyone  who  has  dabbled  even  superﬁcially  with  science  is  aware  of
some of the startling predictions that arise because of Einstein’s approach to
relative motion. As we examine some of the consequences of relativity in this
section,  we  shall  ﬁnd  that  they  conﬂict  with  our  basic  notions  of  space  and
time. We restrict our discussion to the concepts of length, time, and simultane-
ity, which are quite different in relativistic mechanics and Newtonian mechan-
ics. For example, we will ﬁnd that the distance between two points and the time in-
terval between two events depend on the frame of reference in which they are measured.
That is, there is no such thing as absolute length or absolute time in relativity. Further-
more, events  at  different  locations  that  occur  simultaneously  in  one  frame  are  not  si-
multaneous in another frame moving uniformly past the ﬁrst.

Before we discuss the consequences of special relativity, we must ﬁrst under-
stand how an observer in an inertial reference frame describes an event. We
deﬁne  an  event  as  an  occurrence  described  by  three  space  coordinates  and
one  time  coordinate.  In  general,  different  observers  in  different  inertial
frames would describe the same event with different spacetime coordinates.

The reference frame used to describe an event consists of a coordinate grid
and a set of clocks situated at the grid intersections, as shown in Figure 1.8 in
two dimensions. It is necessary that the clocks be synchronized. This can be ac-
complished in many ways with the help of light signals. For example, suppose
an observer at the origin with a master clock sends out a pulse of light at t ⫽ 0.
The light pulse takes a time r/c to reach a second clock, situated a distance r
from the origin. Hence, the second clock will be synchronized with the clock
at  the  origin  if  the  second  clock  reads  a  time  r/c at  the  instant  the  pulse
reaches it. This procedure of synchronization assumes that the speed of light
has the same value in all directions and in all inertial frames. Furthermore, the
procedure concerns an event recorded by an observer in a speciﬁc inertial ref-
erence frame. Clocks in other inertial frames can be synchronized in a similar
manner.  An  observer  in  some  other  inertial  frame  would  assign  different
spacetime coordinates to events, using another coordinate grid with another
array of clocks.

Figure 1.8 In relativity, we use a reference frame consisting of a coordinate grid and
a set of synchronized clocks.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

14

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

Simultaneity and the Relativity of Time
A  basic  premise  of  Newtonian  mechanics  is  that  a  universal  time  scale  exists
that is the same for all observers. In fact, Newton wrote that “Absolute, true,
and mathematical time, of itself, and from its own nature, ﬂows equably with-
out relation to anything external.” Thus, Newton and his followers simply took
simultaneity for granted. In his special theory of relativity, Einstein abandoned
this  assumption.  According  to  Einstein,  a  time  interval  measurement  depends  on
the reference frame in which the measurement is made.

Einstein devised the following thought experiment to illustrate this point. A
boxcar moves with uniform velocity, and two lightning bolts strike the ends of
the boxcar, as in Figure 1.9a, leaving marks on the boxcar and ground. The
marks left on the boxcar are labeled  A⬘ and B⬘; those on the ground are la-
beled A and B. An observer at O⬘ moving with the boxcar is midway between
A⬘ and B⬘, and a ground observer at O is midway between A and B. The events
recorded by the observers are the light signals from the lightning bolts.

The two light signals reach the observer at O at the same time, as indicated
in Figure 1.9b. This observer realizes that the light signals have traveled at the
same speed over equal distances. Thus, observer O concludes that the events
at A and B occurred simultaneously. Now consider the same events as viewed
by  the  observer  on  the  boxcar  at  O⬘.  By  the  time  the  light  has  reached  ob-
server  O, observer  O⬘ has moved as indicated in Figure 1.9b. Thus, the light
signal  from  B⬘ has  already  swept  past  O⬘,  but  the  light  from  A⬘ has  not  yet
reached O⬘. According to Einstein, observer O⬘ must ﬁnd that light travels at the
same speed as that measured by observer O. Therefore, observer O⬘ concludes that
the  lightning  struck  the  front  of  the  boxcar  before  it  struck  the  back.  This
thought experiment clearly demonstrates that the two events, which appear to
O to be simultaneous, do not appear to O⬘ to be simultaneous. In other words,

Two  events  that  are  simultaneous  in  one  frame  are  in  general  not
simultaneous  in  a  second  frame  moving  with  respect  to  the  ﬁrst.  That
is, simultaneity is not an absolute concept, but one that depends on the
state of motion of the observer.

v

A'

A

O'

O

(a)

B'

A'

O'

B

A

O

B

(b)

v

B'

Figure  1.9 Two  lightning  bolts  strike  the  ends  of  a  moving  boxcar.  (a)  The  events
appear  to  be  simultaneous  to  the  stationary  observer  at  O,  who  is  midway  between  A
and B.  (b)  The  events  do  not  appear  to  be  simultaneous  to  the  observer  at  O⬘,  who
claims that the front of the train is struck before the rear.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

15

At this point, you might wonder which observer is right concerning the two
events.  The  answer  is  that  both  are  correct, because  the  principle  of  relativity
states  that  there  is  no  preferred  inertial  frame  of  reference. Although  the  two  ob-
servers  reach  different  conclusions,  both  are  correct  in  their  own  reference
frame because the concept of simultaneity is not absolute. This, in fact, is the
central point of relativity— any uniformly moving frame of reference can be
used to describe events and do physics. However, observers in different inertial
frames will always measure different time intervals with their clocks and differ-
ent distances with their meter sticks. Nevertheless, they will both agree on the
forms of the laws of physics in their respective frames, because these laws must
be  the  same  for  all  observers  in  uniform  motion.  It  is  the  alteration  of  time
and space that allows the laws of physics (including Maxwell’s equations) to be
the same for all observers in uniform motion.

Time Dilation
The fact that observers in different inertial frames always measure different time
intervals between a pair of events can be illustrated in another way by consider-
ing a vehicle moving to the right with a speed v, as in Figure 1.10a. A mirror is
ﬁxed to the ceiling of the vehicle, and observer O⬘, at rest in this system, holds a
laser a distance d below the mirror. At some instant the laser emits a pulse of light
directed  toward  the  mirror  (event  1),  and  at  some  later  time,  after  reﬂecting
from the mirror, the pulse arrives back at the laser (event 2). Observer O⬘ carries
a clock, C⬘, which she uses to measure the time interval ⌬t⬘ between these two
events. Because the light pulse has the speed c, the time it takes to travel from O⬘
to the mirror and back can be found from the deﬁnition of speed:

⌬t ⬘ ⫽

distance traveled

speed of light

⫽

2d
c

(1.6)

This time interval ⌬t ⬘ — measured by O⬘, who, remember, is at rest in the mov-
ing vehicle — requires only a single clock, C⬘, in this reference frame.

v

y ′

Mirror

d

y ′

v

O ′

O ′

O ′

O ′

x ′

O

x

(a)

v∆t

(b)

Figure 1.10 (a) A mirror is ﬁxed to a moving vehicle, and a light pulse leaves O⬘ at
rest  in  the  vehicle.  (b)  Relative  to  a  stationary  observer  on  Earth,  the  mirror  and  O⬘
move with a speed v. Note that the distance the pulse travels measured by the station-
ary observer on Earth is greater than 2d. (c) The right triangle for calculating the rela-
tionship between ⌬t and ⌬t ⬘.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

c ∆t
2

v∆t
2

d

(c)

16

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

Now consider the same set of events as viewed by observer O in a second frame
(Fig. 1.10b). According to this observer, the mirror and laser are moving to the
right with a speed v, and as a result, the sequence of events appears different to
this observer. By the time the light from the laser reaches the mirror, the mirror
has moved to the right a distance v⌬t/2, where ⌬t is the time interval required
for the light pulse to travel from O⬘ to the mirror and back as measured by O. In
other words, O concludes that, because of the motion of the vehicle, if the light is
to hit the mirror, it must leave the laser at an angle with respect to the vertical
direction. Comparing Figures 1.10a and 1.10b, we see that the light must travel
farther in (b) than in (a). (Note that neither observer “knows” that he or she is
moving. Each is at rest in his or her own inertial frame.)

According to the second postulate of special relativity, both observers must
measure c for the speed of light. Because the light travels farther according to
O, it follows that the time interval ⌬t measured by O is longer than the time in-
terval  ⌬t ⬘ measured by  O⬘. To obtain a relationship between  ⌬t and ⌬t ⬘, it is
convenient to use the right triangle shown in Figure 1.10c. The Pythagorean
theorem gives

2 冣2
冢 c⌬t

2 冣2
⫽ 冢 v⌬t

⫹ d 2

Solving for ⌬t gives

⌬t ⫽

2d

√c 2 ⫺ v 2

⫽

2d

c√1 ⫺ v 2/c 2

Because ⌬t⬘ ⫽ 2d/c, we can express Equation 1.7 as

Time dilation

⌬t ⫽

⌬t⬘

√1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

⫽ ␥⌬t⬘

(1.7)

(1.8)

A moving clock runs slower

where ␥ ⫽ (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)⫺1/2. Because ␥ is always greater than unity, this result
says that the time interval ⌬t measured by the observer moving with respect to
the clock is longer than the time interval ⌬t ⬘ measured by the observer at rest
with respect to the clock. This effect is known as time dilation.

The time interval ⌬t ⬘ in Equation 1.8 is called the proper time. In general,
proper  time, denoted ⌬tp, is  deﬁned  as  the  time  interval  between  two
events  as  measured  by  an  observer  who  sees  the  events  occur  at  the
same  point  in  space. In  our  case,  observer  O⬘ measures  the  proper  time.
That is, proper time is always the time measured by an observer moving
along  with  the  clock. As  an  aid  in  solving  problems  it  is  convenient  to
express Equation 1.8 in terms of the proper time interval, ⌬tp, as

⌬t ⫽ ␥⌬tp

(1.9)

Because the time between ticks of a moving clock, ␥(2d/c), is observed to
be longer than the time between ticks of an identical clock at rest, 2d/c, one
commonly says, “A moving clock runs slower than a clock at rest by a factor of ␥.”
This is true for ordinary mechanical clocks as well as for the light clock just
described. In fact, we can generalize these results by stating that all physical
including  chemical  reactions  and  biological  processes,  slow
processes,
down when observed from a reference frame in which they are moving. For

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

17

example, the heartbeat of an astronaut moving through space would keep
time  with  a  clock  inside  the  spaceship,  but  both  the  astronaut’s  clock  and
her heartbeat appear slow to an observer, with another clock, in any other
reference frame. The astronaut would not have any sensation of life slowing
down in her frame.

Time dilation is a very real phenomenon that has been veriﬁed by various
experiments.  For  example,  muons  are  unstable  elementary  particles  that
have a charge equal to that of an electron and a mass 207 times that of the
electron. Muons are naturally produced by the collision of cosmic radiation
with atoms at a height of several thousand meters above the surface of the
Earth. Muons have a lifetime of only 2.2 ␮s when measured in a reference
frame  at  rest  with  respect  to  them.  If  we  take  2.2 ␮s  (proper  time)  as  the
average lifetime of a muon and assume that its speed is close to the speed
of light, we would ﬁnd that these particles could travel a distance of about
650  m  before  they  decayed.  Hence,  they  could  not  reach  the  Earth  from
the upper  atmosphere  where  they  are  produced.  However,  experiments
show that a large number of muons do reach the Earth. The phenomenon
of time dilation explains this effect (see Fig. 1.11a). Relative to an observer
on  Earth,  the  muons  have  a  lifetime  equal  to  ␥␶,  where  ␶ ⫽ 2.2 ␮s  is  the
lifetime  in  a  frame  of  reference  traveling  with  the  muons.  For  example,
for v ⫽ 0.99c, ␥ ⬇ 7.1 and ␥␶ ⬇ 16 ␮s. Hence, the average distance traveled
as  measured  by  an  observer  on  Earth  is  ␥v␶ ⬇ 4700 m,  as  indicated  in
Figure 1.11b.

In 1976, experiments with muons were conducted at the laboratory of the
European Council for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva. Muons were in-
jected  into  a  large  storage  ring,  reaching  speeds  of  about  0.9994c.  Electrons
produced by the decaying muons were detected by counters around the ring,
enabling  scientists  to  measure  the  decay  rate,  and  hence  the  lifetime,  of  the
muons. The lifetime of the moving muons was measured to be about 30 times
as long as that of the stationary muon (see Fig. 1.12), in agreement with the
prediction of relativity to within two parts in a thousand.

It  is  quite  interesting  that  time  dilation  can  be  observed  directly  by  com-
paring  high-precision  atomic  clocks,  one  carried  aboard  a  jet,  the  other

650 m

Muon’s
frame

τ = 2.2 µs

4700 m

Earth’s
frame

τ′ = γ τ ≈ 16 µs

(a)

(b)

Figure 1.11 (a) Muons travel-
ing  with  a  speed  of  0.99c travel
only  about  650 m  as  measured
in the muons’ reference frame,
where  their  lifetime  is  about
2.2 ␮s.  (b)  The  muons  travel
about  4700 m  as  measured  by
an  observer  on  Earth.  Because
of  time  dilation,  the  muons’
lifetime  is  longer  as  measured
by the Earth observer.

1.0

0.5

i

g
n
n
i
a
m
e
r
 
s
n
o
u
m

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

Muon moving

at 0.9994c

Muon
at rest

50

100

150

t(µs)

Figure  1.12 Decay curves for muons traveling at a speed of 0.9994c and for muons
at rest.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

18

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

remaining in a laboratory on Earth. The actual experiment involved the use of
very stable cesium beam atomic clocks.7 Time intervals measured with four such
clocks  in  jet  ﬂight  were  compared  with  time  intervals  measured  by  reference
atomic clocks located at the U.S. Naval Observatory. To compare these results
with the theory, many factors had to be considered, including periods of accel-
eration and deceleration relative to the Earth, variations in direction of travel,
and  the  weaker  gravitational  ﬁeld  experienced  by  the  ﬂying  clocks  compared
with the Earth-based clocks. The results were in good agreement with the pre-
dictions  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  and  can  be  completely  explained  in
terms of the relative motion between the Earth and the jet aircraft.

EXAMPLE 1.2 What Is the Period of the

Pendulum?

The period of a pendulum is measured to be 3.0 s in the
rest  frame  of  the  pendulum.  What  is  the  period  of  the
pendulum  when  measured  by  an  observer  moving  at  a
speed of 0.95c with respect to the pendulum?

Solution In  this  case,  the  proper  time  is  equal  to
3.0 s. From the point of view of the observer, the pen-
dulum  is  moving  at  0.95c past  her.  Hence  the  pendu-
lum is an example of a moving clock. Because a moving

clock runs slower than a stationary clock by ␥, Equation
1.8 gives

T ⫽ ␥T ⬘ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (0.95c)2/c 2

3.0 s

T ⫽ (3.2)(3.0 s) ⫽ 9.6 s

That is, a moving pendulum slows down or takes longer
to complete one period.

Exercise 3 If the speed of the observer is increased by 5.0%, what is the period of the
pendulum when measured by this observer? 
Answer 43 s. Note that the 5.0% increase in speed causes more than a 300% increase
in the dilated time.

Length Contraction
We have seen that measured time intervals are not absolute, that is, the time
interval between two events depends on the frame of reference in which it
is measured. Likewise, the measured distance between two points depends
on the frame of reference. The proper length of an object is deﬁned as
the  length  of  the  object  measured  by  someone  who  is  at  rest  with  re-
spect to the object. You should note that proper length is deﬁned similarly
to proper time, in that proper time is the time between ticks of a clock mea-
sured by an observer who is at rest with respect to the clock. The length of
an object measured by someone in a reference frame that is moving relative
to  the  object  is  always  less  than  the  proper  length.  This  effect  is  known  as
length contraction.

To understand length contraction quantitatively, consider a spaceship trav-
eling with a speed v from one star to another and two observers, one on Earth

7J.  C.  Hafele  and  R.  E.  Keating,  “Around  the  World  Atomic  Clocks:  Relativistic  Time  Gains
Observed,” Science, July 14, 1972, p. 168.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

19

and  the  other  in  the  spaceship.  The  observer  at  rest  on  Earth  (and  also  as-
sumed  to  be  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  two  stars)  measures  the  distance  be-
tween the stars to be Lp, where Lp is the proper length. According to this ob-
server,  the  time  it  takes  the  spaceship  to  complete  the  voyage  is  ⌬t ⫽ Lp/v.
What does an observer in the moving spaceship measure for the distance be-
tween the stars? Because of time dilation, the space traveler measures a smaller
time of travel: ⌬t ⬘ ⫽ ⌬t/␥. The space traveler claims to be at rest and sees the
destination  star  as  moving  toward  the  spaceship  with  speed  v.  Because  the
space  traveler  reaches  the  star  in  the  shorter  time  ⌬t ⬘,  he  or  she  concludes
that the distance,  L, between the stars is shorter than  Lp. This distance mea-
sured by the space traveler is given by

L ⫽ v⌬t⬘ ⫽ v

⌬t
␥

Because Lp ⫽ v⌬t, we see that L ⫽ Lp/␥or

L ⫽ Lp 冢1 ⫺

v 2

c 2 冣1/2

(1.10)

Length contraction

where (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)1/2 is a factor less than 1. This result may be interpreted as
follows:

If an object has a proper length Lp when it is measured by an observer at
rest with respect to the object, when it moves with speed v in a direction
length  L is  measured  to  be  shorter 
parallel  to 

length, 

its 

according to 

L ⫽ Lp 冢1 ⫺

its 
v 2

c 2 冣1/2

.

Note that the length contraction takes place only along the direction of mo-
tion. For example, suppose a stick moves past a stationary Earth observer with
a speed  v, as in Figure 1.13b. The length of the stick as measured by an ob-
server in the frame attached to it is the proper length Lp, as illustrated in Fig-
ure  1.13a.  The  length  of  the  stick,  L,  as  measured  by  the  Earth  observer  is
shorter than Lp by the factor (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)1/2. Note that length contraction is a
symmetric effect: If the stick were at rest on Earth, an observer in a frame mov-
ing past the earth at speed v would also measure its length to be shorter by the
same factor (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)1/2.

As  we  mentioned  earlier,  one  of  the  basic  tenets  of  relativity  is  that  all
inertial frames are equivalent for analyzing an experiment. Let us return to
the example of the decaying muons moving at speeds close to the speed of
light to see an example of this. An observer in the muon’s reference frame
would  measure  the  proper  lifetime,  whereas  an  Earth-based  observer
measures the proper height of the mountain in Figure 1.11. In the muon’s
reference  frame,  there  is  no  time  dilation,  but  the  distance  of  travel  is
observed  to  be  shorter  when  measured  from  this  frame.  Likewise,  in  the
Earth observer’s reference frame, there is time dilation, but the distance of
travel  is  measured  to  be  the  proper  height  of  the  mountain.  Thus,  when
calculations on the muon are performed in both frames, one sees the effect
of “offsetting  penalties,”  and  the  outcome  of  the  experiment  is  the  same!

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

y′

O′

y

O

L p

(a)

L

(b)

x′

x

v

Figure  1.13 A  stick  moves
to the  right  with  a  speed  v.
(a) The  stick  as  viewed  in  a
frame  attached  to  it.  (b)  The
stick as seen by an observer who
sees  it  move  past  her  at  v.  Any
inertial  observer  ﬁnds  that  the
length  of  a  meter  stick  moving
past her with speed v is less than
the  length  of  a  stationary  stick
by a factor of (1 ⫺ v2/c 2)1/2.

20

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

v = 0

v = 0.8c

(a)

(b)

Figure 1.14 Computer-simulated photographs of a box (a) at rest relative to the cam-
era and (b) moving at a speed v ⫽ 0.8c relative to the camera.

Note  that  proper  length  and  proper  time  are  measured  in  different refer-
ence frames.

If an object in the shape of a box passing by could be photographed, its im-
age would show length contraction, but its shape would also be distorted. This
is  illustrated  in  the  computer-simulated  drawings  shown  in Figure  1.14  for  a
box moving past an observer with a speed  v ⫽ 0.8c. When the shutter of the
camera is opened, it records the shape of the object at a given instant of time.
Because  light  from  different  parts  of  the  object  must  arrive  at  the  shutter  at
the same time (when the photograph is taken), light from more distant parts
of the object must start its journey earlier than light from closer parts. Hence,
the photograph records different parts of the object at different times. This re-
sults in a highly distorted image, which shows horizontal length contraction,
vertical curvature, and image rotation.

EXAMPLE 1.3 The Contraction of a Spaceship
A  spaceship  is  measured  to  be  100  m  long  while  it  is  at
rest with respect to an observer. If this spaceship now ﬂies
by the observer with a speed of 0.99c, what length will the
observer ﬁnd for the spaceship?

Solution The proper length of the ship is 100 m. From
Equation 1.10, the length measured as the spaceship ﬂies
by is

L ⫽ Lp√1 ⫺

v2

c2 ⫽ (100 m) √1 ⫺

(0.99c)2

c2

⫽ 14 m

Exercise  4 If  the  ship  moves  past  the  observer  at
0.01000c, what length will the observer measure?
Answer 99.99 m.

EXAMPLE 1.4 How High Is the Spaceship?
An  observer  on  Earth  sees  a  spaceship  at  an  altitude  of
435 m  moving  downward  toward  the  Earth  at  0.970c.
What is the altitude of the spaceship as measured by an
observer in the spaceship?

Solution The  proper  length  here  is  the  Earth– ship
separation as seen by the Earth-based observer, or 435 m.
The  moving  observer  in  the  ship  ﬁnds  this  separation
(the altitude) to be

L ⫽ Lp√1 ⫺

v2

c2 ⫽ (435 m) √1 ⫺

(0.970c)2

c2

⫽ 106 m

EXAMPLE 1.5 The Triangular Spaceship
A spaceship in the form of a triangle ﬂies by an observer
at  0.950c.  When  the  ship  is  measured  by  an  observer  at
rest with respect to the ship (Fig. 1.15a), the distances x
and y are  found  to  be  50.0  m  and  25.0  m,  respectively.
What is the shape of the ship as seen by an observer who
sees the ship in motion along the direction shown in Fig-
ure 1.15b?

Solution The  observer  sees  the  horizontal  length  of
the ship to be contracted to a length of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

y

x
(a)

y

v

L
(b)

Figure  1.15 (Example  1.5)  (a)  When  the  spaceship  is
at rest, its shape is as shown. (b) The spaceship appears
to look like this when it moves to the right with a speed v.
Note that only its x dimension is contracted in this case.

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

21

v 2
c 2

L ⫽ Lp√1 ⫺
⫽ (50.0 m) √1 ⫺

(0.950c)2

c 2

⫽ 15.6 m

The 25-m vertical height is unchanged because it is per-
pendicular  to  the  direction  of  relative  motion  between
the observer and the spaceship. Figure 1.15b represents
the  shape  of  the  spaceship  as  seen  by  the  observer  who
sees the ship in motion.

THE TWINS PARADOX

O P T I O N A L

If we placed a living organism in a box . . . one could arrange that the organism, after an
arbitrary lengthy ﬂight, could be returned to its original spot in a scarcely altered condition,
while  corresponding  organisms  which  had  remained  in  their  original  positions  had  long
since  given  way  to  new  generations.  (Einstein’s  original  statement  of  the  twins
paradox in 1911)
An intriguing consequence of time dilation is the so-called clock or twins para-
dox.  Consider  an  experiment  involving  a  set  of  identical  20-year-old  twins  named
Speedo  and  Goslo.  The  twins  carry  with  them  identical  clocks  that  have  been
synchronized. Speedo, the more adventuresome of the two, sets out on an epic jour-
ney to planet X, 10 lightyears from Earth. (Note that 1 lightyear (ly) is the distance
light travels through free space in 1 year.) Furthermore, his spaceship is capable of a
speed  of  0.500c relative  to  the  inertial  frame  of  his  twin  brother.  After  reaching
planet X, Speedo becomes homesick and impetuously sets out on a return trip to
Earth  at  the  same  high  speed  of  the  outbound  journey.  On  his  return,  Speedo  is
shocked to discover that many things have changed during his absence. To Speedo,
the most signiﬁcant change is that his twin brother Goslo has aged more than he and is
now 60 years of age. Speedo, on the other hand, has aged by only 34.6 years.

At this point, it is fair to raise the following question— Which twin is the traveler
and  which  twin  would  really  be  the  younger  of  the  two?  If  motion  is  relative,  the
twins are in a symmetric situation and either’s point of view is equally valid. From
Speedo’s perspective, it is he who is at rest while Goslo is on a high-speed space jour-
ney. To Speedo, it is Goslo and the Earth that have raced away on a 17.3-year jour-
ney and then headed back for another 17.3 years. This leads to the paradox: Which
twin will have developed the signs of excess aging?

To resolve this apparent paradox, recall that special relativity deals with inertial
frames of reference moving with respect to one another at uniform speed. However,
the  trip  situation  is  not  symmetric.  Speedo,  the  space  traveler,  must  experience
acceleration  during  his  journey.  As  a  result,  his  state  of  motion  is  not  always  uni-
form, and consequently Speedo is not in an inertial frame. He cannot regard him-
self to always be at rest and Goslo to be in uniform motion. Hence Speedo cannot
apply simple time dilation to Goslo’s motion, because to do so would be an incor-
rect application of special relativity. Therefore there is no paradox and Speedo will
really be the younger twin at the end of the trip.

The  conclusion  that  Speedo  is  not  in  a  single inertial  frame  is  inescapable.  We
may  diminish  the  length  of  time  needed  to  accelerate  and  decelerate  Speedo’s
spaceship to an insigniﬁcant interval by using very large and expensive rockets and

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

22

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

claim  that  he  spends  all  but  a  negligible  amount  of  time  coasting  to  planet  X  at
0.500c in  an  inertial  frame.  However,  to  return  to  Earth,  Speedo  must  slow  down,
reverse  his  motion,  and  return  in  a  different  inertial  frame,  one  which  is  moving
uniformly  toward  the  Earth.  At  the  very  best,  Speedo  is  in  two different  inertial
frames. The important point is that even when we idealize Speedo’s trip, it consists
of motion in two different inertial frames and a very real lurch as he hops from the
outbound ship to the returning Earth shuttle. Only Goslo remains in a single iner-
tial  frame,  and  so  only  he  can  correctly  apply  the  simple  time  dilation  formula  of
special  relativity  to  Speedo’s  trip.  Thus,  Goslo  ﬁnds  that  instead  of  aging  40  years
(20  ly/0.500c),  Speedo  actually  ages  only 
(40  yr),  or  34.6  yr.  Clearly,
Speedo spends 17.3 years going to planet X and 17.3 years returning in agreement
with our earlier statement.

(√1 ⫺ v 2/c 2 )

The result that Speedo ages 34.6 yr while Goslo ages 40 yr can be conﬁrmed in a
very direct experimental way from Speedo’s frame if we use the special theory of rel-
ativity but take into account the fact that Speedo’s idealized trip takes place in two differ-
ent  inertial  frames. In  yet  another  ﬂight  of  fancy,  suppose  that  Goslo  celebrates  his
birthday each year in a ﬂashy way, sending a powerful laser pulse to inform his twin
that Goslo is another year older and wiser. Because Speedo is in an inertial frame on
the outbound trip in which the Earth appears to be receding at 0.500c, the ﬂashes
occur at a rate of one every

1

√1 ⫺ (v2/c2)

yr ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ [(0.500c)2/c2]

yr ⫽ 1.15 yr

This occurs because moving clocks run slower. Also, because the Earth is receding,
each successive ﬂash must travel an additional distance of (0.500c)(1.15 yr) between
ﬂashes.  Consequently,  Speedo  observes  ﬂashes  to  arrive  with  a  total  time  between
ﬂashes of 1.15 yr ⫹ (0.500c)(1.15 yr)/c ⫽ 1.73 yr. The total number of ﬂashes seen
by  Speedo  on  his  outbound  voyage  is  therefore  (1  ﬂash/1.73  yr)(17.3  yr) ⫽
10 ﬂashes. This means that Speedo views the Earth clocks to run more slowly than
his own on the outbound trip because he observes 17.3 years to have passed for him
while only 10 years have passed on Earth.

On  the  return  voyage,  because  the  Earth  is  racing  toward  Speedo  with 
speed  0.500c,  successive  ﬂashes  have  less  distance  to  travel,  and  the  total 
time  Speedo  sees  between  the  arrival  of  ﬂashes 
is  drastically  shortened: 
1.15  yr ⫺ (0.500)(1.15  yr) ⫽ 0.577  yr/ﬂash.  Thus,  during  the  return  trip,  Speedo
sees (1 ﬂash/0.577 yr)(17.3 yr) ⫽ 30 ﬂashes in total. In sum, during his 34.6 years of
travel, Speedo receives (10 ⫹ 30) ﬂashes, indicating that his twin has aged 40 years.
Notice that there has been no failure of special relativity for Speedo as long as we
take his two inertial frames into account and assume negligible acceleration and de-
celeration times. On both the outbound and inbound trips Speedo correctly judges
the Earth clocks to run slower than his own, but on the return trip his rapid move-
ment toward the light ﬂashes more than compensates for the slower rate of ﬂashing.

Figure  1.16 “I  love  hearing
that  lonesome  wail  of  the  train
whistle  as  the  frequency  of  the
wave  changes  due  to  the  Dop-
pler effect.”

The Relativistic Doppler Shift
Another  important  consequence  of  time  dilation  is  the  shift  in  frequency
found  for  light  emitted  by  atoms  in  motion  as  opposed  to  light  emitted
by atoms  at  rest.  A  similar  phenomenon,  the  mournful  drop  in  pitch  of  the
sound  of  a  passing  train’s  whistle,  known  as  the  Doppler  effect,  is  quite
familiar  to  most  cowboys  (Fig.  1.16).  The  Doppler  shift  for  sound  is  usually

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.5

CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

23

studied  in  introductory  physics  courses  and  is  especially  interesting  because
motion  of  the  source  with  respect  to  the  medium  of  propagation  can
be clearly  distinguished  from  motion  of  the  observer.  This  means  that  in
the case of sound we can distinguish the “absolute motion” of frames moving
with respect to the air, which is the medium of propagation for sound.

Light  waves  must  be  analyzed  differently  from  sound,  because  light  waves
require no medium of propagation and no method exists of distinguishing the
motion of the light source from the motion of the observer. Thus, we expect
to ﬁnd a different formula for the Doppler shift of light waves, one that is only
sensitive to the relative motion of source and observer and that holds for rela-
tive speeds of source and observer approaching c.

Consider a source of light waves at rest in frame S, emitting waves of frequency
f and wavelength ␭ as measured in S. We wish to ﬁnd the frequency f ⬘ and wave-
length ␭⬘ of the light as measured by an observer ﬁxed in frame S⬘, which is mov-
ing with speed v toward S, as shown in Figure 1.17a and b. In general, we expect
f ⬘ to be greater than f if S⬘ approaches S because more wave crests are crossed
per unit time, and we expect f ⬘ to be less than f if S⬘ recedes from S. In particular,
consider the situation from the point of view of an observer ﬁxed in S ⬘, as shown
in Figure 1.18. This ﬁgure shows two successive wavefronts (color) emitted when
the approaching source is at positions 1 and 2, respectively. If the time between
the emission of these wavefronts as measured in S ⬘ is T⬘, during this time front 1
will move a distance cT⬘ from position 1. During this same time, the light source

S

c

x

c

O

λ

c

x

c

(a)

S ′

v

λ′

c

x′

x′

O′

(b)

Figure  1.17 (a)  A  light  source  ﬁxed  in  S  emits  wave  crests  separated  in  space  by ␭
and moving outward at speed c as seen from S. (b) What wavelength ␭⬘ is measured by
an observer at rest in S⬘? S⬘ is a frame approaching S at speed v such that the x- and
x⬘-axes coincide.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

24

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

S ′

O′

cT ′

vT ′

v

λ′

2

3
O

2
O

1
O

1

Figure 1.18 The view from S⬘. 1, 2, and 3 (in black) show three successive positions
of O separated in time by T ⬘, the period of the light as measured from S⬘.

will advance a distance vT ⬘ to the left of position 1, and the distance between suc-
cessive wavefronts will be measured in S⬘ to be

␭⬘ ⫽ cT ⬘ ⫺ vT ⬘

(1.11)

Because we wish to obtain a formula for f ⬘ (the frequency measured in S⬘) in
terms of  f (the frequency measured in S), we use the expression for ␭⬘ from
Equation 1.11 in f ⬘ ⫽ c/␭⬘ to obtain

f ⬘ ⫽

c

(c ⫺ v)T ⬘

(1.12)

To eliminate T ⬘ in favor of T, note that T is the proper time; that is, T is the
time between two events (the emission of successive wavefronts) that occur at
the same place in S, and consequently,

T ⬘ ⫽

T

√1 ⫺ (v2/c2)

Substituting for T ⬘ in Equation 1.12 and using f ⫽ 1/T gives

or

f ⬘ ⫽

√1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

1 ⫺ (v/c)

f

f ⬘ ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

f

For clarity, this expression is often written

fobs ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

fsource

(1.13)

(1.14)

(1.15)

where fobs is  the  frequency  measured  by  an  observer  approaching  a  light
source, and fsource is the frequency as measured in the source’s rest frame.

Equation  1.15  is  the  relativistic  Doppler  shift  formula,  which,  unlike  the
Doppler formula for sound, depends only on the relative speed v of the source
and observer and holds for relative speeds as large as c. Equation 1.15 agrees

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.6

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

25

with  physical  intuition  in  predicting  fobs to  be  greater  than  fsource for  an  ap-
proaching  emitter  and  receiver.  The  expression  for  the  case  of  a  receding
source is obtained by replacing v with ⫺v in Equation 1.15.

Although  Christian  Johann  Doppler’s  name  is  most  frequently  associated
with  the  effect  in  sound,  he  originally  developed  his  ideas  in  an  effort  to
understand the shift in frequency or wavelength of the light emitted by mov-
ing atoms and astronomical objects. The most spectacular and dramatic use of
the Doppler effect has occurred in just this area in explaining the famous red
shift of absorption lines (wavelengths) observed for most galaxies. (A galaxy is
a cluster of millions of stars.) The term redshift refers to the shift of known ab-
sorption lines toward longer wavelengths, that is, toward the red end of the vis-
ible spectrum. For example, lines normally found in the extreme violet region
for a galaxy at rest with respect to the Earth are shifted about 100 nm toward
the red end of the spectrum for distant galaxies— indicating that these distant
galaxies are rapidly receding from us. The American astronomer Edwin Hubble
used  this  technique  to  conﬁrm  that  most  galaxies  are  moving  away  from  us
and that the Universe is expanding. (For more about the expanding Universe
see Chapter 16, Cosmology, on our Web site.)

EXAMPLE 1.6 Determining the Speed of

Recession of the Galaxy Hydra

The light emitted by a galaxy contains a continuous distrib-
ution  of  wavelengths  because  the  galaxy  is  composed  of
millions  of  stars  and  other  thermal  emitters.  However,
some narrow gaps occur in the continuous spectrum where
the radiation has been strongly absorbed by cooler gases in
the galaxy. In particular, a cloud of ionized calcium atoms
produces very strong absorption at 394 nm for a galaxy at
rest with respect to the Earth. For the galaxy Hydra, which
is 200 million ly away, this absorption is shifted to 475 nm.
How fast is Hydra moving away from the Earth?

Solution For  an  approaching  source  and  observer, 
fobs␭obs ⫽ c ⫽
fobs ⬎ fsource
fsource␭source.  In  the  case  of  Hydra,  ␭obs ⬎ ␭source,  so  Hydra
must be receding and we must use

and ␭obs ⬍ ␭source because

fobs ⫽

√1 ⫺ (v/c)
√1 ⫹ (v/c)

fsource

Substituting fobs ⫽ c/␭obs and fsource ⫽ c/␭source into  this
equation gives

␭obs ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

␭source

Finally, solving for v/c, we ﬁnd

v
c

⫽

or

obs ⫺ ␭2
␭2
␭2
obs ⫹ ␭2

source

source

v
c

⫽

(475 nm)2 ⫺ (394 nm)2
(475 nm)2 ⫹ (394 nm)2 ⫽ 0.185

Therefore,  Hydra  is  receding  from  us  at  v ⫽ 0.185c ⫽
5.54 ⫻ 107 m/s.

1.6 THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

We have seen that the Galilean transformation is not valid when v approaches
the  speed  of  light.  In  this  section,  we  shall  derive  the  correct  coordinate
and velocity transformation equations that apply for all speeds in the range of
0 ⱕ v ⬍ c.  This  transformation,  known  as  the  Lorentz  transformation,  was
laboriously  derived  by  Hendrik  A.  Lorentz  (1853– 1928,  Dutch  physicist)  in
1890 as the transformation that made Maxwell’s equations covariant. However,
its  real  signiﬁcance  in  a  physical  theory  transcending  electromagnetism  was
ﬁrst recognized by Einstein.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

26

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

The  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation  is  a  set  of  formulas  that  relates
the space and time coordinates of two inertial observers moving with a rela-
tive speed  v. We have already seen two consequences of the Lorentz trans-
formation  in  the  time  dilation  and  length  contraction  formulas.  The
Lorentz velocity transformation is the set of formulas that relate the velocity
components ux, uy, uz of an object moving in frame S to the velocity compo-
nents u⬘x, u⬘y, u⬘z of the same object measured in frame S⬘, which is moving
with a speed v relative to S. The Lorentz transformation formulas provide a
formal,  concise,  and  almost  mechanical  method  of  solution  of  relativity
problems.

We  start  our  derivation  of  the  Lorentz  transformation  by  noting  that  a
reasonable guess (based on physical intuition) about the form of the coor-
dinate equations can greatly reduce the algebraic complexity of the deriva-
tion. For simplicity, consider the standard frames, S and S⬘, with S⬘ moving
at  a  speed  v along  the ⫹x direction  (see  Fig.  1.2).  The  origins  of  the  two
frames coincide at t⬘ ⫽ t ⫽ 0. A reasonable guess about the dependence of
x⬘ on x and t is

x⬘ ⫽ G(x ⫺ vt)

(1.16)

where G is  a  dimensionless  factor  that  does  not  depend  on  x or t but  is
some function of v/c such that G is 1 in the limit as v/c approaches 0. The
form of Equation 1.16 is suggested by the form of the Galilean transforma-
tion, x⬘ ⫽ x ⫺ vt,  which  we  know  is  correct  in  the  limit  as  v/c approaches
zero.  The  fact  that  Equation  1.16  is  linear  in  x and t is  also  important
because we require a single event in S (speciﬁed by x1, t1) to correspond to
a  single  event  in  S⬘ (speciﬁed  by  x⬘1, t⬘1).  Assuming  that  Equation  1.16  is
correct,  we  can  write  the  inverse  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation for x in
terms of x⬘ and t⬘ as

x ⫽ G(x⬘ ⫹ vt⬘)

(1.17)

This follows from Einstein’s ﬁrst postulate of relativity, which requires the laws
of physics to have the same form in both S and S⬘ and where the sign of v has
been  changed  to  take  into  account  the  difference  in  direction  of  motion
of the two frames. In fact, we should point out that this important technique
for  obtaining  the  inverse  of  a  Lorentz  transformation  may  be  followed  as  a
general rule:

To obtain the inverse Lorentz transformation of any quantity, simply in-
terchange  primed  and  unprimed  variables  and  reverse  the  sign  of  the
frame velocity. 

Returning  to  our  derivation  of  the  Lorentz  transformations,  our  argu-
ment  will  be  to  take  the  differentials  of  x⬘ and t⬘ and  form  an  expression
that  relates  the  measured  velocity  of  an  object  in  S⬘, u⬘x ⫽ dx⬘/dt⬘,  to  the
measured velocity of that object in S,  ux ⫽ dx/dt. We then determine  G by
requiring that u⬘x must equal c in the case that ux, the velocity of an object
in frame S, is equal to c, in accord with Einstein’s second postulate of rela-
tivity. Once G has been determined, this simple algebraic argument conve-
niently provides both the Lorentz coordinate and velocity transformations.
Following this plan, we ﬁrst ﬁnd

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.6

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

27

t ⬘ ⫽ G 冦t ⫹ (1/G 2 ⫺ 1)

x

v冧

(1.18)

by substituting Equation 1.16 into 1.17 and solving for t⬘. Taking differentials
of Equations 1.16 and 1.18 yields

dx⬘ ⫽ G(dx ⫺ vdt)

dt⬘ ⫽ G 冦dt ⫹ (1/G2 ⫺ 1)

dx

v 冧

Forming u⬘x ⫽ dx⬘/dt⬘ leads, after some simpliﬁcation, to

u⬘x ⫽

dx⬘
dt ⬘

⫽

ux ⫺ v

1 ⫹ (1/G 2 ⫺ 1)(ux/v)

(1.19)

(1.20)

(1.21)

where ux ⫽ dx/dt.

Postulate 2 requires that the velocity of light be c for any observer, so in the
case ux ⫽ c, we must also have  u⬘x ⫽ c. Using this condition in Equation 1.21
gives

c ⫽

c ⫺ v

1 ⫹ (1/G2 ⫺ 1)(c/v)

(1.22)

Equation 1.22 may be solved to give 

G ⬅ ␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (v2/c2)

The  direct  coordinate  transformation  is  thus  x⬘ ⫽ ␥(x ⫺ vt),  and  the  inverse
transformation is x ⫽ ␥(x⬘ ⫹ vt⬘). To get the time transformation (t⬘ as a func-
tion of t and x), substitute G ⫽ ␥into Equation 1.18 to obtain

t⬘ ⫽ ␥冢t ⫺

vx

c 2 冣

In  summary,  the  complete  coordinate  transformations  between  an  event
found to occur at (x, y, z, t) in S and (x⬘, y⬘, z⬘, t⬘) in S⬘ are

(1.23)

(1.24)

(1.25)

(1.26)

x⬘ ⫽ ␥(x ⫺ vt)

y⬘ ⫽ y

z⬘ ⫽ z

t⬘ ⫽ ␥冢t ⫺

vx

c2 冣

␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

where

If we wish to transform coordinates of an event in the S⬘ frame to coordi-
nates in the S frame, we simply replace v by ⫺v and interchange the primed

Lorentz transformation for
S : Sⴕ

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

28

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

and unprimed coordinates in Equations 1.23 through 1.26. The resulting in-
verse transformation is given by

Inverse Lorentz
transformation for Sⴕ : S

where

(1.27)

x ⫽ ␥(x⬘ ⫺ vt⬘)

y ⫽ y⬘

z ⫽ z⬘

t ⫽ ␥冢t⬘ ⫹

vx⬘

c 2 冣

␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ v2/c2

In the Lorentz transformation, note that t depends on both t⬘ and x⬘. Likewise,
t⬘ depends on both t and x. This is unlike the case of the Galilean transforma-
tion, in which t ⫽ t⬘. When v ⬍⬍ c, the Lorentz transformation should reduce
to the Galilean transformation. To check this, note that as v : 0, v/c ⬍ 1 and
v 2/c 2 ⬍⬍ 1,  so  that  Equations  1.23– 1.26  reduce  in  this  limit  to  the  Galilean
coordinate transformation equations, given by

x⬘ ⫽ x ⫺ vt

y⬘ ⫽ y

z⬘ ⫽ z

t⬘ ⫽ t

EXAMPLE 1.7 Time Dilation Is Contained in

the Lorentz Transformation

Show  that  the  phenomenon  of  time  dilation  is  con-
tained  in  the  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation.  A
light  located  at  (x0, y0, z0)  is  turned  abruptly  on  at  t1
and  off  at  t2 in  frame  S.  (a)  For  what  time  interval  is
the  light  measured  to  be  on  in  frame  S⬘?  (See  Figure
1.2 for a picture of the two standard frames.) (b) What
is  the  distance  between  where  the  light  is  turned  on
and off as measured by S⬘?

Solution (a) The two events, the light turning on and
the  light  turning  off,  are  measured  to  occur  in  the  two
frames as follows:

Frame S

Frame S⬘

Event 1 (light on)

Event 2 (light off)

x 0, t1
x⬘1 ⫽ ␥(x 0 ⫺ vt1)
t⬘1 ⫽ ␥ 冢t 1 ⫺
vx0

c 2 冣

x 0, t2
x⬘2 ⫽ ␥(x 0 ⫺ vt2)
t⬘2 ⫽ ␥ 冢t 2 ⫺
vx0

c 2 冣

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Note  that  the  y and z coordinates  are  not  affected  be-
cause the motion of S⬘ is along x. As measured by S⬘, the
light is on for a time interval

t⬘2 ⫺ t ⬘1 ⫽ ␥ 冢t 2 ⫺
⫽ ␥(t 2 ⫺ t1)

vx 0

c 2 冣 ⫺ ␥ 冢t 1 ⫺

vx 0

c 2 冣

Because ␥ ⬎ 1 and (t 2 ⫺ t1) is the proper time, it follows
that  (t⬘2 ⫺ t⬘1) ⬎ (t 2 ⫺ t1),  and  we  have  recovered  our
previous result for time dilation, Equation 1.8.

(b)  Although  event  1  and  event  2  occur  at  the  same
place in S, they are measured to occur at a separation of
x⬘2 ⫺ x⬘1 in S⬘ where

x⬘2 ⫺ x⬘1 ⫽ (␥x 0 ⫺ ␥vt2) ⫺ (␥x 0 ⫺ ␥vt1)

⫽ ␥v(t1 ⫺ t2)

This result is reasonable because it reduces to

v(t 1 ⫺ t 2)

for v/c ⬍⬍ 1

Can you explain why x⬘2 ⫺ x⬘1 is negative?

 

Exercise  5 Use the Lorentz transformation to derive the expression for length con-
traction. Note that the length of a moving object is determined by measuring the posi-
tions of both ends simultaneously.

1.6

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

29

Lorentz Velocity Transformation
The explicit form of the Lorentz velocity transformation follows immediately
upon substitution of G ⬅ ␥ ⫽ 1/

into Equation 1.21:

√1 ⫺ (v2/c2)

u⬘x ⫽

ux ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)

(1.28)

Lorentz velocity
transformation for S : Sⴕ

where u⬘x ⫽ dx⬘/dt⬘ is the instantaneous velocity in the x direction measured in
S⬘ and ux ⫽ dx/dt is the velocity component ux of the object as measured in S.
Similarly, if the object has velocity components along y and z, the components
in S⬘ are

uy⬘ ⫽

dy⬘
dt⬘

⫽

and  uz⬘ ⫽

dy

␥(dt ⫺ vdx/c 2)

⫽

uz

␥[1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)]

uy

␥[1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)]

(1.29)

When ux and v are  both  much  smaller  than  c (the  nonrelativistic  case),
we see  that  the  denominator  of  Equation  1.28  approaches  unity,  and  so 
u⬘x ⬇ ux ⫺ v. This corresponds to the Galilean velocity transformation. In the
other extreme, when ux ⫽ c, Equation 1.28 becomes

u⬘x ⫽

c ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (cv/c 2)

⫽

c[1 ⫺ (v/c)]

1 ⫺ (v/c)

⫽ c

From  this  result,  we  see  that  an  object  moving  with  a  speed  c relative  to  an
observer  in  S  also  has  a  speed  c relative  to  an  observer  in  S⬘ — independent
of the  relative  motion  of  S  and  S⬘.  Note  that  this  conclusion  is  consistent
with Einstein’s  second  postulate,  namely,  that  the  speed  of  light  must  be  c
with respect  to  all  inertial  frames  of  reference.  Furthermore,  the  speed  of
an object  can  never  exceed  c.  That  is,  the  speed  of  light  is  the  “ultimate”
speed. We return to this point later in Chapter 2 when we consider the energy
of a particle.

To  obtain  ux in  terms  of  u⬘x,  replace  v by ⫺v in  Equation  1.28  and  inter-
change ux and u⬘x following  the  rule  stated  earlier  for  obtaining  the  inverse
transformation. This gives

ux ⫽

u⬘x ⫹ v

1 ⫹ (u⬘xv/c2)

(1.30)

Inverse Lorentz velocity
transformation for Sⴕ : S

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

30

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

EXAMPLE 1.8 Relative Velocity of Spaceships
Two spaceships A and B are moving in opposite directions,
as  in  Figure  1.19.  An  observer  on  Earth  measures  the
speed of A to be 0.750c and the speed of B to be 0.850c.
Find the velocity of B with respect to A.

y

O

S

y

S′ (attached to A)
ux′

0.750c

A

B

x

O′

x′

Figure  1.19 (Example  1.8)  Two  spaceships  A  and  B
move in opposite directions. The velocity of B relative to A
is less than c and is obtained by using the relativistic veloc-
ity transformation.

Solution This  problem  can  be  solved  by  taking  the  S⬘
frame to be attached to spacecraft A, so that  v ⫽ 0.750c
relative to an observer on Earth (the S frame). Spacecraft
B can be considered as an object moving to the left with
a  velocity  ux ⫽ ⫺0.850c relative  to  the  Earth  observer.
Hence,  the  velocity  of  B  with  respect  to  A  can  be  ob-
tained using Equation 1.28:

u⬘x ⫽

1 ⫺

ux ⫺ v
uxv
c2
⫽ ⫺0.9771c

⫽

⫺0.850c ⫺ 0.750c

1 ⫺

(⫺0.850c)(0.750c)

c2

The negative sign for u⬘x indicates that spaceship B is mov-
ing in the negative x direction as observed by A. Note that
the  result  is  less  than  c.  That  is,  a  body  with  speed  less
than c in one frame of reference must have a speed less
than c in any other frame. If the incorrect Galilean velocity
transformation were used in this example, we would ﬁnd
that u⬘x ⫽ ux ⫺ v ⫽ ⫺0.850c ⫺ 0.750c ⫽ ⫺1.600c, which is
greater than the universal limiting speed c.

EXAMPLE 1.9 The Speeding Motorcycle
Imagine  a  motorcycle  rider  moving with  a  speed  of
0.800c past a stationary observer, as shown in Figure 1.20.
If  the  rider  tosses  a  ball  in  the  forward  direction  with  a
speed of 0.700c with respect to himself, what is the speed
of the ball as seen by the stationary observer?

Solution In  this  situation,  the  velocity  of  the  motorcy-
cle  with  respect  to  the  stationary  observer  is  v ⫽ 0.800c.
The velocity of the ball in the frame of reference of the
motorcyclist is u⬘x ⫽ 0.700c. Therefore, the velocity, ux, of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

0.800c

0.700c

Figure 1.20 (Example 1.9) A motorcyclist moves past a
stationary  observer  with  a  speed  of  0.800c and  throws  a
ball in the direction of motion with a speed of 0.700c rel-
ative to himself.

the ball relative to the stationary observer is

ux ⫽

u⬘x ⫹ v

1 ⫹ (u⬘xv/c2)

⫽

0.700c ⫹ 0.800c

1 ⫹ [(0.700c)(0.800c)/c2]

⫽ 0.9615c

Exercise 6 Suppose that the motorcyclist moving with a
speed  0.800c turns  on  a  beam  of  light  that  moves  away
from him with a speed of c in the same direction as the
moving  motorcycle.  What  would  the  stationary  observer
measure for the speed of the beam of light?
Answer

c.

EXAMPLE 1.10 Relativistic Leaders of

the Pack!

Imagine  two  motorcycle  gang  leaders  racing  at  relativis-
tic speeds  along  perpendicular  paths  from  the  local
pool hall,  as  shown  in  Figure  1.21.  How  fast  does
pack leader  Beta  recede  over  Alpha’s  right  shoulder  as
seen by Alpha?

Solution Figure  1.21  shows  the  situation  as  seen  by  a
stationary police ofﬁcer located in frame S, who observes
the following:

Pack Leader Alpha

Pack Leader Beta

ux ⫽ 0.75c
ux ⫽ 0

uy ⫽ 0
uy ⫽ ⫺0.90c

 

"The maximum

speed is c !"

0.75c

Pack leader Alpha

Policeperson
at rest in S

1.7

SPACETIME AND CAUSALITY

31

⫽

√1 ⫺ [(0.75c)2/c 2](⫺0.90c)

1 ⫺ [(0)(0.75c)/c 2]

⫽ ⫺0.60c

The  speed  of  recession  of  Beta  away  from  Alpha  as
observed by Alpha is then found to be less than  c as re-
quired by relativity.
u⬘ ⫽ √(u⬘x)2 ⫹ (u⬘y)2 ⫽ √(⫺0.75c)2 ⫹ (⫺0.60c)2 ⫽ 0.96c

Exercise 7 Calculate the classical speed of recession of
Beta from Alpha using the incorrect Galilean transforma-
tion.
Answer 1.2c

Pack leader Beta

0.90c

"The maximum

speed is c !"

Figure 1.21 (Example 1.10) Two motorcycle pack lead-
ers, Alpha and Beta, blaze past a stationary police ofﬁcer.
They  are  leading  their  respective  gangs  from  the  pool
hall along perpendicular roads.

0.750c

S′

Alpha

To get Beta’s speed of recession as seen by Alpha, we take
S⬘ to  move  along  with  Alpha,  as  shown  in  Figure  1.22,
and we calculate u⬘x and u⬘y for Beta using Equations 1.28
and 1.29:

u⬘x ⫽

u⬘y ⫽

ux ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)

⫽

0 ⫺ 0.75c

1 ⫺ [(0)(0.75c)/c 2]

⫽ ⫺0.75c

uy

␥[1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)]

u′ux

Beta

u′uy

Figure  1.22 (Example  1.10)  Pack  leader  Alpha’s  view
of things.

1.7 SPACETIME AND CAUSALITY

The views of space and time which I wish to lay before you have sprung from the soil of experi-
mental physics, and therein lies their strength. They are radical. Henceforth space by itself, and
time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a union of the two will
preserve  an  independent  reality. (Hermann  Minkowski,  1908,  in  an  address  to  the  As-
sembly of German Natural Scientists and Physicians)

We have seen in relativity that space and time coordinates cannot be treated
separately. This is apparent from both the combination of space and time co-
ordinates required in the Lorentz coordinate transformation and in the varia-
tion  of  length  and  time  intervals  with  inertial  frame  as  shown  in  the  time
dilation and length contraction formulas. A convenient way to express the en-
tanglement of space and time is with the concept of four-dimensional spacetime

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

32

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

and spacetime diagrams introduced by the German mathematician Minkowski.8
While classical mechanics uses vectors with three components, relativistic me-
chanics can be elegantly expressed in terms of four vectors, corresponding to
the directions x, y, z, and t. However for simplicity we will conﬁne our discus-
sion to motion in one dimension along the x-axis.

A  Minkowski  or  spacetime  diagram  showing  the  complete  history  or
world  line of a one-dimensional motion in frame S is shown in Figure 1.23.
Note that the quantity ct is plotted on the y-axis and the coordinate x is plot-
ted  on  the  x-axis.  The  scale  of  distance  is  chosen  to  be  the  same  for  both
axes.  That  is,  both  vertical  and  horizontal  axis  ticks  occur  every  meter,  so
that  a  light  signal  starting  out  at  x ⫽ 0, t ⫽ 0  follows  a  45⬚ line.  Point  E
shows  a  point  event  described  in  frame  S  by  the  coordinates  (x, t).  Of
course, other inertial frames (S⬘) may be used to describe the event or plot
the  world  line  and  it  is  quite  interesting  that  these  other  frames  have
nonorthogonal ct⬘ and x⬘ axes, as shown in Figure 1.23. (See Problem 40 for
proof of this statement.) To ﬁnd the space and time coordinates of a given
event  E  in  a  speciﬁc  frame,  we  draw  lines  parallel  to  the  frame  axes  and
measure the intercepts with the speciﬁc frame axes, as shown in the ﬁgure.
Note  too,  that  the  velocity  ux of  a  particle  is  inversely  proportional  to  the
slope of its world line since

ux ⫽ c

⌬x
⌬ct

⫽

c

slope

(1.31)

ct

ct ⬘

World line

Light signal
x ⫽ ct

Event E
E

ct

O

ct ⬘

x ⬘

x

x ⬘

x

Figure  1.23 A  spacetime  diagram  showing  the  position  of  a  particle  in  one  dimen-
sion  at  consecutive  times.  The  path  showing  the  complete  history  of  the  particle  is
called the world line of the particle. An event E has coordinates (x, t) in frame S and
coordinates (x⬘, t ⬘) in S⬘.

8Minkowski was one of Einstein’s teachers, who, commenting on Einstein’s work on relativity, re-
putedly said something like, “I never would have expected that student to come up with anything
so clever.”

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1.7

SPACETIME AND CAUSALITY

33

ct

ct 2

ct 1

ct ⬘

E2

E1

x 1

x 2

x ⫽ ct

x ⬘

x

Figure 1.24 Two events, E1 and E2, with coordinates (x1,t1) and (x2,t 2) in frame S.

We stated earlier in this section that neither lengths nor time intervals by
themselves have any absolute meaning. Can we ﬁnd a quantity that is absolute
or invariant and represents the correct union of length and time? Figure 1.24
shows a spacetime graph with two events, E1 and E2 having coordinates (x1, t1)
and (x2,t 2) in frame S and coordinates (x⬘1,t⬘1) and (x⬘2,t⬘2) in frame S⬘. Let us
deﬁne the quantity (⌬s)2 by

(⌬s)2 ⫽ (c⌬t)2 ⫺ (⌬x)2 ⫽ (c(t 2 ⫺ t1))2 ⫺ (x 2 ⫺ x 1)2

(1.32)

where ⌬s has  the  dimension  of  length  and  is  called  the  spacetime  interval be-
tween two events; it is analogous to distance in classical mechanics. If we now
evaluate the quantity

(⌬s⬘)2 ⫽ (c⌬t⬘)2 ⫺ (⌬x⬘)2 ⫽ (c(t⬘2 ⫺ t⬘1))2 ⫺ (x⬘2 ⫺ x⬘1)2

for the two events E1 and E2 whose coordinates in S and S⬘ are connected by
the  Lorentz  transforms  x⬘1 ⫽ ␥(x1 ⫺ vt1), t⬘1 ⫽ ␥(t1 ⫺ vx1/c2),  and  so  on,  we
ﬁnd after some algebra

(⌬s⬘)2 ⫽ (c⌬t)2 ⫺ (⌬x)2 ⫽ (⌬s)2

(1.33)

This important result says that the  quantity ⌬s, the  spacetime  interval  be-
tween two events, is an invariant and has the same value for all inertial
observers. We  have  found  the  quantity  that  correctly  combines  space  and
time in an invariant way.

Minkowski diagrams can be used to classify the entire universe of spacetime
and  clarify  whether  or  not  one  event  could  be  the  cause  of  another.  Figure
1.25 shows a spacetime diagram for one dimension with axes for two different
inertial  frames  S  and  S⬘,  which  share  a  common  origin  O  at  x ⫽ x⬘ ⫽ 0  and
t ⫽ t⬘ ⫽ 0.  The  lines  x ⫽ ⫾ct are  world  lines  of  light  pulses  passing  through
the  origin  and  traveling  in  the  positive  or  negative  x direction.  The  regions
labeled past and future correspond to negative and positive values of time as

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

The invariant spacetime
interval ⌬s

34

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

ct

ct ⬘

x ⫽ ct

ELSEWHERE

x ⬘

x

FUTURE

x ⫽ ⫺ct

ELSEWHERE

NOW

O

PAST

World line

Figure  1.25 Classiﬁcation  of  one-dimensional  spacetime  into  past,  future,  and  else-
where  regions.  A  particle  with  world  line  passing  through  O  cannot  reach  regions
marked elsewhere.

judged from the present moment (now), which occurs at the origin. Regions
labeled “elsewhere”  cannot  be  reached  by  an  object  whose  world  line  passes
through O since to get to them would require a spacetime slope ⬍1 or speed
greater than c.

The  quantity  (⌬s)2 ⫽ (c⌬t)2 ⫺ (⌬x)2 can  be  used  to  classify  the  interval
between  two  events  and  determine  whether  one  event  could be  caused  by
the  other.  To  see  this,  consider  the  three  pairs  of  events  shown  in  Figure
1.26,  where  for  simplicity  the  events  V,  A,  and  C  have  been  taken  to  coin-
cide  with  the  origin.  For  the  two  events  V,  W,  (⌬s)2 ⬎ 0  since  c⌬t ⬎ 兩 ⌬x 兩.
Event  V  could be the  cause  of  event  W  because  some  signal  or  inﬂuence

ct

x ⫽ ⫺ct

W

c ⌬t

EVENTS
V, A, C

⌬x

O

x ⫽ ct

B

D

x

Figure  1.26 Three  pairs  of  events  in  spacetime:  V,W;  A,B;  C,D.  V  could  cause  W.
A could cause B. C could not cause D.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

35

could cover the distance ⌬x from V to W with a speed less than c and con-
nect the two events. The interval between V and W is called “timelike” for
reasons we won’t go into here, but it is important to note that since (⌬s)2 is
an invariant, if V causes W in frame S, it also causes W in any other inertial
frame.  Thus,  events  linked  causally  in  one  frame  are  linked  causally  in  all
other inertial frames.

For  the  two  events  A,  B,  (⌬s)2 ⫽ 0  because  c⌬t ⫽ 兩 ⌬x 兩.  In  this  case  the
world line of a light pulse connects point events A and B, and the spacetime
interval ⌬s is said to be “lightlike.”

In the ﬁnal case of events C, D, (⌬s)2 ⬍ 0 because c⌬t ⬍ 兩 ⌬x 兩. This means
that  even  a  signal  propagating  at  the  speed  of  light  can’t  cover  the  distance
兩⌬x兩 between the events C and D and so C cannot possibly be the cause of D in
any inertial frame whatsoever.

SUMMARY

The two basic postulates of the special theory of relativity are as follows:

• The laws of physics must be the same for all observers moving at constant

velocity with respect to one another.

• The speed of light must be the same for all inertial observers, indepen-

dent of their relative motion.

To satisfy these postulates, the Galilean transformations must be replaced by
the Lorentz transformations given by

x⬘ ⫽ ␥(x ⫺ vt)

y⬘ ⫽ y

z⬘ ⫽ z

t⬘ ⫽ ␥冢t ⫺

v

c 2 x冣

␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

(1.23)

(1.24)

(1.25)

(1.26)

where

These equations relate an event with coordinates x, y, z, t measured in S to the
same  event  with  coordinates  x⬘, y⬘, z⬘, t⬘ measured  in  S⬘,  where  it  is  assumed
that the primed system moves with a speed v along the xx⬘-axes.

The relativistic form of the velocity transformation is

u⬘x ⫽

ux ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)

(1.28)

where ux is  the  speed  of  an  object  as  measured  in  the  S  frame  and  u⬘x is  its
speed measured in the S⬘ frame.

If the object has velocity components  uy and uz along y and z respectively,

the components in S⬘ are

u⬘y ⫽

uy

␥[1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)]   and  u⬘z ⫽

uz

␥[1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)]

(1.29)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

36

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

Some of the consequences of the special theory of relativity are as follows:
• Clocks in motion relative to an observer appear to be slowed down by a

factor ␥. This is known as time dilation.

• Lengths of objects in motion appear to be contracted in the direction of

motion by a factor of 1/␥. This is known as length contraction.

• Events  that  are  simultaneous  for  one  observer  are  not  simultaneous  for
another  observer  in  motion  relative  to  the  ﬁrst. This  is  known  as  the
relativity of simultaneity.

These three statements can be summarized by saying that duration, length,

and simultaneity are not absolute concepts in relativity.

The relativistic Doppler shift for electromagnetic waves emitted by a mov-

ing source is given by

fobs ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

fsource

(1.15)

where fobs is  the  frequency  measured  by  an  observer  approaching  a  light
source  with  relative  speed  v,  and  fsource is  the  frequency  as  measured  in  the
source’s  rest  frame.  The  expression  for  the  case  of  a  receding  source  is
obtained by replacing v with ⫺v in Equation 1.15.

The quantity ⌬s, the spacetime interval between two events, is an invariant
and  has  the  same  value  for  all  inertial  observers  where  ⌬s is  deﬁned  by 
(⌬s)2 ⫽ (c⌬t)2 ⫺ (⌬x)2.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. E.  F.  Taylor  and  J.  A.  Wheeler,  Spacetime  Physics, San

8. G. Gamow, Mr. Tompkins in Wonderland, New York, Cam-

Francisco, W. H. Freeman, 1963.

2. R.  Resnick,  Introduction  to  Special  Relativity, New  York,

Wiley, 1968.

3. A. P. French, Special Relativity, New York, Norton, 1968.
4. H.  Bondi,  Relativity  and  Common  Sense, Science  Study

Series, Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1964.

bridge University Press, 1939.

9. L. Infeld, Albert Einstein, New York, Scribner’s, 1950.
10. J.  Schwinger,  Einstein’s  Legacy, Scientiﬁc  American

Library, New York, W. H. Freeman, 1985.

11. R.  S.  Shankland,  “The  Michelson – Morley  Experi-

ment,” Sci. Amer., November 1964, p. 107.

5. J. Bronowski, “The Clock Paradox,” Sci. Amer., February,

12. R.  Skinner,  Relativity  for  Scientists  and  Engineers, New

1963, p. 134.

York, Dover Publications, 1982.

6. A. Einstein, Out of My Later Years, New York, World Pub-

13. N. Mermin, Space and Time in Special Relativity, Prospect

lishing, 1971.

7. A. Einstein, Ideas and Opinions, New York, Crown, 1954.

Heights, Illinois, Waveland Press, 1989.

QUESTIONS

1. What  two  measurements  will  two  observers  in  relative

motion always agree on?

2. A spaceship in the shape of a sphere moves past an ob-
server  on  Earth  with  a  speed  of  0.5c.  What  shape  will
the observer see as the spaceship moves past?

3. An astronaut moves away from Earth at a speed close to
the speed of light. If an observer on Earth could make
measurements  of  the  astronaut’s  size  and  pulse  rate,
what changes (if any) would he or she measure? Would
the astronaut measure any changes?

4. Two  identically  constructed  clocks  are  synchronized.
One is put in an eastward orbit around Earth while the
other  remains  on  Earth.  Which  clock  runs  slower?
When  the  moving  clock  returns  to  Earth,  will  the  two
clocks still be synchronized?

5. Two  lasers  situated  on  a  moving  spacecraft  are  trig-
gered  simultaneously.  An  observer  on  the  spacecraft
claims  to  see  the  pulses  of  light  simultaneously.  What
condition  is  necessary  in  order  that  another  observer
agrees that the two pulses are emitted simultaneously?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PROBLEMS

37

6. When we say that a moving clock runs slower than a sta-
tionary  one,  does  this  imply  that  there  is  something
physically unusual about the moving clock?

7. When we speak of time dilation, do we mean that time
passes more slowly in moving systems or that it simply
appears to do so?

8. List some ways our day-to-day lives would change if the

speed of light were only 50 m/s.

9. Give  a  physical  argument  to  show  that  it  is  impossible
to accelerate an object of mass m to the speed of light,
even with a continuous force acting on it.

10. It  is  said  that  Einstein,  in  his  teenage  years,  asked  the
question, “What would I see in a mirror if I carried it in
my  hands  and  ran  at  the  speed  of  light?”  How  would
you answer this question?

11. Suppose  astronauts  were  paid  according  to  the  time
spent  traveling  in  space.  After  a  long  voyage  at  a
speed near that of light, a crew of astronauts returns
and  opens  their  pay  envelopes.  What  will  their  reac-
tion be?

12. What  happens  to  the  density  of  an  object  as  its  speed

increases, as measured by an Earth observer?

PROBLEMS

1.2 The Principle of Newtonian Relativity and
the Galilean Transformation
1. In a lab frame of reference, an observer ﬁnds Newton’s
Show  that

second  law  is  valid  in  the  form 

兺F ⫽ ma.

actual
physical
forces

Newton’s  second  law  is  not  valid  in  a  reference
frame  moving  past  the  laboratory  frame  of  Problem  1
with a constant acceleration a1. Assume that mass is an
invariant quantity and is constant in time.

2. A 2000-kg car moving with a speed of 20 m/s collides
with  and  sticks  to  a  1500-kg  car  at  rest  at  a  stop  sign.
Show that because momentum is conserved in the rest
frame,  momentum  is  also  conserved  in  a  reference
frame moving with a speed of 10 m/s in the direction
of the moving car.

3. A  billiard  ball  of  mass  0.3 kg  moves  with  a  speed  of
5 m/s and collides elastically with a ball of mass 0.2 kg
moving in the opposite direction with a speed of 3 m/s.
Show that because momentum is conserved in the rest
frame, it is also conserved in a frame of reference mov-
ing  with  a  speed  of  2 m/s  in  the  direction  of  the  sec-
ond ball.

1.3 The Michelson – Morley Experiment
4. An  airplane  ﬂying  upwind,  downwind,  and  crosswind
shows  the  main  principle  of  the  Michelson – Morley
experiment. A plane capable of ﬂying at speed c in still
air  is  ﬂying  in  a  wind  of  speed  v.  Suppose  the  plane
ﬂies  upwind  a  distance  L and  then  returns  downwind
to its starting point. (a) Find the time needed to make
the  round-trip  and  compare  it  with  the  time  to  ﬂy
crosswind  a  distance  L and  return.  Before  calculating
these  times,  sketch  the  two  situations.  (b)  Compute
the time  difference  for  the  two  trips  if  L ⫽ 100 mi,
c ⫽ 500 mi/h, and v ⫽ 100 mi/h.

1.5 Consequences of Special Relativity
5. With what speed will a clock have to be moving in order
to run at a rate that is one-half the rate of a clock at rest?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

6. How  fast  must  a  meter  stick  be  moving  if  its  length  is

observed to shrink to 0.5 m?

7. A clock on a moving spacecraft runs 1 s slower per day
relative to an identical clock on Earth. What is the rela-
tive speed of the spacecraft? (Hint: For v/c ⬍⬍ 1, note
that ␥ ⬇ 1 ⫹ v2/2c 2.)

8. A meter stick moving in a direction parallel to its length
appears  to  be  only  75 cm  long  to  an  observer.  What  is
the speed of the meter stick relative to the observer?

9. A spacecraft moves at a speed of 0.900c. If its length is
L as measured by an observer on the spacecraft, what is
the length measured by a ground observer?

10. The average lifetime of a pi meson in its own frame of
reference  is  2.6 ⫻ 10⫺8 s.  If  the  meson  moves  with  a
speed  of  0.95c,  what  is  (a)  its  mean  lifetime  as  mea-
sured by an observer on Earth and (b) the average dis-
tance it travels before decaying, as measured by an ob-
server on Earth?

11. An  atomic  clock  is  placed  in  a  jet  airplane.  The  clock
measures a time interval of 3600 s when the jet moves
with a speed of 400 m/s. How much longer or shorter
a time  interval  does  an  identical  clock  held  by  an
observer on the ground measure? (Hint: For v/c ⬍⬍ 1,
␥ ⬇ 1 ⫹ v2/2c 2.)

12. An  astronaut  at  rest  on  Earth  has  a  heartbeat  rate  of
70 beats/min.  What  will  this  rate  be  when  she  is  trav-
eling in a spaceship at 0.90c as measured (a) by an ob-
server also in the ship and (b) by an observer at rest on
the Earth?

13. The muon is an unstable particle that spontaneously
decays  into  an  electron  and  two  neutrinos.  If  the
number of muons at t ⫽ 0 is N0, the number at time
t is  given  by  N ⫽ N0e⫺t/␶,  where  ␶ is  the  mean  life-
time,  equal  to  2.2 ␮s.  Suppose  the  muons  move  at  a
speed  of  0.95c and  there  are  5.0 ⫻ 104 muons  at 
t ⫽ 0.  (a)  What  is  the  observed  lifetime  of  the
muons? (b) How many muons remain after traveling
a distance of 3.0 km?

14. A rod of length L 0 moves with a speed v along the hor-
izontal  direction.  The  rod  makes  an  angle  of  ␪0 with

38

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

 

respect  to  the  x⬘-axis.  (a)  Show  that  the  length  of
the rod as  measured  by  a  stationary  observer  is  given
by L ⫽ L 0[1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)cos2 ␪0]1/2.  (b)  Show  that  the
angle that the rod makes with the x-axis is given by the
expression  tan ␪ ⫽ ␥ tan ␪0.  These  results  show  that
the rod is both contracted and rotated. (Take the lower
end of the rod to be at the origin of the primed coordi-
nate system.)

15. The classical Doppler shift for light. A light source recedes
from an observer with a speed v that is small compared
with c.  (a)  Show  that  in  this  case,  Equation  1.15  re-
duces to

⌬f
f

⬇ ⫺

v
c

(b) Also show that in this case

⌬␭

␭

⬇

v
c

(Hint: Differentiate ␭f ⫽ c to show that ⌬␭/␭ ⫽ ⫺⌬f/f )
(c) Spectroscopic measurements of an absorption line
normally  found  at  ␭ ⫽ 397 nm  reveal  a  redshift  of
20 nm  for  light  coming  from  a  galaxy  in  Ursa  Major.
What is the recessional speed of this galaxy?

16. Calculate,  for  the  judge,  how  fast  you  were  going  in
miles  per  hour  when  you  ran  the  red  light  because  it
appeared Doppler-shifted green to you. Take red light
to  have  a  wavelength  of  650 nm  and  green  to  have  a
wavelength of 550 nm.

17. (a)  How  fast  and  in  what  direction  must  galaxy  A  be
moving if an absorption line found at 550 nm (green)
for  a  stationary  galaxy  is  shifted  to  450 nm  (blue)  for
A? (b) How fast and in what direction is galaxy B mov-
ing if it shows the same line shifted to 700 nm (red)?

18. Police  radar  detects  the  speed  of  a  car  (Fig.  P1.18)  as
follows: Microwaves of a precisely known frequency are
broadcast  toward  the  car.  The  moving  car  reﬂects  the
microwaves  with  a  Doppler  shift.  The  reﬂected  waves
are received and combined with an attenuated version
of  the  transmitted  wave.  Beats  occur  between  the  two
microwave  signals.  The  beat  frequency  is  measured.
(a) For  an  electromagnetic  wave  reﬂected  back  to  its
source  from  a  mirror  approaching  at  speed  v,  show
that the reﬂected wave has frequency 

f ⫽ fsource

c ⫹ v
c ⫺ v

where fsource is  the  source  frequency.  (b)  When  v is
much  less  than  c,  the  beat  frequency  is  much  smaller
than  the  transmitted  frequency.  In  this  case  use  the
approximation f ⫹ fsource ⬇ 2 fsource and show that the
beat frequency can be written as fbeat ⫽ 2v/␭. (c) What
beat frequency is measured for a car speed of 30.0 m/s

if the microwaves have frequency 10.0 GHz? (d) If the
beat frequency measurement is accurate to ⫾5 Hz, how
accurate is the velocity measurement?

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

1.6 The Lorentz Transformation
19. Two spaceships approach each other, each moving with
the same speed  as  measured  by  an  observer  on  the
Earth. If their relative speed is 0.70c, what is the speed of
each spaceship?

20. An electron moves to the right with a speed of 0.90c rela-
tive to the laboratory frame. A proton moves to the right
with  a  speed  of  0.70c relative  to  the  electron.  Find  the
speed of the proton relative to the laboratory frame.

21. An  observer  on  Earth  observes  two  spacecraft  moving
in the same direction toward the Earth. Spacecraft A ap-
pears to have a speed of 0.50c, and spacecraft B appears
to have a speed of 0.80c. What is the speed of spacecraft
A measured by an observer in spacecraft B?

22. Speed  of  light  in  a  moving  medium. The  motion  of  a
medium  such  as  water  inﬂuences  the  speed  of  light.
This  effect  was  ﬁrst  observed  by  Fizeau  in  1851.  Con-
sider a light beam passing through a horizontal column
of  water  moving  with  a  speed  v.  (a)  Show  that  if  the
beam travels in the same direction as the ﬂow of water,
the speed of light measured in the laboratory frame is
given by

u ⫽

c

n 冢 1 ⫹ nv/c
1 ⫹ v/nc 冣

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

where n is the index of refraction of the water. (Hint:
Use  the  inverse  Lorentz  velocity  transformation  and
note that the speed of light with respect to the moving
frame  is  given  by  c/n.)  (b)  Show  that  for  v ⬍⬍ c,  the
preceding  expression  is  in  good  agreement  with
Fizeau’s experimental result:

u ⬇

c
n

⫹ v ⫺

v
n2

This  proves  that  the  Lorentz  velocity  transformation
and not the Galilean velocity transformation is correct
for light.

23. An  observer  in  frame  S  sees  lightning  simultaneously
strike  two  points  100 m  apart.  The  ﬁrst  strike  occurs

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

25. In 1962, when Scott Carpenter orbited Earth 22 times,
the press stated that for each orbit he aged 2 millionths
of  a  second  less  than  if  he  had  remained  on  Earth.
(a) Assuming  that  he  was  160 km  above  Earth  in  an
eastbound  circular  orbit,  determine  the  time  differ-
ence  between  someone  on  Earth  and  the  orbiting  as-
tronaut for the 22 orbits. (b) Did the press report accu-
rate information? Explain.

26. The proper length of one spaceship is three times that of
another. The two spaceships are traveling in the same di-
rection  and,  while  both  are  passing  overhead,  an  Earth
observer  measures  the  two  spaceships  to  have  the  same
length. If the slower spaceship is moving with a speed of
0.35c, determine the speed of the faster spaceship.

27. The  pion  has  an  average  lifetime  of  26.0 ns  when  at

rest. For it to travel 10.0 m, how fast must it move?

28. If  astronauts  could  travel  at  v ⫽ 0.95c,  we  on  Earth
would say it takes (4.2/0.95) ⫽ 4.4 years to reach Alpha
Centauri,  4.2  lightyears  away.  The  astronauts  disagree.
(a)  How  much  time  passes  on  the  astronauts’  clocks?
(b) What distance to Alpha Centauri do the astronauts
measure?

29. A  spaceship  moves  away  from  Earth  at  a  speed  v and
ﬁres a shuttle craft in the forward direction at a speed
v relative  to  the  ship.  The  pilot  of  the  shuttle  craft
launches a probe at speed v relative to the shuttle craft.
Determine (a) the speed of the shuttle craft relative to
Earth, and (b) the speed of the probe relative to Earth.
30. An observer in a rocket moves toward a mirror at speed
v relative to the reference frame labeled by S in Figure
P1.30. The mirror is stationary with respect to S. A light
pulse  emitted  by  the  rocket  travels  toward  the  mirror
and  is  reﬂected  back  to  the  rocket.  The  front  of  the
rocket is a distance d from the mirror (as measured by
observers in S) at the moment the light pulse leaves the
rocket. What is the total travel time of the pulse as mea-
sured by observers in (a) the S frame and (b) the front
of the rocket?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

39

at x1 ⫽ y1 ⫽ z1 ⫽ t1 ⫽ 0 and the second at x2 ⫽ 100 m,
y2 ⫽ z2 ⫽ t2 ⫽ 0. (a) What are the coordinates of these
two events in a frame S⬘ moving in the standard conﬁg-
uration at 0.70c relative to S? (b) How far apart are the
events in S⬘? (c) Are the events simultaneous in S⬘? If
not, what is the difference in time between the events,
and which event occurs ﬁrst?

24. As  seen  from  Earth,  two  spaceships  A  and  B  are
approaching  along  perpendicular  directions.  If  A  is
observed  by  an  Earth  observer  to  have  velocity
uy ⫽ ⫺0.90c and B to have a velocity ux ⫽ ⫹0.90c, ﬁnd
the speed of ship A as measured by the pilot of B.

Mirror

v = 0.8c

S

0

Figure P1.30

31. A  physics  professor  on  Earth  gives  an  exam  to  her  stu-
dents who are on a spaceship traveling at speed v relative
to Earth. The moment the ship passes the professor, she
signals the start of the exam. If she wishes her students to
have  time  T0 (spaceship  time)  to  complete  the  exam,
show that she should wait a time (Earth time) of

T ⫽ T0√ 1 ⫺ v/c

1 ⫹ v/c

before sending a light signal telling them to stop. (Hint:
Remember that it takes some time for the second light
signal to travel from the professor to the students.)

32. A  yet-to-be-built  spacecraft  starts  from  Earth  moving  at
constant  speed  to  the  yet-to-be-discovered  planet  Retah,
which is 20 lighthours away from Earth. It takes 25 h (ac-
cording  to  an  Earth  observer)  for  a  spacecraft  to  reach
this planet. Assuming that the clocks are synchronized at
the beginning of the journey, compare the time elapsed
in the spacecraft’s frame for this one-way journey with the
time elapsed as measured by an Earth-based clock.

33. Suppose our Sun is about to explode. In an effort to es-
cape,  we  depart  in  a  spaceship  at  v ⫽ 0.80c and  head
toward  the  star  Tau  Ceti,  12  lightyears  away.  When  we
reach the midpoint of our journey from the Earth, we
see our Sun explode and, unfortunately, at the same in-
stant we see Tau Ceti explode as well. (a) In the space-
ship’s frame of reference, should we conclude that the

40

CHAPTER 1

RELATIVITY I

two explosions occurred simultaneously? If not, which
occurred ﬁrst? (b) In a frame of reference in which the
Sun and Tau Ceti are at rest, did they explode simulta-
neously? If not, which exploded ﬁrst?

34. Two  powerless  rockets  are  on  a  collision  course.  The
rockets  are  moving  with  speeds  of  0.800c and  0.600c
and  are  initially  2.52 ⫻ 1012 m  apart  as  measured  by
Liz, an Earth observer, as shown in Figure P1.34. Both
rockets  are  50.0 m  in  length  as  measured  by  Liz.
(a) What are their respective proper lengths? (b) What
is the length of each rocket as measured by an observer
in the other rocket? (c) According to Liz, how long be-
fore  the  rockets  collide?  (d)  According  to  rocket  1,
how long before they collide? (e) According to rocket
2,  how  long  before  they  collide?  (f)  If  both  rocket
crews  are  capable  of  total  evacuation  within  90 min
(their own time), will there be any casualties?

Rocket 1
0.800c

Rocket 2
–0.600c

Liz

2.52 × 1012 m

Figure P1.34

35. The identical twins Speedo and Goslo join a migration
from Earth to Planet X. It is 20.0 ly away in a reference
frame  in  which  both  planets  are  at  rest.  The  twins,  of
the  same  age,  depart  at  the  same  time  on  different
spaceships. Speedo’s ship travels steadily at 0.950c, and
Goslo’s at 0.750c. Calculate the age difference between
the  twins  after  Goslo’s  spaceship  reaches  Planet  X.
Which twin is the older?

36. Suzanne  observes  two  light  pulses  to  be  emitted  from
the  same  location,  but  separated  in  time  by  3.00 ␮s.
Mark  sees  the  emission  of  the  same  two  pulses  sepa-
rated in time by 9.00 ␮s. (a) How fast is Mark moving
relative to Suzanne? (b) According to Mark, what is the
separation in space of the two pulses?

37. An observer in reference frame S sees two events as si-
multaneous. Event A occurs at the point (50.0 m, 0, 0)
at the instant 9:00:00 Universal time, 15 January 2001.
Event B occurs at the point (150 m, 0, 0) at the same
moment. A second observer, moving past with a veloc-
ity of 0.800c ˆi, also observes the two events. In her refer-
ence  frame  S⬘,  which  event  occurred  ﬁrst  and  what
time elapsed between the events?

38. A spacecraft is launched from the surface of the Earth
with a velocity of 0.600c at an angle of 50.0⬚ above the
horizontal, positive x-axis. Another spacecraft is moving
past with a velocity of 0.700c in the negative x direction.
Determine the magnitude and direction of the velocity
of  the  ﬁrst  spacecraft  as  measured  by  the  pilot  of  the
second spacecraft.

39. An  Earth  satellite  used  in  the  Global  Positioning  Sys-
tem moves in a circular orbit with period 11 h 58 min.
(a) Determine the radius of its orbit. (b) Determine its
speed.  (c)  The  satellite  contains  an  oscillator  produc-
ing the principal nonmilitary GPS signal. Its frequency
is 1 575.42 MHz in the reference frame of the satellite.
When it is received on the Earth’s surface, what is the
fractional  change  in  this  frequency  due  to  time  dila-
tion, as described by special relativity? (d) The gravita-
tional  blueshift  of  the  frequency  according  to  general
relativity  is  a  separate  effect.  The  magnitude  of  that
fractional change is given by

⌬f
f

⫽

⌬Ug
mc 2

where ⌬Ug/m is the change in gravitational potential en-
ergy per unit mass between the two points at which the
signal is observed. Calculate this fractional change in fre-
quency. (e) What is the overall fractional change in fre-
quency? Superposed on both of these relativistic effects
is a Doppler shift that is generally much larger. It can be
a redshift or a blueshift, depending on the motion of a
particular satellite relative to a GPS receiver (Fig. P1.39).

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

40. Show that the S⬘ axes, x⬘ and ct⬘, are nonorthogonal in
a spacetime diagram. Assume that the S and S⬘ inertial
frames move as shown in Figure 1.2 and that t ⫽ t⬘ ⫽ 0
when x ⫽ x⬘ ⫽ 0.  (Hint: First  use  the  fact  that  the  ct⬘-
axis is the world line of the origin of S⬘ to show that the
ct⬘-axis is inclined with respect to the ct-axis. Next note
that  the  world  line  of  a  light  pulse  moving  in  the  ⫹x
direction  starting  out  at  x ⫽ 0  and  ct ⫽ 0  is  described
by the equation x ⫽ ⫹ct in S and x⬘ ⫽ ct⬘ in S⬘).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

2
Relativity II

Chapter Outline

2.1 Relativistic Momentum and the

Relativistic Form of Newton’s Laws

2.2 Relativistic Energy
2.3 Mass as a Measure of Energy
2.4 Conservation of Relativistic

Momentum and Energy

2.5 General Relativity
Summary
WEB ESSAY The Renaissance of General
Relativity, by Clifford M. Will

In this chapter we extend the theory of special relativity to classical mechan-
ics, that is, we give relativistically correct expressions for momentum, Newton’s
second law, and the famous equivalence of mass and energy. The ﬁnal section,
on  general  relativity,  deals  with  the  physics  of  accelerating  reference  frames
and Einstein’s theory of gravitation.

2.1 RELATIVISTIC MOMENTUM AND

THE RELATIVISTIC FORM OF
NEWTON’S LAWS

The conservation of linear momentum states that when two bodies collide, the
total momentum remains constant, assuming the bodies are isolated (that is,
they  interact  only  with  each  other).  Suppose  the  collision  is  described  in  a
reference  frame  S  in  which  momentum  is  conserved.  If  the  velocities  of  the
colliding bodies are calculated in a second inertial frame S⬘ using the Lorentz
transformation,  and  the  classical  deﬁnition  of  momentum  p ⫽ mu applied,
one  ﬁnds  that  momentum  is  not conserved  in  the  second  reference  frame.
However,  because  the  laws  of  physics  are  the  same  in  all  inertial  frames,
momentum must be conserved in all frames if it is conserved in any one. This
application of the principle of relativity demands that we modify the classical
deﬁnition of momentum.

To  see  how  the  classical  form  p ⫽ mu fails  and  to  determine  the  correct 
relativistic  deﬁnition  of  p,  consider  the  case  of  an  inelastic  collision 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

41

42

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

1

m

1

m

2

m

(a)

v

v

Before

21

After

V = 0

Momentum is conserved according to S
p before = m v + m(–v) = 0
p after = 0

v′1 = 0

v′2

Before

2

m

(b)

V ′

21

After

Momentum is not conserved according to S′
p′before =

–2m v

1 + v2/c 2

p′after = –2m v

Figure  2.1 (a)  An  inelastic  collision  between  two  equal  clay  lumps  as  seen  by  an
observer in frame S. (b) The same collision viewed from a frame S⬘ that is moving to
the right with speed v with respect to S.

between  two  particles  of  equal  mass.  Figure  2.1a  shows  such  a  collision  for 
two  identical  particles  approaching  each  other  at  speed  v as  observed  in  an 
inertial  reference  frame  S.  Using  the  classical  form  for  momentum,  p ⫽ mu
(we  use  the  symbol  u for  particle  velocity  rather  than  v, which  is  reserved 
for  the  relative  velocity  of  two  reference  frames),  the  observer  in  S  ﬁnds 
momentum  is  conserved  as  shown  in  Figure  2.1a.  Suppose  we  now  view 
things from an inertial frame S⬘ moving to the right with speed  v relative to 
S. In S⬘ the new speeds are v⬘1, v⬘2 and V ⬘ (see Fig. 2.1b). If we use the Lorentz
velocity transformation

u⬘x ⫽

ux ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (uxv/c 2)

to  ﬁnd  v⬘1, v⬘2 and V ⬘,  and  the  classical  form  for  momentum,  p ⫽ mu,  will
momentum be conserved according to the observer in S⬘? To answer this ques-
tion we ﬁrst calculate the velocities of the particles in S⬘ in terms of the given
velocities in S.

v⬘1 ⫽

v⬘2 ⫽

v1 ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (v1v/c 2)

v2 ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (v2v/c2)

⫽

⫽

v ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

⫽ 0

⫺v ⫺ v

1 ⫺ [(⫺v)(v)/c 2]

⫽

⫺2v

1 ⫹ (v 2/c 2)

V ⬘ ⫽

V ⫺ v

1 ⫺ (Vv/c 2)

⫽

0 ⫺ v

1 ⫺ [(0)v/c 2]

⫽ ⫺v

Checking for momentum conservation in S⬘, we have

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

2.1

RELATIVISTIC MOMENTUM AND THE RELATIVISTIC FORM OF NEWTON’S LAWS

43

p ⬘before ⫽ mv⬘1 ⫹ mv⬘2 ⫽ m(0) ⫹ m 冤
p ⬘after ⫽ 2mV ⬘ ⫽ ⫺2mv

⫺2v

1 ⫹ (v 2/c 2)冥 ⫽

⫺2mv

1 ⫹ (v 2/c 2)

Thus, in  the  frame  S⬘, the momentum before the collision is not equal to the
momentum after the collision, and momentum is not conserved.

It can be shown (see Example 2.6) that momentum is conserved in both S

and S⬘, (and indeed in all inertial frames), if we redeﬁne momentum as

p ⬅

mu

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

(2.1)

Deﬁnition of relativistic
momentum

where u is  the  velocity  of  the  particle  and  m  is  the  proper  mass, that  is,  the
mass  measured  by  an  observer  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  mass.1 Note  that
when u is  much  less  than  c,  the  denominator  of  Equation  2.1  approaches
unity  and  p approaches mu.  Therefore,  the  relativistic  equation  for  p
reduces  to  the  classical  expression  when  u is  small  compared  with  c.
Because  it  is  a  simpler  expression,  Equation  2.1  is  often  written  p ⫽ ␥mu,
where 
. Note that this ␥ has the same functional form as
the ␥ in  the  Lorentz  transformation,  but  here  ␥ contains u,  the  particle
speed, while in the Lorentz transformation, ␥ contains v, the relative speed
of the two frames.

␥ ⫽ 1/√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

The relativistic form of Newton’s second law is given by the expression

F ⫽

dp
dt

⫽

d
dt

 (␥mu)

(2.2)

where p is  given  by  Equation  2.1.  This  expression  is  reasonable  because  it
preserves  classical  mechanics  in  the  limit  of  low  velocities  and  requires  the
momentum of an isolated system (F ⴝ 0) to be conserved relativistically
as well as classically. It is left as a problem (Problem 3) to show that the rela-
tivistic acceleration a of a particle decreases under the action of a constant force
applied in the direction of u, as

a ⫽

F
m

 (1 ⫺ u2/c 2)3/2

From  this  formula  we  see  that  as  the  velocity  approaches  c,  the  acceleration
caused by any ﬁnite force approaches zero. Hence, it is impossible to acceler-
ate a particle from rest to a speed equal to or greater than c.

1In this book we shall always take m to be constant with respect to speed, and we call m the speed
invariant mass, or proper mass. Some physicists refer to the mass in Equation 2.1 as the rest mass, 
m 0, and call the term 
the relativistic mass. Using this description, the relativistic
mass  is  imagined  to  increase  with  increasing  speed.  We  exclusively  use  the  invariant  mass  m
because we think it is a clearer concept and that the introduction of relativistic mass leads to no
deeper physical understanding.

m 0/√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

44

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

EXAMPLE 2.1 Momentum of an Electron
An electron, which has a mass of 9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg, moves
with  a  speed  of  0.750c.  Find  its  relativistic  momentum
and  compare  this  with  the  momentum  calculated  from
the classical expression.

Solution Using Equation 2.1 with u ⫽ 0.750c, we have

p ⫽

⫽

mu

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)
(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)(0.750 ⫻ 3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

√1 ⫺ [(0.750c)2/c2]

⫽ 3.10 ⫻ 10⫺22 kg ⭈m/s

The incorrect classical expression would give

momentum ⫽ mu ⫽ 2.05 ⫻ 10⫺22 kg ⭈m/s

Hence, for this case the correct relativistic result is 50%
greater than the classical result!

EXAMPLE 2.2 An Application of the

Relativistic Form of F ⫽ dp/dt:
The Measurement of the
Momentum of a High-Speed
Charged Particle

Suppose  a  particle  of  mass  m and  charge  q is  injected
with  a  relativistic  velocity  u into  a  region  containing  a
magnetic ﬁeld B. The magnetic force F on the particle

is given by F ⫽ q u ⫻ B. If u is perpendicular to B, the
force is radially inward, and the particle moves in a cir-
cle of radius R with 兩u兩 constant. From Equation 2.2 we
have

F ⫽

dp
dt

⫽

d
dt

(␥mu)

Solution Because  the  magnetic  force  is  always  per-
pendicular to the velocity, it does no work on the parti-
cle,  and  hence  the  speed,  u,  and  ␥ are  both  constant
with  time.  Thus,  the  magnitude  of  the  force  on  the
particle is

F ⫽ ␥m 兩 d u

dt

兩

(2.3)

Substituting F ⫽ quB and 兩du/dt 兩 ⫽ u2/R (the usual deﬁ-
nition of centripetal acceleration) into Equation 2.3, we
can solve for p ⫽ ␥mu. We ﬁnd

p ⫽ ␥mu ⫽ qBR

(2.4)

Equation  2.4  shows  that  the  momentum  of  a  relativistic
particle  of  known  charge  q may  be  determined  by  mea-
suring  its  radius  of  curvature  R in  a  known  magnetic
ﬁeld, B.  This  technique  is  routinely  used  to  determine
the momentum of subatomic particles from photographs
of their tracks in space.

2.2 RELATIVISTIC ENERGY

We have seen that the deﬁnition of momentum and the laws of motion required
generalization  to  make  them  compatible  with  the  principle  of  relativity.  This
implies that the relativistic form of the kinetic energy must also be modiﬁed.

To derive the relativistic form of the work – energy theorem, let us start with
the deﬁnition of work done by a force F and make use of the deﬁnition of rela-
tivistic force, Equation 2.2. That is,

W ⫽冕x2

F dx ⫽冕x2

x1

x1

dp
dt

dx

(2.5)

where  we  have  assumed  that  the  force  and  motion  are  along  the  x-axis.
To perform  this  integration  and  ﬁnd  the  work  done  on  a  particle  or  the
relativistic  kinetic  energy  as  a  function  of  the  particle  velocity  u,  we  ﬁrst
evaluate dp/dt:

dp
dt

⫽

d
dt

mu

√1 ⫺ (u 2/c 2)

⫽

m 冢 du
dt 冣

[1 ⫺ (u2/c2)]3/2

(2.6)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Substituting this expression for dp/dt and dx ⫽ u dt into Equation 2.5 gives

2.2

RELATIVISTIC ENERGY

45

W ⫽冕x2

x1

dt 冣u dt

m 冢 du
[1 ⫺ (u2/c2)]3/2 ⫽ m冕u

0

u du

[1 ⫺ (u2/c2)]3/2

where we have assumed that the particle is accelerated from rest to some ﬁnal
velocity u. Evaluating the integral, we ﬁnd that

W ⫽

mc2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

⫺ mc2

(2.7)

Recall that the work – energy theorem states that the work done by all forces
acting  on  a  particle  equals  the  change  in  kinetic  energy  of  the  particle.
Because the initial kinetic energy is zero, we conclude that the work W in Eq.
2.7 is equal to the relativistic kinetic energy K, that is,

K ⫽

mc2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

⫺ mc2

(2.8)

Relativistic kinetic energy

At  low  speeds,  where  u/c ⬍⬍ 1,  Equation  2.8  should  reduce  to  the  classical
expression K ⫽ mu2.  We  can  check  this  by  using  the  binomial  expansion
(1 ⫺ x 2)⫺1/2 ⬇ 1 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈, for x ⬍⬍ 1, where the higher-order powers of x
are ignored in the expansion. In our case, x ⫽ u/c, so that
u2
c2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

c2 冣⫺1/2

⫽ 冢1 ⫺

⬇ 1 ⫹

1
2

u2

1
2

1
2

1

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

Substituting this into Equation 2.8 gives

K ⬇ mc2 冢1 ⫹

1
2

u2

c2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈冣 ⫺ mc2 ⫽

1
2

mu2

which agrees with the classical result. A graph comparing the relativistic and
nonrelativistic  expressions  for  u as  a  function  of  K is  given  in  Figure  2.2.
Note that in the relativistic case, the particle speed never exceeds c, regard-

u

2.0 c

1.5 c

1.0 c

0.5 c

Nonrelativistic

case

u  = √2K/m

Relativistic

case

u  = c √1 – (K/mc 2 + 1)–2

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0 K/mc 2

Figure  2.2 A  graph  comparing  the  relativistic  and  nonrelativistic  expressions  for
speed as a function of kinetic energy. In the relativistic case, u is always less than c.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

46

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

Deﬁnition of total energy

Mass – energy equivalence

less of the kinetic energy, as is routinely conﬁrmed in very high energy par-
ticle accelerator experiments. The two curves are in good agreement when
u ⬍⬍ c.

It is instructive to write the relativistic kinetic energy in the form

where

K ⫽ ␥mc 2 ⫺ mc 2

␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ u2/c2

(2.9)

The constant term mc 2, which is independent of the speed, is called the rest
energy of the particle. The term ␥mc 2, which depends on the particle speed,
is therefore the sum of the kinetic and rest energies. We deﬁne ␥mc 2 to be the
total energy E, that is,

E ⫽ ␥mc 2 ⫽ K ⫹ mc 2

(2.10)

The expression E ⫽ ␥mc 2 is Einstein’s famous mass– energy equivalence
equation, which shows that mass is a measure of the total energy in all
forms. Although  we  have  been  considering  single  particles  for  simplicity,
Equation 2.10 applies to macroscopic objects as well. In this case it has the re-
markable implication that any kind of energy added to a “brick” of matter —
electric, magnetic, elastic, thermal, gravitational, chemical— actually increases
the  mass!  Several  end-of-chapter  questions  and  problems  explore  this  idea
more  fully.  Another  implication  of  Equation  2.10  is  that  a  small  mass  corre-
sponds to an enormous amount of energy because c 2 is a very large number.
This concept has revolutionized the ﬁeld of nuclear physics and is treated in
detail in the next section.

In  many  situations,  the  momentum  or  energy  of  a  particle  is  measured
rather  than  its  speed.  It  is  therefore  useful  to  have  an  expression  relating
the total energy E to the relativistic momentum p. This is accomplished using
E ⫽ ␥mc 2 and p ⫽ ␥mu. By squaring these equations and subtracting, we can
eliminate u (Problem 7). The result, after some algebra, is

Energy – momentum relation

E 2 ⫽ p 2c 2 ⫹ (mc 2)2

(2.11)

When the particle is at rest, p ⫽ 0, and so we see that E ⫽ mc 2. That is, the to-
tal energy equals the rest energy. For the case of particles that have zero mass,
such as photons (massless, chargeless particles of light), we set m ⫽ 0 in Equa-
tion 2.11, and ﬁnd

E ⫽ pc

(2.12)

This equation is an exact expression relating energy and momentum for pho-
tons, which always travel at the speed of light.

Finally, note that because the mass m of a particle is independent of its mo-
tion, m must have the same value in all reference frames. On the other hand,
the total energy and momentum of a particle depend on the reference frame
in which they are measured, because they both depend on velocity. Because m
is  a  constant,  then  according  to  Equation  2.11  the  quantity  E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2 must

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

2.2

RELATIVISTIC ENERGY

47

have  the  same  value  in  all  reference  frames.  That  is,  E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2 is invariant
under a Lorentz transformation.

When dealing with electrons or other subatomic particles, it is convenient
to express their energy in electron volts (eV), since the particles are usually
given this energy by acceleration through a potential difference. The conver-
sion factor is

1 eV ⫽ 1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

For example, the mass of an electron is 9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg. Hence, the rest en-
ergy of the electron is

mec 2 ⫽ (9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)2 ⫽ 8.20 ⫻ 10⫺14 J

Converting this to electron volts, we have

mec 2 ⫽ (8.20 ⫻ 10⫺14 J)(1 eV/1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 J) ⫽ 0.511 MeV

where 1 MeV ⫽ 106 eV. Finally, note that because mec 2 ⫽ 0.511 MeV, the mass
of  the  electron  may  be  written  me ⫽ 0.511 MeV/c 2,  accounting  for  the  prac-
tice of measuring particle masses in units of MeV/c 2.

EXAMPLE 2.3 The Energy of a Speedy Electron
An electron has a speed u ⫽ 0.850c. Find its total energy
and kinetic energy in electron volts.

Solution Using the fact that the rest energy of the elec-
tron is 0.511 MeV together with E ⫽ ␥mc 2 gives

E ⫽

m ec 2

√1 ⫺ (u 2/c 2)

⫽

0.511 MeV

√1 ⫺ [(0.85c)2/c 2]

⫽ 1.90(0.511 MeV) ⫽ 0.970 MeV

The  kinetic  energy  is  obtained  by  subtracting  the  rest
energy from the total energy:
K ⫽ E ⫺ mec 2 ⫽ 0.970 MeV ⫺ 0.511 MeV ⫽ 0.459 MeV

EXAMPLE 2.4 The Energy of a Speedy Proton
The  total  energy  of  a  proton  is  three  times  its  rest 
energy.

(a) Find the proton’s rest energy in electron volts.

Solution

rest energy ⫽ mpc 2

⫽ (1.67 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)2
⫽ (1.50 ⫻ 10⫺10 J)(1 eV/1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 J)
⫽ 938 MeV

(b) With what speed is the proton moving?

E ⫽ 3m pc2 ⫽

m pc2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

3 ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

Solving for u gives
u2

冢1 ⫺

c2 冣 ⫽

u ⫽

1

9     or    u2
c2 ⫽
√8
3

c ⫽ 2.83 ⫻ 108 m/s

8
9

(c)  Determine  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  proton  in

electron volts.

Solution

K ⫽ E ⫺ mpc 2 ⫽ 3mpc 2 ⫺ mpc 2 ⫽ 2mpc 2

Because mpc 2 ⫽ 938 MeV, K ⫽ 1876 MeV.
(d) What is the proton’s momentum?

Solution We  can  use  Equation  2.11  to  calculate  the
momentum with E ⫽ 3mpc 2:

E 2 ⫽ p2c2 ⫹ (m pc2)2 ⫽ (3m pc2)2
p2c2 ⫽ 9(m pc2)2 ⫺ (m pc2)2 ⫽ 8(m pc2)2

p ⫽ √8

m pc2

c

⫽ √8

(938 MeV)

c

⫽ 2650

MeV

c

Solution Because the total energy  E is three times the
rest energy, E ⫽ ␥mc 2 gives

Note  that  the  unit  of  momentum  is  left  as  MeV/c for
convenience.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

48

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

2.3 MASS AS A MEASURE OF ENERGY
The equation E ⫽ ␥mc 2 as applied to a particle suggests that even when a parti-
cle is at rest (␥ ⫽ 1) it still possesses enormous energy through its mass. The
clearest  experimental  proof  of  the  equivalence  of  mass  and  energy  occurs  in
nuclear and elementary particle interactions in which both the conversion of
mass into energy and the conversion of energy into mass take place. Because of
this  convertibility  from  the  currency  of  mass  into  the  currency  of  energy,  we
can no longer accept the separate classical laws of the conservation of mass and
the conservation of energy; we must instead speak of a single uniﬁed law, the
conservation of mass– energy. Simply put, this law requires that the sum of
the mass – energy of a system of particles before interaction must equal
the  sum  of  the  mass – energy  of  the  system  after  interaction  where  the
mass – energy of the ith particle is deﬁned as the total relativistic energy

Conservation of mass – energy

Ei ⫽

mic 2
√1 ⫺ (u2

i /c 2)

To understand the conservation of mass – energy and to see how the relativistic
laws possess more symmetry and wider scope than the classical laws of momen-
tum  and  energy  conservation,  we  consider  the  simple  inelastic  collision
treated earlier.

As one can see in Figure 2.1a, classically momentum is conserved but kinetic
energy is not because the total kinetic energy before collision equals mu2 and
the total kinetic energy after is zero (we have replaced the v shown in Figure
2.1 with u). Now consider the same two colliding clay lumps using the relativis-
tic mass – energy conservation law. If the mass of each lump is m, and the mass
of the composite object is M, we must have

Ebefore ⫽ Eafter

mc 2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

⫹

mc2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

⫽ Mc2

or

M ⫽

2m

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

(2.13)

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2) ⬍ 1

Because 
,  the  composite  mass  M is  greater  than  the  sum
of the  two  individual  masses!  What’s  more,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  mass
increase  of  the  composite  lump,  ⌬M ⫽ M ⫺ 2m,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
incident kinetic energies of the colliding lumps (2K) divided by c 2:

⌬M ⫽

2K
c 2 ⫽

2

c2 冢

mc 2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c2)

⫺ mc 2冣

(2.14)

Thus, we have an example of the conversion of kinetic energy to mass, and the
satisfying  result  that  in  relativistic  mechanics,  kinetic  energy  is  not  lost  in  an
inelastic collision but shows up as an increase in the mass of the ﬁnal composite
object. In fact, the deeper symmetry of relativity theory shows that both relativis-
tic mass– energy and momentum are always conserved in a collision, whereas classical
methods show that momentum is conserved but kinetic energy is not unless the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

collision  is  perfectly  elastic.  Indeed,  as  we  show  in  Example  2.6,  relativistic
momentum and energy are inextricably linked because momentum conserva-
tion only holds in all inertial frames if mass–energy conservation also holds.

2.3

MASS AS A MEASURE OF ENERGY

49

EXAMPLE 2.5
(a) Calculate the mass increase for a completely inelastic
head-on collision of two 5.0-kg balls each moving toward
the  other  at  1000 mi/h  (the  speed  of  a  fast  jet  plane).
(b)  Explain  why  measurements  on  macroscopic  objects
reinforce  the  relativistically  incorrect beliefs  that  mass  is
conserved (M ⫽ 2m) and that kinetic energy is lost in an
inelastic collision.

Solution (a) u ⫽ 1000 mi/h ⫽ 450 m/s, so

4.5 ⫻ 102 m/s
3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s
Because u2/c 2 ⬍⬍ 1, substituting

u
c

⫽

⫽ 1.5 ⫻ 10⫺6

1

√1 ⫺ (u 2/c 2)

⬇ 1 ⫹

1
2

u2
c 2

in Equation 2.14 gives

⌬M ⫽ 2m 冢

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

1

⫺ 1冣
c 2 ⫺ 1冣 ⬇

u2

⬇ 2m 冢1 ⫹
⫽ (5.0 kg)(1.5 ⫻ 10⫺6)2 ⫽ 1.1 ⫻ 10⫺11 kg

mu2
c 2

1
2

(b) Because the mass increase of 1.1 ⫻ 10⫺11 kg is an un-
measurably minute fraction of 2m (10 kg), it is quite nat-
ural  to  believe  that  the  mass  remains  constant  when
macroscopic  objects  suffer  an  inelastic  collision.  On  the
other hand, the change in kinetic energy from mu2 to 0
is so large (106 J) that it is readily measured to be lost in
an inelastic collision of macroscopic objects.
Exercise  1 Prove  that ⌬M ⫽ 2⌬K/c 2 for  a  completely
inelastic collision, as stated.

EXAMPLE 2.6
Show that use of the relativistic deﬁnition of momentum

p ⫽

mu

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

leads  to  momentum  conservation  in  both  S  and  S⬘ for
the inelastic collision shown in Figure 2.1.

Solution In frame S:

p before ⫽ ␥mv ⫹ ␥m(⫺v) ⫽ 0
p after ⫽ ␥MV ⫽ (␥M )(0) ⫽ 0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Hence, momentum is conserved in S. Note that we have
used M as the mass of the two combined masses after the
collision  and  allowed  for  the  possibility  in  relativity  that
M is not necessarily equal to 2m.

In frame S⬘:

p⬘before ⫽ ␥mv⬘1 ⫹ ␥mv⬘2 ⫽

(m)(0)

√1 ⫺ (0)2/c 2

⫹

m

{√1 ⫺ [⫺2v/1 ⫹ (v2/c 2)]2}(1/c 2)

⫻ 冢 ⫺2v

1 ⫹ v2/c2 冣

After some algebra, we ﬁnd

m

{√1 ⫺ [2v/1 ⫹ (v2/c 2)]2}(1/c 2)

⫽

m(1 ⫹ v2/c 2)
(1 ⫺ v2/c 2)

and we obtain

p⬘before ⫽

m(1 ⫹ v2/c2)

(1 ⫺ v2/c 2) 冢 ⫺2v

1 ⫹ v2/c 2 冣 ⫽

⫺2mv

(1 ⫺ v2/c 2)

p⬘after ⫽ ␥MV ⬘ ⫽

M(⫺v)

√1 ⫺ [(⫺v)2/c 2]

⫽

⫺Mv

√1 ⫺ v2/c 2

To show that momentum is conserved in S⬘, we use the fact
that M is not simply equal to 2m in relativity. As shown, the
combined mass, M, formed from the collision of two parti-
cles, each of mass m moving toward each other with speed
v,  is  greater  than  2m.  This  occurs  because  of  the  equiva-
lence of mass and energy, that is, the kinetic energy of the
incident  particles  shows  up  in  relativity  theory  as  a  tiny
increase in mass, which can actually be measured as ther-
mal energy. Thus, from Equation 2.13, which results from
imposing the conservation of mass–energy, we have

M ⫽

2m

√1 ⫺ (v2/c 2)

Substituting this result for M into p⬘after, we obtain

p⬘after ⫽

2m

⫺v

√1 ⫺ (v2/c 2)

√1 ⫺ (v2/c 2)

⫽

⫺2mv

1 ⫺ (v 2/c 2)

⫽ p⬘before

Hence,  momentum  is  conserved  in  both  S  and  S⬘,
provided that we use the correct relativistic deﬁnition of
momentum, p ⫽ ␥mu,  and  assume  the  conservation  of
mass – energy.

50

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

Fission

The absence of observable mass changes in inelastic collisions of macro-
scopic objects impels us to look for other areas to test this law, where par-
ticle  velocities  are  higher,  masses  are  more  precisely  known,  and  forces
are stronger than electrical or mechanical forces. This leads us to consider
nuclear  reactions,  because  nuclear  masses  can  be  measured  very  precisely
with a mass spectrometer, nuclear forces are much stronger than electrical
forces,  and  decay  products  are  often  produced  with  extremely  high
velocities.

Perhaps  the  most  direct  conﬁrmation  of  the  conservation  of  mass –
energy occurs in the decay of a heavy radioactive nucleus at rest into several
lighter  particles  emitted  with  large  kinetic  energies.  For  such  a  nucleus
of mass  M undergoing ﬁssion into  particles  with  masses  M1, M2,  and  M3
and having  speeds  u1, u 2,  and  u3,  conservation  of  total  relativistic  energy
requires

Mc 2 ⫽

M1c 2
√1 ⫺ (u2

1/c 2)

⫹

M2c 2
√1 ⫺ (u2

2/c 2)

⫹

M3c 2
√1 ⫺ (u2

3/c 2)

(2.15)

Because the square roots are all less than 1, M ⬎ M1 ⫹ M 2 ⫹ M3 and the loss
of mass, M ⫺ (M1 ⫹ M 2 ⫹ M3), appears as energy of motion of the products.
This disintegration energy released per ﬁssion is often denoted by the sym-
bol Q and can be written for our case as

Q ⫽ [M ⫺ (M1 ⫹ M2 ⫹ M3)]c 2 ⫽ ⌬mc 2

(2.16)

37Rb, 143

92U nucleus decays at rest into  90

EXAMPLE 2.7 A Fission Reaction
An excited  236
55Cs,
and several neutrons,  1
0n. (a) By conserving charge and
the  total  number  of  protons  and  neutrons,  write  a  bal-
anced  reaction  equation  and  determine  the  number  of
neutrons  produced.  (b)  Calculate  by  how  much  the
combined “offspring”  mass  is  less  than  the  “parent”
mass.  (c)  Calculate  the  energy  released  per  ﬁssion.
(d) Calculate the energy released in kilowatt hours when
1 kg of uranium undergoes ﬁssion in a power plant that
is 40% efﬁcient.

Solution (a)  In  general,  an  element  is  represented  by
the symbol A
ZX, where X is the symbol for the element, A
is  the  number  of  neutrons  plus  protons  in  the  nucleus
(mass  number),  and  Z is  the  number  of  protons  in  the
nucleus (atomic number). Conserving charge and num-
ber of nucleons gives

37Rb ⫹ 143

236U 9: 90
92

55Cs ⫹ 31
0n
So three neutrons are produced per ﬁssion.
(b)  The  masses  of  the  decay  particles  are  given  in 
Appendix  B  in  terms  of  atomic  mass  units,  u,  where 
1 u ⫽ 1.660 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg ⫽ 931.5 MeV/c 2.

⌬m ⫽ MU ⫺ (MRb ⫹ M Cs ⫹ 3m n) ⫽ 236.045563 u

⫺(89.914811 u ⫹ 142.927220 u
⫹ (3)(1.008665) u)

⫽ 0.177537 u ⫽ 2.9471 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg

Therefore, the reaction products have a combined mass
that is about 3.0 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg less than the initial uranium
mass.
(c)  The  energy  given  off  per  ﬁssion  event  is  just  ⌬mc 2.
This  is  most  easily  calculated  if  ⌬m is ﬁrst  converted  to
mass units of MeV/c 2. Because 1 u ⫽ 931.5 MeV/c 2,

⌬m ⫽ (0.177537 u)(931.5 MeV/c 2)

⫽ 165.4 MeV/c 2

Q ⫽ ⌬mc 2 ⫽ 165.4

⫽ 165.4 MeV

MeV
c2

c 2 ⫽ 165.4 MeV

(d) To ﬁnd the energy released by the ﬁssion of 1 kg of
uranium  we  need  to  calculate  the  number  of  nuclei,  N,
contained in 1 kg of 236U.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

(6.02 ⫻ 1023 nuclei/mol)

N ⫽

(236 g/mol)
⫽ 2.55 ⫻ 1024 nuclei

 (1000 g)

The total energy produced, E, is

E ⫽ (efﬁciency)NQ

⫽ (0.40)(2.55 ⫻ 1024 nuclei)(165 MeV/nucleus)

2.3

MASS AS A MEASURE OF ENERGY

51

⫽ 1.68 ⫻ 1026 MeV
⫽ (1.68 ⫻ 1026 MeV)(4.45 ⫻ 10⫺20 kWh/MeV)
⫽ 7.48 ⫻ 106 kWh

Exercise 2 How long will this amount of energy keep a
100-W lightbulb burning?
Answer ⬇ 8500 years.

We  have  considered  the  simplest  case  showing  the  conversion  of  mass
to energy  and  the  release  of  this  nuclear  energy:  the  decay  of  a  heavy
unstable element into several lighter elements. However, the most common
case  is  the one  in  which  the  mass  of  a  composite  particle  is  less  than the
sum of  the  particle  masses  composing  it.  By  examining  Appendix  B,  you
can see that the mass of any nucleus is less than the sum of its component
neutrons  and protons  by  an  amount  ⌬m.  This  occurs  because  the  nuclei
are stable,  bound systems  of  neutrons  and  protons  (bound  by  strong  at-
tractive  nuclear  forces),  and  in  order  to  disassociate  them  into  separate
nucleons  an  amount  of  energy  ⌬mc 2 must  be  supplied  to  the  nucleus.
This energy  or  work  required  to  pull  a  bound  system  apart,  leaving  its
component  parts  free  of  attractive  forces  and  at  rest,  is  called  the
binding energy,  BE.  Thus,  we  describe  the  mass  and  energy  of  a  bound
system by the equation

Mc 2 ⫹ BE ⫽ 兺n

mic 2

i⫽1

(2.17)

where M is the bound system mass, the mi’s are the free component particle
masses,  and  n is  the  number  of  component  particles.  Two  general  com-
ments are in order about Equation 2.17. First, it applies quite generally to
any type of system bound by attractive forces, whether gravitational, electri-
cal (chemical), or nuclear. For example, the mass of a water molecule is less
than  the  combined  mass  of  two  free  hydrogen  atoms  and  a  free  oxygen
atom,  although  the  mass  difference  cannot  be  directly  measured  in  this
case. (The mass difference can be measured in the nuclear case because the
forces and the binding energy are so much greater.) Second, Equation 2.17
shows the possibility of liberating huge quantities of energy, BE, if one reads
the equation from right to left; that is, one collides nuclear particles with a
small but sufﬁcient amount of kinetic energy to overcome proton repulsion
and  fuse  the  particles  into  new  elements  with  less  mass.  Such  a  process  is
called fusion, one  example  of  which  is  a  reaction  in  which  two  deuterium
nuclei  combine  to  form  a  helium  nucleus,  releasing  23.9 MeV  per  fusion.
(See Chapter 14 for more on fusion processes.) We can write this reaction
schematically as follows:
2
1H ⫹ 2

2He ⫹ 23.9 MeV

1H 9: 4

Fusion

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

52

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

EXAMPLE 2.8
(a)  How  much  lighter  is  a  molecule  of  water  than  two
hydrogen  atoms  and  an  oxygen  atom?  The  binding  en-
ergy of water is about 3 eV. (b) Find the fractional loss of
mass per gram of water formed. (c) Find the total energy
released (mainly as heat and light) when 1 gram of water
is formed.

Solution (a) Equation 2.17 may be solved for the mass
difference as follows:

⌬m ⫽ (m H ⫹ m H ⫹ m O) ⫺ MH2O ⫽

BE
c 2 ⫽

3 eV
c 2

⫽

(3.0 eV)(1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 J/eV)

(3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s)2

⫽ 5.3 ⫻ 10⫺36 kg

(b)  To  ﬁnd  the  fractional  loss  of  mass  per  molecule 
we  divide  ⌬m by  the  mass  of  a  water  molecule, 
⫽
18u ⫽ 3.0 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg:

MH2O

⌬m
MH2O

⫽

5.3 ⫻ 10⫺36 kg
3.0 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg

⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺10

Because  the  fractional  loss  of  mass  per  molecule  is
the same as the fractional loss per gram of water formed,
1.8 ⫻ 10⫺10 g  of  mass  would  be  lost  for  each  gram  of
water formed. This is much too small a mass to be mea-
sured directly, and this calculation shows that nonconser-
vation  of  mass  does  not  generally  show  up  as  a  measur-
able effect in chemical reactions.
(c) The energy released when 1 gram of H2O is formed
is  simply  the  change  in  mass  when  1 gram  of  water  is
formed times c 2:
E ⫽ ⌬mc2 ⫽ (1.8 ⫻ 10⫺13 kg)(3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s)2 ⬇ 16 kJ

This  energy  change,  as  opposed  to  the  decrease  in
mass, is easily measured, providing another case similar
to Example 2.5 in which mass changes are minute but
energy  changes,  ampliﬁed  by  a  factor  of  c 2,  are  easily
measured.

2.4 CONSERVATION OF RELATIVISTIC

MOMENTUM AND ENERGY

So far we have considered only cases of the conservation of mass– energy. By
far, however, the most common and strongest conﬁrmation of relativity theory
comes from the daily application of relativistic momentum and energy conser-
vation to elementary particle interactions. Often the measurement of momen-
tum  (from  the  path  curvature  in  a  magnetic  ﬁeld — see  Example  2.2)  and
kinetic  energy  (from  the  distance  a  particle  travels  in  a  known  substance
before  coming  to  rest)  are  enough  when  combined  with  conservation  of
momentum  and  mass – energy  to  determine  fundamental  particle  properties
of mass, charge, and mean lifetime.

EXAMPLE 2.9 Measuring the Mass 

of the ␲⫹ Meson

The ␲⫹ meson (also called the pion) is a subatomic parti-
cle responsible for the strong nuclear force between pro-
tons  and  neutrons.  It  is  observed  to  decay  at  rest  into  a
␮⫹ meson (muon) and a neutrino,2 denoted v. Because
the  neutrino  has  no  charge  and  little  mass  (talk  about
elusive!), it leaves no track in a bubble chamber. (A bub-
ble chamber is a large chamber ﬁlled with liquid hydro-
gen that shows the tracks of charged particles as a series
of tiny bubbles.) However, the track of the charged muon

is visible as it loses kinetic energy and comes to rest (Fig.
2.3). If the mass of the muon is known to be 106 MeV/c 2,
and the kinetic energy, K, of the muon is measured to be
4.6 MeV from its track length, ﬁnd the mass of the ␲⫹.

Solution The  decay  equation  is  ␲⫹ : ␮⫹ ⫹ v.  Con-
serving energy gives

E␲ ⫽ Eu ⫹ Ev

2Neutrino,  from  the  Italian,  means  “little  tiny  neutral  one.”  Following  this  practice,  neutron
should probably be neutrone (pronounced noo-tr n-eh)or “great big neutral one.”

o

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Before

After

π+

π

+ at rest

ν

p , E
ν
ν

+
µ

p +, K +
µ
µ

Figure 2.3 (Example 2.9) Decay of the pion at rest into
a neutrino and a muon.

Because the pion is at rest when it decays, and the neu-
trino has negligible mass,

2.5

GENERAL RELATIVITY

53

Finally,  to  obtain  p␮ from  the  measured  value  of  the
muon’s  kinetic  energy,  K␮,  we  start  with  Equation  2.11,
E␮

2 ⫽ p␮

2c 2 ⫹ (m␮c 2)2, and solve it for p␮
2c 2 ⫽ E ␮
p␮
⫽ K␮

2 ⫺ (m␮c 2)2 ⫽ (K␮ ⫹ m␮c 2)2 ⫺ (m␮c 2)2
2 ⫹ 2K␮m␮c 2

2c 2:

2c 2 into  Equation  2.19
Substituting  this  expression  for  p␮
yields the desired expression for the pion mass in terms
of the muon’s mass and kinetic energy:

m␲c 2 ⫽ √(m␮
⫹ √K ␮

2 c 4 ⫹ K ␮
2 ⫹ 2K␮m␮c 2

2 ⫹ 2K␮m␮c 2

(2.20)

Finally,  substituting  m␮c 2 ⫽ 106  MeV  and  K␮ ⫽ 4.6 MeV
into Equation 2.20 gives

m␲c 2 ⫽ 111 MeV ⫹ 31 MeV ⬇ 1.4 ⫻ 102 MeV

m␲c 2 ⫽ √(m␮c 2)2 ⫹ (p␮

2c 2) ⫹ pvc

(2.18)

Thus, the mass of the pion is

Conserving momentum in the decay yields p␮ ⫽ pv. Sub-
stituting the muon momentum for the neutrino momen-
tum  in  Equation  2.18  gives  the  following  expression  for
the rest energy of the pion in terms of the muon’s mass
and momentum:

m␲c 2 ⫽ √(m␮c 2)2 ⫹ (p ␮

2 c 2) ⫹ p␮c

(2.19)

m␲ ⫽ 140 MeV/c 2

This  result  shows  why  this  particle  is  called  a  meson;
it has  an  intermediate  mass  (from  the  Greek  word
mesos meaning “middle”)  between  the  light  electron
(0.511 MeV/c 2) and the heavy proton (938 MeV/c 2).

2.5 GENERAL RELATIVITY

Up to this point, we have sidestepped a curious puzzle. Mass has two seemingly
different  properties:  a  gravitational  attraction for  other  masses  and  an  inertial
property that represents a resistance to acceleration. To designate these two at-
tributes, we use the subscripts g and i and write

Gravitational property:    Fg ⫽ G
Inertial property:    兺F ⫽ mia

m gm⬘g

r 2

The  value  for  the  gravitational  constant  G was  chosen  to  make  the  magni-
tudes  of  mg and mi numerically  equal.  Regardless  of  how  G is  chosen,
however,  the  strict  proportionality  of  mg and mi has  been  established  ex-
perimentally  to  an  extremely  high  degree:  a  few  parts  in  1012.  Thus,  it
appears  that  gravitational  mass  and  inertial  mass  may  indeed  be  exactly
proportional.

But  why?  They  seem  to  involve  two  entirely  different  concepts:  a  force  of
mutual gravitational attraction between two masses, and the resistance of a sin-
gle mass to being accelerated. This question, which puzzled Newton and many
other physicists over the years, was answered by Einstein in 1916 when he pub-
lished his theory of gravitation, known as the general theory of relativity. Because
it  is  a  mathematically  complex  theory,  we  offer  merely  a  hint  of  its  elegance
and insight.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

54

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

F

F

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure  2.4 (a)  The  observer  is  at  rest  in  a  uniform  gravitational  ﬁeld g,  directed
downward. (b) The observer is in a region where gravity is negligible, but the frame is
accelerated  by  an  external  force  F that  produces  an  acceleration  g directed  upward.
According to Einstein, the frames of reference in parts (a) and (b) are equivalent in
every way. No local experiment can distinguish any difference between the two frames.
(c) In the accelerating frame, a ray of light would appear to bend downward due to the
acceleration  of  the  elevator.  (d)  If  parts  (a)  and  (b)  are  truly  equivalent,  as  Einstein
proposed, then part (c) suggests that a ray of light would bend downward in a gravita-
tional ﬁeld.

In Einstein’s view, the dual behavior of mass was evidence of a very intimate
and  basic  connection  between  the  two  behaviors.  He  pointed  out  that  no
mechanical  experiment  (such  as  dropping  an  object)  could  distinguish
between the two situations illustrated in Figures 2.4a and 2.4b. In Figure 2.4a,
a person is standing in an elevator on the surface of a planet and feels pressed
into the ﬂoor, due to the gravitational force. In Figure 2.4b, the person is in an
elevator  in  empty  space  accelerating  upward  with  a ⫽ g.  The  person  feels
pressed  into  the  ﬂoor  with  the  same  force  as  in  Figure  2.4a.  In  each  case,
an object  released  by  the  observer  undergoes  a  downward  acceleration  of
magnitude g relative  to  the ﬂoor.  In  Figure  2.4a,  the  person  is  in  an  inertial
frame  in  a  gravitational  ﬁeld.  In  Figure  2.4b,  the  person  is  in  a  noninertial
frame accelerating in gravity-free space. Einstein’s claim is that these two situa-
tions are completely equivalent. Because the two reference frames in relative ac-
celeration can no longer be distinguished from one another, this extends the
idea of complete physical equivalence to reference frames accelerating transla-
tionally with  respect  to  each  other.  This  solved  another  philosophical  issue
raised by Einstein, namely the artiﬁciality of conﬁning the principle of relativ-
ity to nonaccelerating frames.

Einstein  carried  his  idea  further  and  proposed  that  no experiment,  me-
chanical or otherwise, could distinguish between the two cases. This exten-
sion  to  include  all  phenomena  (not  just  mechanical  ones)  has  interesting
consequences.  For  example,  suppose  that  a  light  pulse  is  sent  horizontally
across  an  elevator  that  is  accelerating  upward  in  empty  space,  as  in  Figure
2.4c.  From  the  point  of  view  of  an  observer  in  an  inertial  frame  outside  of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

2.5

GENERAL RELATIVITY

55

 

the elevator, the light travels in a straight line while the floor of the elevator
accelerates upward. According to the observer on the elevator, however, the
trajectory of the light pulse bends downward as the floor of the elevator (and
the observer) accelerates upward. Therefore, based on the equality of parts
(a) and (b) of the ﬁgure for all phenomena, Einstein proposed that a beam
of  light  should  also  be  defelected  downward  or  fall  in  a  gravitational
ﬁeld, as  in  Figure  2.4d.  Experiments  have  veriﬁed  the  effect,  although  the
bending is small. A laser aimed at the horizon falls less than 1 cm after trav-
eling 6000 km.

The two postulates of Einstein’s general theory of relativity are

• The laws of nature have the same form for observers in any frame of ref-

Postulates of general relativity

erence, whether accelerated or not.

• In the vicinity of any point, a gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to an acceler-
ated  frame  of  reference  in  the  absence  of  gravitational  effects.  (This  is
the principle of equivalence.)

An interesting effect predicted by the general theory is that time is altered
by  gravity.  A  clock  in  the  presence  of  gravity  runs  slower  than  one  located
where  gravity  is  negligible.  Consequently,  the  frequencies  of  radiation  emit-
ted  by  atoms  in  the  presence  of  a  strong  gravitational  ﬁeld  are  redshifted to
lower frequencies when compared with the same emissions in the presence of
a  weak  ﬁeld.  This  gravitational  redshift  has  been  detected  in  spectral  lines
emitted  by  atoms  in  massive  stars.  It  has  also  been  veriﬁed  on  the  Earth  by
comparing the frequencies of gamma rays (a high-energy form of electromag-
netic radiation) emitted from nuclei separated vertically by about 20 m (see
Section 3.7).

The  second  postulate  suggests  that  a  gravitational  ﬁeld  may  be  “trans-
formed away” at any point if we choose an appropriate accelerated frame of
reference — a  freely  falling  one.  Einstein  developed  an  ingenious  method  of
describing  the  acceleration  necessary  to  make  the  gravitational  ﬁeld “disap-
pear.” He speciﬁed a concept, the curvature of spacetime, that describes the grav-
itational  effect  at  every  point.  In  fact,  the  curvature  of  spacetime  completely
replaces Newton’s gravitational theory. According to Einstein, there is no such
thing as a gravitational force. Rather, the presence of a mass causes a curvature
of spacetime in the vicinity of the mass, and this curvature dictates the space-
time  path  that  all  freely  moving  objects  must  follow.  In  1979,  John  Wheeler
(b. 1911,  American  theoretical  physicist)  summarized  Einstein’s  general
theory of relativity in a single sentence: “Space tells matter how to move and
matter tells space how to curve.”

As  an  example  of  the  effects  of  curved  spacetime,  imagine  two  travelers
moving on parallel paths a few meters apart on the surface of the Earth and
maintaining an exact northward heading along two longitude lines. As they
observe each other near the equator, they will claim that their paths are ex-
actly  parallel.  As  they  approach  the  North  Pole,  however,  they  notice  that
they  are  moving  closer  together,  and  they  will  actually  meet  at  the  North
Pole. Thus, they will claim that they moved along parallel paths, but moved
toward  each  other,  as  if  there  were  an  attractive  force  between  them.  They  will
make this conclusion based on their everyday experience of moving on flat
surfaces. From our perspective, however, we realize that they are walking on

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

56

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

Deflected path of light
from star

Earth

Apparent

direction to star

1.75"

Sun

Light from star

(actual direction)

Figure  2.5 Deﬂection  of  starlight  passing  near  the  Sun.  Because  of  this  effect,  the
Sun or some other remote object can act as a gravitational lens. In his general theory of
relativity, Einstein calculated that starlight just grazing the Sun’s surface should be de-
ﬂected by an angle of 1.75 s of arc.

a  curved  surface,  and  it  is  the  geometry  of  the  curved  surface  that  causes
them  to  converge,  rather  than  an  attractive  force.  In  a  similar  way,  general
relativity replaces the notion of forces with the movement of objects through
curved spacetime.

An important prediction of the general theory of relativity is that a light ray
passing near the Sun should be deﬂected in the curved spacetime created by
the Sun’s mass. This prediction was conﬁrmed when astronomers detected the
bending  of  starlight  near  the  Sun  during  a  total  solar  eclipse  that  occurred
shortly  after  World  War  I  (Fig.  2.5).  When  this  discovery  was  announced,
Einstein  became  an  international  celebrity.  (See  the  web  essay  by  Clifford
Will
for  other  important  tests  and  ramiﬁcations  of  general  relativity  at
http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e.)

If  the  concentration  of  mass  becomes  very  great,  as  is  believed  to  occur
when  a  large  star  exhausts  its  nuclear  fuel  and  collapses  to  a  very  small  vol-
ume, a black hole may form. Here, the curvature of spacetime is so extreme
that, within a certain distance from the center of the black hole, all matter and
light become trapped, as discussed in Section 3.7.

Gravitational Radiation, or A Good Wave Is Hard to Find
Gravitational  radiation  is  a  subject  almost  as  old  as  general  relativity.
By 1916, Einstein had succeeded in showing that the ﬁeld equations of gen-
eral relativity admitted wavelike solutions analogous to those of electromag-
netic  theory.  For  example,  a  dumbbell  rotating  about  an  axis  passing  at
right  angles  through  its  handle  will  emit  gravitational  waves  that  travel  at
the  speed  of  light.  Gravitational  waves  also  carry  energy  away  from  the
dumbbell,  just  as  electromagnetic  waves  carry  energy  away  from  a  light
source. Also, like electromagnetic (em) waves, gravity waves are believed to
have  a  dual  particle  and  wave  nature.  The  gravitational  particle,  the  gravi-
ton, is believed to have a mass of zero, to travel at the speed c, and to obey
the relativistic equation E ⫽ pc.

In  1968,  Joseph  Weber  initiated  a  program  of  gravitational-wave  detection
using as detectors massive aluminum bars, suspended in vacuum and isolated
from outside forces. Gravity waves are notoriously more difﬁcult to detect than

Figure  2.6 Albert  Einstein.
Gravity imaging was another tri-
umph  for  Einstein  since  he
pointed out that it might occur
in  1936.  (Courtesy  of  AIP/Niels
Bohr Library).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

2.5

GENERAL RELATIVITY

57

⫹

m

⫺

Electric field

(a)

m

Gravity field

(b)

Figure  2.8 Simple  models  of
em  and  gravity  wave  detectors.
The  detectors  are  shown  as  two
“charges”  with  a  spring  sand-
wiched  in  between,  the  idea  be-
ing  that  the  waves  exert  forces
on the charges and set the spring
vibrating  in  proportion  to  the
wave  intensity.  The  detector  will
be  particularly  sensitive  when
the wave 
frequency  matches 
the  natural  frequency  of  the
spring–mass  system.  (a)  Equal
and  opposite  electric  charges
move 
in  opposite  directions
when  subjected  to  an  em  wave
and  easily  excite  the  spring.
(b) A  metal  bar  gravity  wave 
detector  can  be  modeled  by 
a  spring  connecting  two  equal
masses; however, a wave encoun-
tering  both  masses  in  phase  will
not cause the spring to vibrate.

To distant

star

Out-of-phase
gravity waves

m

m

Figure  2.9 If  the  gravity  wave
detector  is  of  the  same  size  as
the wavelength of the radiation
detected,  the  waves  arrive  out-
of-phase  at  the  two  masses  and
the system starts to vibrate.

Figure 2.7 Joseph Weber working on a bar detector at the University of Maryland in the
early  1970’s.  The  fundamental  frequency  of  the  bar  was  1660  Hz.  Piezoelectric  crystals
around the center of the bar convert tiny mechanical vibrations to electrical signals. (Cour-
tesy of AIP Emilio Segre Visual Archives)

em waves not only because gravitational forces are much weaker than electric
forces but also because gravitational “charge” or mass only comes in one vari-
ety, positive. Figure 2.8a shows why a dipolar em wave detector is much more
sensitive than a gravitational bar detector shown in Figure 2.8b. Nevertheless,
as shown in Figure 2.9, if the distance between detecting masses is of the same
order of magnitude as the wavelength of the gravity wave, passing gravitational
waves  exert  a  weak  net  oscillating  force  that  alternately  compresses  and  ex-
tends the bar lengthwise.

Tiny vibrations of the bar are detected by crystals attached to the bar that
convert  the  vibrations  to  electrical  signals.  Currently,  a  dozen  laboratories
around  the  world  are  engaged  in  building  and  improving  the  basic  “Weber
bar”  detector,  striving  to  reduce  noise  from  thermal,  electrical,  and  envi-
ronmental  sources  in  order  to  detect  the  very  weak  oscillations  produced  by
a gravitational wave. For a bar of 1 meter in length, the challenge is to detect
a variation  in  length  smaller  than  10⫺20 m,  or  10⫺5 of  the  radius  of  a  pro-
ton. This  sensitivity  is  predicated  on  a  massive  nearby  catastrophic source  of
gravitational  waves,  such  as  the  gravitational  collapse  of  a  star  to  form  a
black hole at the center of our galaxy. Thus, gravity waves are not only hard to
detect  but  also  hard  to  generate  with  great  intensity.  It  is  interesting  that
collapsing  star  models  predict  a  collapse  to  take  about  a  millisecond,  with
production  of  gravity  waves  of  frequency  around  1 kHz  and  wavelengths  of
several hundred km.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

58

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

(a)

Figure  2.10 (a) Prototype LIGO apparatus with 40 m arms.

 

  a:  Tony  Tyson/Lucent  Technologies/Bell  Labs  Innovations;

At this time, several “laser-interferometric” gravitational-wave observatories
(LIGO) are in operation or under construction in the United States and Eu-
rope. These reﬂect laser beams along perpendicular arms to monitor tiny vari-
ations  in  length  between  mirrors  spaced  several  kilometers  apart  in  a  giant
Michelson – Morley  apparatus.  (See  Figures  2.10a  and  b.)  The  variations  in
arm length should occur when a gravitational wave passes through the appara-
tus. Two LIGO sites with 4-km arms are currently in operation in the United
States in Livingston, Louisiana and Hanford, Washington. The two sites, sepa-
rated  by  about  2000  miles,  search  for  signals  that  appear  simultaneously  at
both sites. Such coincidences are more likely to be gravity waves from a distant
star rather than local noise signals.

Although gravitational radiation has not been detected directly, we know
that it exists through the observations of a remarkable system known as the
binary  pulsar.  Discovered  in  1974  by  radio  astronomers  Russell  Hulse  and
Joseph  Taylor,  it  consists  of  a  pulsar  (which  is  a  rapidly  spinning  neutron
star) and a companion star in orbit around each other. Although the com-
panion  has  not  been  seen  directly,  it  is  also  believed  to  be  a  neutron  star.
The  pulsar  acts  as  an  extremely  stable  clock,  its  pulse  period  of  approxi-
mately 59 milliseconds drifting by only 0.25 ns/year. Figure 2.11 shows the
remarkable regularity of 400 consecutive radio pulses from a pulsar. By mea-
suring the arrival times of radio pulses at Earth, observers were able to de-
termine  the  motion  of  the  pulsar  about  its  companion  with  amazing  accu-
racy. For example, the accurate value for the orbital period is 27906.980 895
s, and the orbital eccentricity is 0.617兩131. Like a rotating dumbbell, an or-
biting binary system should emit gravitational radiation and, in the process,
lose some of its orbital energy. This energy loss will cause the pulsar and its
companion to spiral in toward each other and the orbital period to shorten.
According to general relativity, the predicted decrease in the orbital period
is  75.8 ␮s/year.  The  observed  decrease  in  orbital  period  is  in  agreement
with  the  prediction  to  better  than  0.5%.  This  conﬁrms  the  existence  of
gravitational radiation and the general relativistic equations that describe it.

Figure  2.11 400  consecutive
radio  pulses  from  pulsar  PSR
0950⫹08.  Each  line  of  the  400
represents  a  consecutive  time
interval of 0.253 s.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

59

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

(a)

Figure  2.12 (a)  Russell  Hulse  shown  in  1974  operating  his  computer  and  teletype
at Arecibo  observatory  in  Puerto  Rico.  The  form  records  the  “fantastic”  detection  of
PSR 1913⫹16, with its ever-changing periods scratched out by Hulse in frustration.

 (a: Photo Courtesy of Russell Hulse. © The Nobel Foundation, 1993;

Hulse  and  Taylor  (Figure  2.12)  received  the  Nobel  prize  in  1993  for  this
discovery.

SUMMARY

The relativistic expression for the linear momentum of a particle moving with
a velocity u is

p ⬅

mu

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

⫽ ␥mu

(2.1)

where ␥is given by

␥ ⫽

1

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

The relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of a particle is

K ⫽ ␥mc 2 ⫺ mc 2

(2.9)

where mc 2 is called the rest energy of the particle.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

60

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

The total energy E of a particle is related to the mass through the expression

E ⫽ ␥mc 2 ⫽

mc 2

√1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

(2.10)

The  total  energy  of  a  particle  of  mass  m is  related  to  the  momentum

through the equation

E 2 ⫽ p 2c 2 ⫹ (mc 2)2

(2.11)

Finally,  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  mass – energy  states  that  the  sum  of  the
mass – energy  of  a  system  of  particles  before  interaction  must  equal  the  sum  of  the  mass–
energy of the system after interaction where the mass– energy of the ith particle is deﬁned as

Ei ⫽

mic 2
√1 ⫺ (u2

i /c 2)

Application of the principle of conservation of mass – energy to the speciﬁc
cases of (1) the ﬁssion of a heavy nucleus at rest and (2) the fusion of several
particles  into  a  composite  nucleus  with  less  total  mass  allows  us  to  deﬁne
(1) the energy released per ﬁssion, Q , and (2) the binding energy of a com-
posite system, BE.

The two postulates of Einstein’s general theory of relativity are
• The laws of nature have the same form for observers in any frame of ref-

erence, whether accelerated or not.

• In the vicinity of any point, a gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to an acceler-
ated  frame  of  reference  in  the  absence  of  gravitational  effects.  (This  is
the principle of equivalence.)

The  ﬁeld  equations  of  general  relativity  predict  gravitational  waves,  and  a
worldwide search is currently in progress to detect these elusive waves.

(© S. Harris)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

PROBLEMS

61

1. E.  F.  Taylor  and  J.  A.  Wheeler,  Spacetime  Physics, San

Francisco, W. H. Freeman, 1963.

8. L. Infeld, Albert Einstein, New York, Scribner’s, 1950.
9. J.  Schwinger,  Einstein’s  Legacy, Scientiﬁc  American  Li-

2. R.  Resnick,  Introduction  to  Special  Relativity, New  York,

brary, New York, W. H. Freeman, 1985.

Wiley, 1968.

3. A. P. French, Special Relativity, New York, Norton, 1968.
4. H. Bondi, Relativity and Common Sense, Science Study Se-

ries, Garden City, NY, Doubleday, 1964.

10. R. S. Shankland, “The Michelson-Morley Experiment,”

Sci. Amer., November 1964, p. 107.

11. R.  Skinner,  Relativity  for  Scientists  and  Engineers, New

York, Dover Publications, 1982.

5. A. Einstein, Out of My Later Years, New York, World Pub-

12. N. Mermin, Space and Time in Special Relativity, Prospect

lishing, 1971.

6. A. Einstein, Ideas and Opinions, New York, Crown, 1954.
7. G. Gamow, Mr. Tompkins in Wonderland, New York, Cam-

bridge University Press, 1939.

Heights, IL, Waveland Press, 1989.

13. M.  Bartusiak,  Einstein’s  Unﬁnished  Symphony,  New  York,
Berkley  Books,  2000.  (A  nonmathematical  history  and
explanation of the search for gravity waves.)

QUESTIONS

1. A particle is moving at a speed of less than c/2. If the
speed  of  the  particle  is  doubled,  what  happens  to  its
momentum?

2. Give a physical argument showing that it is impossible
to accelerate an object of mass m to the speed of light,
even with a continuous force acting on it.

3. The  upper  limit  of  the  speed  of  an  electron  is  the
speed of light,  c. Does that mean that the momentum
of the electron has an upper limit?

4. Because mass is a measure of energy, can we conclude
that  the  mass  of  a  compressed  spring  is  greater  than
the mass of the same spring when it is not compressed?
5. Photons of light have zero mass. How is it possible that

they have momentum?

6. “Newtonian  mechanics  correctly  describes  objects  mov-
ing  at  ordinary  speeds,  and  relativistic  mechanics  cor-
rectly describes objects moving very fast.” “Relativistic me-
chanics  must  make  a  smooth  transition  as  it  reduces  to
Newtonian  mechanics  in  a  case  where  the  speed  of  an
object  becomes  small  compared  to  the  speed  of  light.”
Argue for or against each of these two statements.

7. Two objects are identical except that one is hotter than
the other. Compare how they respond to identical forces.

8. With regard to reference frames, how does general rel-

ativity differ from special relativity?

9. Two  identical  clocks  are  in  the  same  house,  one  up-
stairs  in  a  bedroom,  and  the  other  downstairs  in  the
kitchen. Which clock runs more slowly? Explain.

10. A  thought  experiment.  Imagine  ants  living  on  a  merry-go-
round, which is their two-dimensional world. From mea-
surements  on  small  circles  they  are  thoroughly  familiar
with  the  number ␲.  When  they  measure  the  circumfer-
ence  of  their  world,  and  divide  it  by  the  diameter,  they
expect  to  calculate  the  number  ␲ ⫽ 3.14159. . . .  We
see  the  merry-go-round  turning  at  relativistic  speed.
From our point of view, the ants’ measuring rods on the
circumference  are  experiencing  Lorentz  contraction  in
the  tangential  direction;  hence  the  ants  will  need  some
extra rods to ﬁll that entire distance. The rods measuring
the  diameter,  however,  do  not  contract,  because  their
motion is perpendicular to their lengths. As a result, the
computed ratio does not agree with the number ␲. If you
were an ant, you would say that the rest of the universe is
spinning in circles, and your disk is stationary. What pos-
sible explanation can you then give for the discrepancy,
in view of the general theory of relativity?

PROBLEMS

2.1 Relativistic Momentum and the Relativistic
Form of Newton’s Laws
1. Calculate  the  momentum  of  a  proton  moving  with  a
speed  of  (a)  0.010c,  (b)  0.50c,  (c)  0.90c.  (d)  Convert
the answers of (a) – (c) to MeV/c.

2. An electron has a momentum that is 90% larger than
its classical momentum. (a) Find the speed of the elec-
tron. (b) How would your result change if the particle
were a proton?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

3. Consider  the  relativistic  form  of  Newton’s  second  law.

Show that when F is parallel to v,

F ⫽ m 冢1 ⫺

v2

c 2 冣⫺3/2 dv

dt

where m is the mass of an object and v is its speed.

4. A charged particle moves along a straight line in a uni-
form electric ﬁeld E with a speed v. If the motion and
the electric ﬁeld are both in the  x direction, (a) show

62

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

 

that the magnitude of the acceleration of the charge q
is given by

a ⫽

dv
dt

⫽

qE

m 冢1 ⫺

v 2

c 2 冣3/2

(b)  Discuss  the  signiﬁcance  of  the  dependence  of  the
acceleration on the speed. (c) If the particle starts from
rest at x ⫽ 0 at t ⫽ 0, ﬁnd the speed of the particle and
its position after a time t has elapsed. Comment on the
limiting values of v and x as t : ⬁.

5. Recall  that  the  magnetic  force  on  a  charge  q moving
with velocity v in a magnetic ﬁeld B is equal to qv ⫻ B.
If  a  charged  particle  moves  in  a  circular  orbit  with  a
ﬁxed  speed  v in  the  presence  of  a  constant  magnetic
ﬁeld, use the relativistic form of Newton’s second law to
show that the frequency of its orbital motion is

f ⫽

qB

2␲m 冢1 ⫺

v2

c 2 冣1/2

6. Show that the momentum of a particle having charge e
moving in a circle of radius  R in a magnetic ﬁeld B is
given by p ⫽ 300BR, where p is in MeV/c, B is in teslas,
and R is in meters.

2.2 Relativistic Energy
7. Show  that  the  energy – momentum  relationship  given
by E 2 ⫽ p 2c 2 ⫹ (mc 2)2 follows  from  the  expressions
E ⫽ ␥mc 2 and p ⫽ ␥mu.

8. A  proton  moves  at  a  speed  of  0.95c.  Calculate  its 
(a) rest energy, (b) total energy, and (c) kinetic energy.
9. An electron has a kinetic energy 5 times greater than its

rest energy. Find (a) its total energy and (b) its speed.

10. Find the speed of a particle whose total energy is 50%

greater than its rest energy.

11. A proton in a high-energy accelerator is given a kinetic
energy  of  50 GeV.  Determine  the  (a)  momentum  and
(b) speed of the proton.

12. An  electron  has  a  speed  of  0.75c.  Find  the  speed  of  a
proton that has (a) the same kinetic energy as the elec-
tron and (b) the same momentum as the electron.

13. Protons in an accelerator at the Fermi National Lab-
oratory  near  Chicago  are  accelerated  to  an  energy
of 400  times  their  rest  energy.  (a)  What  is  the
speed of these protons? (b) What is their kinetic en-
ergy in MeV?

14. How  long  will  the  Sun  shine, Nellie?  The  Sun  radiates
about  4.0 ⫻ 1026 J  of  energy  into  space  each  second.
(a)  How  much  mass  is  released  as  radiation  each  sec-
ond?  (b)  If  the  mass  of  the  Sun  is  2.0 ⫻ 1030 kg,  how
long  can  the  Sun  survive  if  the  energy  release  contin-
ues at the present rate?

15. Electrons  in  projection  television  sets  are  acceler-
ated through  a  total  potential  difference  of  50,000 V.
(a) Calculate  the  speed  of  the  electrons  using  the

relativistic  form  of  kinetic  energy  assuming  the  elec-
trons  start  from  rest.  (b)  Calculate  the  speed  of  the
electrons  using  the  classical  form  of  kinetic  energy. 
(c) Is the difference in speed signiﬁcant in the design
of this set in your opinion?

16. As noted in Section 2.2, the quantity E ⫺ p 2c 2 is an in-
variant in relativity theory. This means that the quantity
E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2 has the same value in all inertial frames even
though E and p have  different  values  in  different
frames.  Show  this  explicitly  by  considering  the  follow-
ing  case.  A  particle  of  mass  m is  moving  in  the ⫹x
direction  with  speed  u and  has  momentum  p and  en-
ergy E in the frame S. (a) If S⬘ is moving at speed v in
the standard way, ﬁnd the momentum p⬘ and energy E ⬘
observed in S⬘. (Hint: Use the Lorentz velocity transfor-
mation  to  ﬁnd p⬘ and E ⬘.  Does  E ⫽ E ⬘ and p ⫽ p⬘?
(b) Show that E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2 is equal to E⬘2 ⫺ p⬘2c 2.

2.3 Mass as a Measure of Energy
17. A radium isotope decays to a radon isotope,  222Rn, by
emitting  an  ␣ particle  (a  helium  nucleus)  according
to the decay scheme 226Ra : 222Rn ⫹ 4He. The masses
of  the  atoms  are  226.0254  (Ra),  222.0175  (Rn),  and
4.0026 (He). How much energy is released as the result
of this decay?

18. Consider the decay 55

24Cr : 55

25Mn ⫹ e⫺, where e⫺ is an
electron.  The  55Cr  nucleus  has  a  mass  of  54.9279 u,
and the 55Mn nucleus has a mass of 54.9244 u. (a) Cal-
culate the mass difference in MeV. (b) What is the max-
imum kinetic energy of the emitted electron?

19. Calculate  the  binding  energy  in  MeV  per  nucleon  in
the isotope 12
6C. Note that the mass of this isotope is ex-
actly  12 u,  and  the  masses  of  the  proton  and  neutron
are 1.007276 u and 1.008665 u, respectively.

20. The free neutron is known to decay into a proton, an
(of  negligible  rest

electron,  and  an  antineutrino 
mass) according to

v

n 9: p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ v

This is called beta decay and will be discussed further in
Chapter 13. The decay products are measured to have a
total  kinetic  energy  of  0.781  MeV  ± 0.005 MeV.  Show
that this observation is consistent with the excess energy
predicted by the Einstein mass–energy relationship.

2.4 Conservation of Relativistic Momentum
and Energy
21. An  electron  having  kinetic  energy  K ⫽ 1.000 MeV
makes a head-on collision with a positron at rest. (A
positron  is  an  antimatter  particle  that  has  the  same
mass  as  the  electron  but  opposite  charge.)  In  the
collision  the  two  particles  annihilate  each  other  and
are replaced by two ␥ rays of equal energy, each trav-
eling at equal angles ␪ with the electron’s direction of
motion.  (Gamma  rays  are  massless  particles  of  elec-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

tromagnetic  radiation  having  energy  E ⫽ pc.)  Find
the energy  E, momentum  p, and angle of emission ␪
of the ␥ rays.

22. The K0 meson is an uncharged member of the particle
“zoo” that decays into two charged pions according to
K0 : ␲⫹ ⫹ ␲⫺. The pions have opposite charges, as in-
dicated,  and  the  same  mass,  m␲ ⫽ 140 MeV/c 2.  Sup-
pose that a K0 at rest decays into two pions in a bubble
chamber in which a magnetic ﬁeld of 2.0 T is present
(see Fig. P2.22). If the radius of curvature of the pions
is  34.4 cm,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  momenta  and  speeds  of  the
pions and (b) the mass of the K0 meson.

23. An unstable particle having a mass of 3.34 ⫻ 10⫺ 27 kg
is  initially  at  rest.  The  particle  decays  into  two  frag-
ments that ﬂy off with velocities of 0.987c and ⫺ 0.868c.
Find the rest masses of the fragments.

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

24. As  measured  by  observers  in  a  reference  frame  S,  a
particle  having  charge  q moves  with  velocity  v in  a
magnetic ﬁeld B and  an  electric  ﬁeld E.  The  result-
ing  force  on  the  particle  is  then  measured  to  be 
F ⫽ q(E ⫹ v ⫻ B).  Another  observer  moves  along
with the charged particle and measures its charge to
be q also  but  measures  the  electric  ﬁeld  to  be  E⬘.  If
both  observers  are  to  measure  the  same  force,  F,
show that E⬘ ⫽ E ⫹ v ⫻ B.

25. Classical deﬂection of light by the Sun Estimate the deﬂec-
tion of starlight grazing the surface of the Sun. Assume
that light consists of particles of mass  m traveling with
velocity c and  that  the  deﬂection  is  small.  (a)  Use
⌬px ⫽ 冕⫹⬁
to show that the angle of deﬂection ␪ is
2GMs
where  ⌬px is  the  total  change  in
given  by 
bc2
momentum  of  a 
light  particle  grazing  the  Sun. 
See  Figures  P2.25a  and  b.  (b)  For  b ⫽ Rs,  show  that 
␪ ⫽ 4.2 ⫻ 10⫺ 6 rad.

⫺⬁ Fx dt

␪⬵

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

63

Κ0

–

π

+π

B

Figure P2.22 A sketch of the tracks made by the ␲⫹ and
␲⫺ in the decay of the K0 meson at rest. The pion motion is
perpendicular to B. (B is directed out of the page.)

y

m

incoming light particle

c

φ

r

y

F

b

R s

Sun

R s ⫽ radius
         of Sun
M s ⫽ mass
          of Sun

␪

m

c
(a)

O

x

outgoing
particle

y

⌬ px ⫽ pf ⫺ pi

⌬ px

x

⫺pi

␪

1

pf

,
For small 
␪
ⱍ⌬pxⱍ⬵ ⱍpfⱍ 
␪
         ⫽ mc 
␪
or

|⌬ px|
mc

␪

 ⬵ 

(b)

26. An  object  having  mass  of  900 kg  and  traveling  at  a
speed of 0.850c collides with a stationary object having
mass 1400 kg. The two objects stick together. Find (a)
the speed and (b) the mass of the composite object.

27. Imagine  that  the  entire  Sun  collapses  to  a  sphere  of
radius Rg such that the work required to remove a small
mass m from  the  surface  would  be  equal  to  its  rest
energy mc 2. This radius is called the gravitational radius
for  the  Sun.  Find  Rg . (It  is  believed  that  the  ultimate
fate  of  very  massive  stars  is  to  collapse  beyond  their
gravitational radii into black holes.)

28. A  rechargeable  AA  battery  with  a  mass  of  25.0 g
can supply a power of 1.20 W for 50.0 min. (a) What is
the  difference  in  mass  between  a  charged  and  an  un-

Figure P2.25 The classical deﬂection of starlight grazing
the sun.

charged battery? (b) What fraction of the total mass is
this mass difference?

29. An  object  disintegrates  into  two  fragments.  One  of
the fragments  has  mass  1.00 MeV/c 2 and  momentum
1.75 MeV/c in  the  positive  x direction.  The  other
fragment  has  mass  1.50 MeV/c 2 and  momentum
2.005 MeV/c in  the  positive  y direction.  Find  (a)  the
mass and (b) the speed of the original object.

30. The  creation  and  study  of  new  elementary  particles  is
an  important  part  of  contemporary  physics.  Especially

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

64

CHAPTER 2

RELATIVITY II

interesting is the discovery of a very massive particle. To
create  a  particle  of  mass  M requires  an  energy  Mc 2.
With enough energy, an exotic particle can be created
by  allowing  a  fast-moving  particle  of  ordinary  matter,
such  as  a  proton,  to  collide  with  a  similar  target  par-
ticle.  Let  us  consider  a  perfectly  inelastic  collision
between two protons: An incident proton with mass m,
kinetic  energy  K,  and  momentum  magnitude  p joins
with an originally stationary target proton to form a sin-
gle  product  particle  of  mass  M.  You  might  think  that
the  creation  of  a  new  product  particle,  9  times  more
massive  than  in  a  previous  experiment,  would  require
just 9 times more energy for the incident proton. Un-
fortunately, not all of the kinetic energy of the incom-
ing  proton  is  available  to  create  the  product  particle,
since  conservation  of  momentum  requires  that  after
the collision the system as a whole still must have some
kinetic energy. Only a fraction of the energy of the inci-
dent particle is thus available to create a new particle.
You  will  determine  how  the  energy  available  for  parti-
cle creation depends on the energy of the moving pro-
ton. Show that the energy available to create a product
particle is given by 

Mc 2 ⫽ 2mc 2√1 ⫹

K

2mc 2

From  this  result,  when  the  kinetic  energy  K of  the
incident  proton  is  large  compared  to  its  rest  energy
mc 2, we see that M approaches (2mK)1/2/c. Thus if the
energy of the incoming proton is increased by a factor
of 9, the mass you can create increases only by a factor
of 3. This disappointing result is the main reason that
most modern accelerators, such as those at CERN (in

Europe),  at  Fermilab  (near  Chicago),  at  SLAC  (at
Stanford),  and  at  DESY  (in  Germany),  use  colliding
beams. Here the total momentum of a pair of interact-
ing  particles  can  be  zero.  The  center  of  mass  can  be
at rest  after  the  collision,  so  in  principle  all  of  the
initial kinetic energy can be used for particle creation,
according to

Mc 2 ⫽ 2mc 2 ⫹ K ⫽ 2mc 2 冢1 ⫹

K

2mc2 冣

where K is the total kinetic energy of two identical col-
liding particles. Here, if K ⬎⬎ mc 2, we have M directly
proportional to K, as we would desire. These machines
are difﬁcult to build and to operate, but they open new
vistas in physics.

31. A  particle  of  mass  m moving  along  the  x-axis  with  a
velocity component ⫹u collides head-on and sticks to a
particle  of  mass  m/3  moving  along  the  x-axis  with  the
velocity  component  ⫺u. What  is  the  mass  M of  the
resulting particle? 

32. Compact  high-power  lasers  can  produce  a  2.00-J  light
pulse of duration 100 fs focused to a spot 1 ␮m in diam-
eter. (See Mourou and Umstader, “Extreme Light,” Sci-
entiﬁc  American,  May  2002,  p.  81.)  The  electric  ﬁeld  in
the  light  accelerates  electrons  in  the  target  material  to
near the speed of light. (a) What is the average power of
the laser during the pulse? (b) How many electrons can
be accelerated to 0.9999c if 0.0100% of the pulse energy
is converted into energy of electron motion?

33. Energy reaches the upper atmosphere of the Earth from
the Sun at the rate of 1.79 ⫻ 1017 W. If all of this energy
were  absorbed  by  the  Earth  and  not  re-emitted,  how
much would the mass of the Earth increase in 1.00 yr?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3
The Quantum
Theory of Light

Chapter Outline

3.1 Hertz’s Experiments — Light as an

3.5 The Compton Effect and X-Rays

Electromagnetic Wave

3.2 Blackbody Radiation

Enter Planck
The Quantum of Energy

X-Rays
The Compton Effect

3.6 Particle – Wave Complementarity
3.7 Does Gravity Affect Light?

3.3 The Rayleigh – Jeans Law and

(Optional)

Planck’s Law (Optional)
Rayleigh – Jeans Law
Planck’s Law

3.4 Light Quantization and the

Photoelectric Effect

Summary
WEB APPENDIX: Calculation of the
Number of Modes of Waves in a Cavity
Planck’s Calculation of E

At  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century,  following  the  lead  of  Newton  and
Maxwell, physicists might have rewritten the biblical story of creation as follows:

In the beginning He created the heavens and the earth —

F ⫽ G

mm⬘
r 2 ⫽ ma

and He said, “Let there be light” —

Q
␧0

d⌽B
dt

    冖 E ⭈ d s ⫽ ⫺

冖 E ⭈ d A ⫽
冖 B ⭈ d A ⫽ 0    冖 B ⭈ d s ⫽ ␮0I ⫹ ␧0␮0

d⌽E
dt

Actually,  in  addition  to  the  twin  pillars  of  mechanics  and  electromagnetism
erected  by  the  giants  Newton  and  Maxwell,  there  was  a  third  sturdy  support
for physics  in  1900 — thermodynamics  and  statistical  mechanics.  Classical
thermodynamics  was  the  work  of  many  men  (Carnot,  Mayer,  Helmholtz,
Clausius, Lord Kelvin). It is especially notable because it starts with two simple
propositions  and  gives  solid  and  conclusive  results  independent  of  detailed
physical  mechanisms.  Statistical  mechanics,  founded  by  Maxwell,  Clausius,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

65

66

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Boltzmann,1 and  Gibbs,  uses  the  methods  of  probability  theory  to  calculate
averages and ﬂuctuations from the average for systems containing many parti-
cles  or  modes  of  vibration.  It  is  interesting  that  quantum  physics  started  not
with a breakdown of Maxwell’s or Newton’s laws applied to the atom, but with a
problem  of  classical  statistical  mechanics — that  of  calculating  the  intensity  of
radiation at a given wavelength from a heated cavity. The desperate solution to
this  radiation  problem  was  found  by  a  thoroughly  classical  thermodynamicist,
Max  Planck,  in  1900.  Indeed,  it  is  signiﬁcant  that  both  Planck  and  Einstein
returned again and again to the simple and general foundation of thermody-
namics and statistical mechanics as the only certain bases for the new quantum
theory.  Although  we  shall  not  follow  the  original  thermodynamic  arguments
completely, we shall see in this chapter how Planck arrived at the correct spec-
tral  distribution  for  cavity  radiation  by  allowing  only  certain  energies  for  the
radiation-emitting oscillators in the cavity walls. We shall also see how Einstein
extended this quantization of energy to light itself, thereby brilliantly explain-
ing the photoelectric effect. We conclude our brief history of the quantum the-
ory of light with a discussion of the scattering of light by electrons (Compton
effect), which showed conclusively that the light quantum carried momentum
as well as energy. Finally, we describe the pull of gravity on light in Section 3.7.

3.1 HERTZ’S EXPERIMENTS — LIGHT AS AN

ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVE

It is ironic that the same experimentalist who so carefully conﬁrmed that the
“newfangled” waves of Maxwell actually existed and possessed the same prop-
erties  as  light  also  undermined  the  electromagnetic  wave  theory  as  the  com-
plete  explanation  of  light.  To  understand  this  irony,  let  us  brieﬂy  review  the
theory  of  electromagnetism  developed  by  the  great  Scottish  physicist  James
Clerk Maxwell between 1865 and 1873.

Maxwell was primarily interested in the effects of electric current oscillations
in wires. According to his theory, an alternating current would set up ﬂuctuating
electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the region surrounding the original disturbance.
Moreover, these waves were predicted to have a frequency equal to the frequency
of  the  current  oscillations.  In  addition,  and  most  importantly,  Maxwell’s  theory  pre-
dicted  that  the  radiated  waves  would  behave  in  every  way  like  light: electromagnetic
waves would be reﬂected by metal mirrors, would be refracted by dielectrics like
glass,  would  exhibit  polarization  and  interference,  and  would  travel  outward
from the wire through a vacuum with a speed of 3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s. Naturally this led
to  the  unifying  and  simplifying  postulate  that  light  was  also  a  type  of  Maxwell
wave or electromagnetic disturbance, created by extremely high frequency elec-
tric  oscillators  in  matter.  At  the  end  of  the  19th  century  the  precise  nature  of
these charged submicroscopic oscillators was unknown (Planck called them res-
onators), but physicists assumed that somehow they were able to emit light waves
whose frequency was equal to the oscillator’s frequency of motion.

Even  at  this  time,  however,  it  was  apparent  that  this  model  of  light  emis-
sion  was  incapable  of  direct  experimental  veriﬁcation,  because  the  highest

1On whose tombstone is written S ⫽ kB log W, a basic formula of statistical mechanics attributed
to Boltzmann.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.1

HERTZ’S EXPERIMENTS — LIGHT AS AN ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVE

67

Figure  3.1 Heinrich  Hertz
(1857 – 1894),  an  extraordinar-
ily gifted German experimental-
ist. (©Bettmann/Corbis)

electrical frequencies then attainable were about 109 Hz and visible light was
known to possess a frequency a million times higher. But Heinrich Hertz (Fig.
3.1)  did  the  next  best  thing.  In  a  series  of  brilliant  and  exhaustive  experi-
ments,  he  showed  that  Maxwell’s  theory  was  correct  and  that  an  oscillating
electric current does indeed radiate electromagnetic waves that possess every
characteristic  of  light  except  the  same  wavelength  as  light.  Using  a  simple
spark  gap  oscillator  consisting  of  two  short  stubs  terminated  in  small  metal
spheres  separated  by  an  air  gap  of  about  half  an  inch,  he  applied  pulses
of high  voltage,  which  caused  a  spark  to  jump  the  gap  and  produce  a  high-
frequency  electric  oscillation  of  about  5 ⫻ 108 Hz.  This  oscillation,  or  ring-
ing, occurs while the air gap remains conducting, and charge surges back and
forth between the spheres until electrical equilibrium is established. Using a
simple loop antenna with a small spark gap as the receiver, Hertz very quickly
succeeded in detecting the radiation from his spark gap oscillator, even at dis-
tances of several hundred meters. Moreover, he found the detected radiation
to  have  a  wavelength  of  about  60 cm,  corresponding  to  the  oscillator  fre-
quency of 5 ⫻ 108 Hz. (Recall that c ⫽ ␭f, where ␭ is the wavelength and f is
the frequency.)

In  an  exhaustive  tour  de  force,  Hertz  next  proceeded  to  show  that  these
electromagnetic  waves  could  be  reﬂected,  refracted,  focused,  polarized,
and made  to  interfere — in  short,  he  convinced  physicists  of  the  period  that
Hertzian waves and light waves were one and the same. The classical model for
light emission was an idea whose time had come. It spread like wildﬁre. The
idea  that  light  was  an  electromagnetic  wave  radiated  by  oscillating  submicro-
scopic  electric  charges  (now  known  to  be  atomic  electrons)  was  applied  in
rapid succession to the transmission of light through solids, to reﬂection from
metal  surfaces,  and  to  the  newly  discovered  Zeeman  effect.  In  1896,  Pieter
Zeeman,  a  Dutch  physicist,  discovered  that  a  strong  magnetic  ﬁeld  changes
the  frequency  of  the  light  emitted  by  a  glowing  gas.  In  an  impressive  victory
for  Maxwell,  it  was  found  that  Maxwell’s  equations  correctly  predicted  (in
most cases) the change of vibration of the electric oscillators and hence, the
change  in  frequency  of  the  light  emitted.  (See  Problem  1.)  Maxwell,  with
Hertz behind the throne, reigned supreme, for he had united the formerly in-
dependent kingdoms of electricity, magnetism, and light! (See Fig. 3.2.)

A  terse  remark  made  by  Hertz  ends  our  discussion  of  his  conﬁrmation  of
the electromagnetic wave nature of light. In describing his spark gap transmit-
ter, he emphasizes that “it is essential that the pole surfaces of the spark gap

y

E

B

z

c

x

Figure 3.2 A light or radio wave far from the source according to Maxwell and Hertz.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

68

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

should  be  frequently  repolished”  to  ensure  reliable  operation  of  the  spark.2
Apparently this result was initially quite mysterious to Hertz. In an effort to re-
solve  the  mystery,  he  later  investigated  this  side  effect  and  concluded  that  it
was the ultraviolet light from the initial spark acting on a clean metal surface
that caused current to ﬂow more freely between the poles of the spark gap. In
the  process  of  verifying  the  electromagnetic  wave  theory  of  light,  Hertz  had
discovered the photoelectric effect, a phenomenon that would undermine the
priority of the wave theory of light and establish the particle theory of light on
an equal footing.

λmax

3.2 BLACKBODY RADIATION

h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
w

 
t
i
n
u
 
r
e
p
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

4000 K

3000 K

2000 K

0

1

2

3

4

λ (µm)

Figure  3.3 Emission  from  a
glowing  solid.  Note  that  the
amount  of  radiation  emitted
(the  area  under  the  curve)  in-
creases  rapidly  with  increasing
temperature.

The tremendous success of Maxwell’s theory of light emission immediately led
to  attempts  to  apply  it  to  a  long-standing  puzzle  about  radiation — the  so-
called “blackbody” problem. The problem is to predict the radiation intensity
at a given wavelength emitted by a hot glowing solid at a speciﬁc temperature.
Instead  of  launching  immediately  into  Planck’s  solution  of  this  problem,  let
us develop  a  feeling  for  its  importance  to  classical  physics  by  a  quick  review
of its history.

Thomas  Wedgwood,  Charles  Darwin’s  relative  and  a  renowned  maker  of
china,  seems  to  have  been  the  ﬁrst  to  note  the  universal  character  of  all
heated objects. In 1792, he observed that all the objects in his ovens, regard-
less of their chemical nature, size, or shape, became red at the same tempera-
ture.  This  crude  observation  was  sharpened  considerably  by  the  advancing
state of spectroscopy, so that by the mid-1800s it was known that glowing solids
emit  continuous  spectra  rather  than  the  bands  or  lines  emitted  by  heated
gases. (See Fig. 3.3.) In 1859, Gustav Kirchhoff proved a theorem as important
as his circuit loop theorem when he showed by arguments based on thermody-
namics  that  for  any  body  in  thermal  equilibrium  with  radiation3 the  emitted
power is proportional to the power absorbed. More speciﬁcally,

ef ⫽ J( f, T )Af

(3.1)

where ef is the power emitted per unit area per unit frequency by a particular
heated object, Af is the absorption power (fraction of the incident power ab-
sorbed per unit area per unit frequency by the heated object), and J( f, T ) is a
universal function (the same for all bodies) that depends only on f, the light
frequency, and T, the absolute temperature of the body. A blackbody is deﬁned
as  an  object  that  absorbs  all  the  electromagnetic  radiation  falling  on  it  and
consequently  appears  black.  It  has  Af ⫽ 1  for  all  frequencies  and  so  Kirch-
hoff’s theorem for a blackbody becomes

Blackbody

ef ⫽ J( f, T )

(3.2)

2H. Hertz, Ann. Physik (Leipzig), 33:983, 1887.
3An example of a body in equilibrium with radiation would be an oven with closed walls at a ﬁxed
temperature and the radiation within the oven cavity. To say that radiation is in thermal equilib-
rium  with  the  oven  walls  means  that  the  radiation  has  exchanged  energy  with  the  walls  many
times and is homogeneous, isotropic, and unpolarized. In fact, thermal equilibrium of radiation
within a cavity can be considered to be quite similar to the thermal equilibrium of a ﬂuid within a
container held at constant temperature — both will cause a thermometer in the center of the cav-
ity to achieve a ﬁnal stationary temperature equal to that of the container.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.2

BLACKBODY RADIATION

69

Equation 3.2 shows that the power emitted per unit area per unit frequency by
a  blackbody  depends  only  on  temperature  and  light  frequency  and  not  on
the physical  and  chemical  makeup  of  the  blackbody,  in  agreement  with
Wedgwood’s early observation.

Because absorption and emission are connected by Kirchhoff’s theorem, we
see that a blackbody or perfect absorber is also an ideal radiator. In practice, a
small  opening  in  any  heated  cavity,  such  as  a  port  in  an  oven,  behaves  like  a
blackbody  because  such  an  opening  traps  all  incident  radiation  (Fig.  3.4).  If
the direction of the radiation is reversed in Figure 3.4, the light emitted by a
small  opening  is  in  thermal  equilibrium  with  the  walls,  because  it  has  been
absorbed and re-emitted many times.

The next important development in the quest to understand the universal
character  of  the  radiation  emitted  by  glowing  solids  came  from  the  Austrian
physicist Josef Stefan (1835 – 1893) in 1879. He found experimentally that the
total  power  per  unit  area  emitted  at  all  frequencies  by  a  hot  solid,  e total,  was
proportional  to  the  fourth  power  of  its  absolute  temperature.  Therefore,
Stefan’s law may be written as

e total ⫽冕⬁

0

ef df ⫽ ␴T 4

(3.3)

where e total is the power per unit area emitted at the surface of the blackbody
at all frequencies, ef is the power per unit area per unit frequency emitted by
the  blackbody,  T is  the  absolute  temperature  of  the  body,  and  ␴ is  the
Stefan – Boltzmann  constant,  given  by ␴ ⫽ 5.67 ⫻ 10⫺8 W ⭈ m⫺2 ⭈ K⫺4.  A  body
that is not an ideal radiator will obey the same general law but with a coefﬁ-
cient, a, less than 1:

Figure 3.4 The opening to the
cavity  inside  a  body  is  a  good
approximation  of  a  blackbody.
Light entering the small opening
strikes  the  far  wall,  where  some
of  it  is  absorbed  but  some  is  re-
ﬂected  at  a  random  angle.  The
light  continues  to  be  reﬂected,
and  at  each  reﬂection  a  portion
of  the  light  is  absorbed  by  the
cavity  walls.  After  many  reﬂec-
tions  essentially  all  of  the  inci-
dent energy is absorbed.

e total ⫽ a␴T 4

(3.4)

Stefan’s law

Only  5  years  later  another  impressive  conﬁrmation  of  Maxwell’s  electromag-
netic  theory  of  light  occurred  when  Boltzmann  derived  Stefan’s  law  from  a
combination of thermodynamics and Maxwell’s equations.

EXAMPLE 3.1 Stefan’s Law Applied to the Sun

Estimate  the  surface  temperature  of  the  Sun  from
the following  information.  The  Sun’s  radius  is  given
by R s ⫽ 7.0 ⫻ 108 m.  The  average  Earth – Sun  distance
is R ⫽ 1.5 ⫻ 1011 m. The power per unit area (at all fre-
quencies)  from  the  Sun  is  measured  at  the  Earth  to  be
1400 W/m2. Assume that the Sun is a blackbody.

Solution For a black body, we take a ⫽ 1, so Equation
3.4 gives

e total(R s). This comes from the conservation of energy:

e total(R s) ⭈ 4␲R s

2 ⫽ e total(R ) ⭈ 4␲R 2

or

e total(R s) ⫽ e total(R ) ⭈

R2
R2
s

Using Equation 3.5, we have

T ⫽ 冤 e total(R ) ⭈ R 2

␴R 2
s

冥1/4

e total(R s) ⫽ ␴T 4

(3.5)

or

where  the  notation  e total(R s)  stands  for  the  total  power
per unit area at the surface of the Sun. Because the prob-
lem  gives  the  total  power  per  unit  area  at  the  Earth,
e total(R),  we  need  the  connection  between  e total(R)  and

T ⫽ 冤

(1400 W/m2)(1.5 ⫻ 1011 m)2

(5.6 ⫻ 10⫺8 W/m2 ⭈ K4)(7.0 ⫻ 108 m)2冥1/4

⫽ 5800 K

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

70

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  3.3,  the  wavelength  marking  the  maximum  power
emission  of  a  blackbody, ␭max,  shifts  toward  shorter  wavelengths  as  the  black-
body  gets  hotter.  This  agrees  with  Wedgwood’s  general  observation  that
objects  in  his  kiln  progressed  from  dull  red  to  orange  to  white  in  color  as
the  temperature  was  raised.  This  simple  effect  of  ␭max ⬀ T ⫺1 was  not
deﬁnitely  established,  however,  until  about  20  years  after  Kirchhoff’s
seminal  paper  had  started  the  search  to  ﬁnd  the  form  of  the  universal
function J( f, T ).  In  1893,  Wilhelm  Wien  proposed  a  general  form  for
the blackbody  distribution  law  J( f,  T )  that  gave  the  correct  experimental
behavior of ␭max with temperature. This law is called Wien’s displacement law
and may be written

␭maxT ⫽ 2.898 ⫻ 10⫺3 m ⭈ K

(3.6)

where ␭max is  the  wavelength  in  meters  corresponding  to  the  blackbody’s
maximum  intensity  and  T is  the  absolute  temperature  of  the  surface  of
the object  emitting  the  radiation.  Assuming  that  the  peak  sensitivity  of
the human  eye  (which  occurs  at  about  500 nm — blue-green  light)  coin-
cides  with  ␭max for  the  Sun  (a  blackbody),  we  can  check  the  consistency
of Wien’s  displacement  law  with  Stefan’s  law  by  recalculating  the  Sun’s
surface temperature:

T ⫽

2.898 ⫻ 10⫺3 m ⭈K

500 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

⫽ 5800 K

Thus  we  have  good  agreement  between  measurements  made  at  all  wave-
lengths (Example 3.1) and at the maximum-intensity wavelength.

Exercise 1 How convenient that the Sun’s emission peak is at the same wavelength as
our eyes’ sensitivity peak! Can you account for this?

So  far,  the  power  radiated  per  unit  area  per  unit  frequency  by  the  black-
body, J( f, T ) has been discussed. However, it is more convenient to consider
the spectral energy density, or energy per unit volume per unit frequency of the radi-
ation within the blackbody cavity, u( f, T ). For light in equilibrium with the walls,
the power emitted per square centimeter of opening is simply proportional to
the  energy  density  of  the  light  in  the  cavity.  Because  the  cavity  radiation  is
isotropic  and  unpolarized,  one  can  average  over  direction  to  show  that  the
constant of proportionality between J( f, T ) and u( f, T ) is c/4, where c is the
speed of light. Therefore,

J( f, T ) ⫽ u( f, T )c/4

(3.7)

An  important  guess  as  to  the  form  of  the  universal  function  u( f, T )  was

made in 1893 by Wien and had the form

u( f, T )⫽Af 3e⫺␤f/T

(3.8)

where A and ␤ are constants. This result was known as Wien’s exponential law;
it  resembles  and  was  loosely  based  on  Maxwell’s  velocity  distribution  for  gas
molecules.  Within  a  year  the  great  German  spectroscopist  Friedrich  Paschen

Spectral energy density of a
blackbody

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.2

BLACKBODY RADIATION

71

n

i
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a

Wien's

exponential

law

Experimental

points

0

1

2

3

4

5

6
λ(µm)

7

8

9

10 11 12

Figure  3.5 Discrepancy  between  Wien’s  law  and  experimental  data  for  a  blackbody
at 1500 K.

had conﬁrmed Wien’s guess by working in the then difﬁcult infrared range of
1 to 4 ␮m and at temperatures of 400 to 1600 K.4

As can be seen in Figure 3.5, Paschen had made most of his measurements
in  the  maximum  energy  region  of  a  body  heated  to  1500 K  and had  found
good agreement with Wien’s exponential law. In 1900, however, Lummer and
Pringsheim extended the measurements to 18 ␮m, and Rubens and Kurlbaum
went  even  farther — to  60 ␮m.  Both  teams  concluded  that  Wien’s  law  failed
in this  region  (see  Fig.  3.5).  The  experimental  setup  used  by  Rubens  and
Kurlbaum  is  shown  in  Figure  3.6.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  historic

E

K

D1

S

P1

P3

P4

D2

T

M

P2

Figure 3.6 Apparatus for measuring blackbody radiation at a single wavelength in
the far infrared region. The experimental technique that disproved Wien’s law and
was  so  crucial  to  the  discovery  of  the  quantum  theory  was  the  method  of  residual
rays (Restrahlen). In this technique, one isolates a narrow band of far infrared radia-
tion by causing white light to undergo multiple reﬂections from alkalide halide crys-
tals (P1 –P4). Because each alkali halide has a maximum reﬂection at a characteristic
wavelength,  quite  pure  bands  of  far  infrared  radiation  may  be  obtained  with
repeated reﬂections. These pure bands can then be directed onto a thermopile (T )
to  measure  intensity.  E is  a  thermocouple  used  to  measure  the  temperature  of  the
blackbody oven, K.

4We should  point  out  the  great  difﬁculty  in  making  blackbody  radiation  measurements  and  the
singular advances made by German spectroscopists in the crucial areas of blackbody sources, sen-
sitive  detectors,  and  techniques  for  operating  far  into  the  infrared  region.  In  fact,  it  is  dubious
whether Planck would have found the correct blackbody law as quickly without his close associa-
tion  with  the  experimentalists  at  the  Physikalisch  Technische  Reichsanstalt  of  Berlin  (a  sort  of
German  National  Bureau  of  Standards) — Otto  Lummer,  Ernst  Pringsheim,  Heinrich  Rubens,
and Ferdinand Kurlbaum.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

72

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Fig III. Reststrahlen von Steinsalz.

E = f(ν) berechnet nach Wein
E = f(ν) beobachtet

200

100

–200°

–100°

0°

0

–100

100°

200°

300°

400°

600°

700°

800°

900°

1100° 1200° 1300° 1400°

500°

1000°

1500°C

beobachtet mit dem schwarzen Körper IV
beobachtet mit dem schwarzen Körper V

Figure 3.7 Comparison of theoretical and experimental blackbody emission curves at
51.2 ␮m and over the temperature range of ⫺188⬚ to 1500⬚C. The title of this modiﬁed
ﬁgure is “Residual Rays from Rocksalt.” Berechnet nach means “calculated according to,”
and beobachtet means  “observed.”  The  vertical  axis  is  emission  intensity  in  arbitrary
units. (From H. Rubens and S. Kurlbaum, Ann. Physik, 4:649, 1901.)

experiments  involved  the  measurement  of  blackbody  radiation  intensity  at
a ﬁxed  wavelength  and  variable  temperature.  Typical  results  measured  at
␭ ⫽ 51.2 ␮m and over the temperature range of ⫺200⬚ to ⫹1500⬚C are shown
in Figure 3.7, from the paper by Rubens and Kurlbaum.

Enter Planck
On a Sunday evening early in October of 1900, Max Planck discovered the fa-
mous blackbody formula, which truly ushered in the quantum theory. Planck’s
proximity  to  the  Reichsanstalt  experimentalists  was  extremely  important  for
his  discovery — earlier  in  the  day  he  had  heard  from  Rubens  that  his  latest

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.2

BLACKBODY RADIATION

73

measurements  showed  that  u( f, T ),  the  spectral  energy  density,  was  propor-
tional to T for long wavelengths or low frequency. Planck knew that Wien’s law
agreed  well  with  the  data  at  high  frequency  and  indeed  had  been  working
hard for several years to derive Wien’s exponential law from the principles of
statistical mechanics and Maxwell’s laws. Interpolating between the two limit-
ing forms (Wien’s exponential law and an energy density proportional to tem-
perature), he immediately found a general formula, which he sent to Rubens,
on a postcard, the same evening. His formula was5

u( f, T ) ⫽

8␲hf 3

c 3

冢

1

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1 冣

(3.9)

where h is  Planck’s  constant ⫽ 6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s,  and  kB is  Boltzmann’s
constant ⫽ 1.380 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K.  We  can  see  that  Equation  3.9  has  the  correct
limiting behavior at high and low frequencies with the help of a few approxi-
mations. At high frequencies, where hf/kBT ⬎⬎ 1,

1

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1

⬇ e⫺hf/kBT

so that

u( f, T ) ⫽

8␲hf 3

c 3

冢

1

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1 冣 ⬇

8␲hf 3

c 3

e⫺hf/kBT

and  we  recover  Wien’s  exponential  law,  Equation  3.8.  At  low  frequencies,
where hf/kBT ⬍⬍ 1,

and

1

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1

⫽

1

1 ⫹

hf
k BT

⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫺ 1

⬇ k BT
hf

u( f, T ) ⫽

8␲hf 3

c3

冢

1

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1 冣 ⬇

8␲f 2

c3

k BT

This  result  shows  that  the  spectral  energy  density  is  proportional  to  T in  the
low-frequency or so-called classical region, as Rubens had found.

We should  emphasize  that  Planck’s  work  entailed  much  more  than  clever
mathematical manipulation. For more than six years Planck (Fig. 3.8) labored to
ﬁnd a rigorous derivation of the blackbody distribution curve. He was driven, in
his  own  words,  by  the  fact  that  the  emission  problem  “represents  something
absolute, and since I had always regarded the search for the absolute as the lofti-
est  goal  of  all  scientiﬁc  activity,  I  eagerly  set  to  work.”  This  work  was  to  occupy
most of his life as he strove to give his formula an ever deeper physical interpreta-
tion and to reconcile discrete quantum energies with classical theory.

Figure 3.8 Max Planck (1858 –
1947).  The  work  leading  to  the
“lucky”  blackbody  radiation  for-
mula was described by Planck in
his  Nobel  prize  acceptance
speech  (1920):  “But  even  if  the
radiation  formula  proved  to  be
perfectly  correct,  it  would  after
all  have  been  only  an  interpola-
tion  formula  found  by  lucky
guess-work and thus, would have
left us rather unsatisﬁed. I there-
fore  strived  from  the  day  of  its
discovery,  to  give  it  a  real  physi-
cal  interpretation  and  this  led
me to consider the relations be-
tween  entropy  and probability
according  to  Boltzmann’s  ideas.
After some weeks of the most in-
tense  work  of  my  life,  light  be-
gan  to  appear  to  me  and  unex-
pected views revealed themselves
in  the  distance.”  (AIP  Niels  Bohr
Library, W. F. Meggers Collection)

5Planck  originally  published  his  formula  as 

u(␭, T ) ⫽

C1

␭5 冢

1

eC 2/␭T ⫺ 1 冣

,  where  C1 ⫽ 8␲ch and

C 2 ⫽ hc/kB. He then found best-ﬁt values to the experimental data for C1 and C 2 and evaluated
h ⫽ 6.55 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s and k B ⫽ NA/R ⫽ 1.345 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K. As R, the universal gas constant, was
fairly  well  known  at  the  time,  this  technique  also  resulted  in  another  method  for  ﬁnding  NA,
Avogadro’s number.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

74

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

The Quantum of Energy
Planck’s  original  theoretical  justiﬁcation  of  Equation  3.9  is  rather  abstract
because it involves arguments based on entropy, statistical mechanics, and several
theorems  proved  earlier  by  Planck  concerning  matter  and  radiation  in equilib-
rium.6 We shall give arguments that are easier to visualize physically yet attempt
to convey the spirit and revolutionary impact of Planck’s original work.

Planck  was  convinced  that  blackbody  radiation  was  produced  by  vibrating
submicroscopic electric charges, which he called resonators. He assumed that
the  walls  of  a  glowing  cavity  were  composed  of  literally  billions  of  these
resonators  (whose  exact  nature  was  unknown  at  the  time),  all  vibrating  at
different  frequencies.  Hence,  according  to  Maxwell,  each  oscillator  should
emit radiation with a frequency corresponding to its vibration frequency. Also
according  to  classical  Maxwellian  theory, an  oscillator  of  frequency  f
could have any value of energy and could change its amplitude continu-
ously as it radiated any fraction of its energy. This is where Planck made
his  revolutionary  proposal.  To  secure  agreement  with  experiment, Planck
had  to  assume  that  the  total  energy  of  a  resonator  with  mechanical
frequency f could only be an integral multiple of hf or

Eresonator ⫽ nhf    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(3.10)

where h is  a  fundamental  constant  of  quantum  physics,  h ⫽ 6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s,
known as Planck’s constant. In addition, he concluded that emission of radiation
of  frequency  f occurred  when  a  resonator  dropped  to  the  next  lowest  energy
state. Thus the resonator can change its energy only by the difference ⌬E according to

⌬E ⫽ hf

(3.11)

That is, it cannot lose just any amount of its total energy, but only a ﬁnite amount, hf,
the so-called quantum of energy. Figure 3.9 shows the quantized energy levels and
allowed transitions proposed by Planck.

E

4hf

3hf

2hf

hf

0

Y
G
R
E
N
E

to n = ∞

n

4

3

2

1

0

Figure  3.9 Allowed  energy  levels  according  to  Planck’s  original  hypothesis  for  an
oscillator with frequency f. Allowed transitions are indicated by the double-headed arrows.

6M. Planck, Ann. Physik, 4:553, 1901.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.2

BLACKBODY RADIATION

75

EXAMPLE 3.2 A Quantum Oscillator versus a

Classical Oscillator

Consider the implications of Planck’s conjecture that all
oscillating  systems  of  natural  frequency  f have  discrete
allowed energies E ⫽ nhf and that the smallest change in
energy of the system is given by ⌬E ⫽ hf.

(a)  First  compare  an  atomic  oscillator  sending  out
540-nm  light  (green)  to  one  sending  out  700-nm  light
(red)  by  calculating  the  minimum  energy  change  of
each. For the green quantum,

⌬Egreen ⫽ hf ⫽

hc
␭

consequently the energy decrease continuously with time,
as  shown  in  Figure  3.10a.  Actually,  all systems  vibrating
with  frequency  f are  quantized  (according  to  Equation
3.10)  and  lose  energy  in  discrete  packets  or  quanta,  hf.
This would lead to a decrease of the pendulum’s energy
in a stepwise manner, as shown in Figure 3.10b. We shall
show  that  there  is  no  contradiction  between  quantum
theory  and  the  observed  behavior  of  laboratory  pendu-
lums and springs.

An energy change of one quantum corresponds to

(6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

⌬E ⫽ hf

540 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

where the pendulum frequency f is

⫽

⫽ 3.68 ⫻ 10⫺9 J

Actually, the joule is much too large a unit of energy
for describing atomic processes; a more appropriate unit
of  energy  is  the  electron  volt  (eV).  The  electron  volt
takes the charge on the electron as its unit of charge. By
deﬁnition,  an  electron  accelerated  through  a  potential
difference  of  1 volt  has  an  energy  of  1 eV.  An  electron
volt may be converted to joules by noting that

E ⫽ V ⭈ q ⫽ 1 eV ⫽ (1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)(1 J/C)

⫽ 1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

It is also useful to have expressions for h and hc in terms
of electron volts. These are

h ⫽ 4.136 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV ⭈ s
hc ⫽ 1.240 ⫻ 10⫺6 eV ⭈ m ⫽ 1240 eV ⭈ nm

Returning  to  our  example,  we  see  that  the  minimum
energy change of an atomic oscillator sending out green
light is

⌬E green ⫽

3.68 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 J/eV

⫽ 2.30 eV

For the red quantum the minimum energy change is

⌬Ered ⫽

hc
␭

⫽

(6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

700 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

⫽ 2.84 ⫻ 10⫺19 J ⫽ 1.77 eV

Note  that  the  minimum  allowed  amount  or  “quantum”
of  energy  is  not  uniform  under  all  conditions  as  is  the
quantum  of  charge — the  quantum  of  energy  is  propor-
tional  to  the  natural  frequency  of  the  oscillator.  Note,
too,  that  the  high  frequency  of  atomic  oscillators
produces  a  measurable  quantum  of  energy  of  several
electron volts.

(b) Now consider a pendulum undergoing small oscil-
lations  with  length  ᐉ ⫽ 1 m.  According  to  classical  the-
ory, if air friction is present, the amplitude of swing and

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

f ⫽

1
2␲

g
ᐉ

⫽ 0.50 Hz

Thus,

⌬E ⫽ (6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s)(0.50 s⫺1)

⫽ 3.3 ⫻ 10⫺34 J
⫽ 2.1 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV

Energy

E 0

Energy

E =  E 0e –α t

Time

(a)

hf

Time

(b)

Figure  3.10 (Example  3.2)  (a)  Observed  classical  be-
havior  of  a  pendulum.  (b)  Predicted  quantum  behavior
of a pendulum.

76

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Because  the  total  energy  of  a  pendulum  of  mass  m and
length ᐉ displaced through an angle ␪ is

⌬E
E

⫽

3.3 ⫻ 10⫺34 J
1.5 ⫻ 10⫺2 J

⫽ 2.2 ⫻ 10⫺32

E ⫽ mgᐉ(1 ⫺ cos ␪)

we  have  for  a  typical  pendulum  with  m ⫽ 100 g,  ᐉ ⫽
1.0 m, and ␪ ⫽ 10⬚,

E ⫽ (0.10 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(1.0 m)(1 ⫺ cos 10⬚) ⫽ 0.015 J

Therefore, the fractional change in energy, ⌬E/E, is un-
observably small:

Note  that  the  energy  quantization  of  large  vibrating
systems is unobservable because of their low frequencies
compared  to  the  high  frequencies  of  atomic  oscillators.
Hence  there 
is  no  contradiction  between  Planck’s
quantum  postulate  and  the  behavior  of  macroscopic
oscillators.

Exercise 2 Calculate the quantum number, n, for this pendulum with E ⫽ 1.5 ⫻ 10⫺2 J.
Answer 4.6 ⫻ 1031

Exercise 3 An object of mass m on a spring of stiffness k oscillates with an amplitude A
about its equilibrium position. Suppose that m ⫽ 300 g, k ⫽ 10 N/m, and A ⫽ 10 cm. (a)
Find the total energy. (b) Find the mechanical frequency of vibration of the mass. (c) Cal-
culate the change in amplitude when the system loses one quantum of energy.
Answer (a) E total ⫽ 0.050 J; (b) f ⫽ 0.92 Hz; (c) ⌬E quantum ⫽ 6.1 ⫻ 10⫺34 J, so

⌬A ⬇ ⫺

⌬E
√2Ek

⫽ ⫺6.1 ⫻ 10⫺34 m

Until now we have been concentrating on the remarkable quantum proper-
ties of single oscillators of frequency f. Planck explained the continuous spec-
trum of the blackbody by assuming that the heated walls contained resonators
vibrating  at  many  different  frequencies,  each  emitting  light  at  the  same  fre-
quency  as  its  vibration  frequency.  By  considering  the  conditions  leading  to
equilibrium  between  the  wall  resonators  and  the  radiation  in  the  blackbody
cavity,  he  was  able  to  show  that  the  spectral  energy  density  u( f, T )  could  be
expressed  as  the  product  of  the  number  of  oscillators  having  frequency
between f and f ⫹ df, denoted by N( f ) df, and the average energy emitted per
oscillator, 

. Thus we have the important result

E

u( f, T ) df ⫽ E N( f )df

(3.12)

Furthermore,  Planck  showed  that  the  number  of  oscillators  with  frequency
between f and f ⫹ df was proportional to f 2 or

N ( f ) df ⫽

8␲f 2

c 3

df

(3.13)

(See  Appendix  1  on  our  book  Web  site  at  http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e
for details.)

Substituting Equation 3.13 into Equation 3.12 gives

u( f, T ) df ⫽ E

8␲f 2

c3

df

(3.14)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.3

THE RAYLEIGH – JEANS LAW AND PLANCK’S LAW

77

This  result  shows  that  the  spectral  energy  density  is  proportional  to  the
product  of  the  frequency  squared  and  the  average  oscillator  energy.  Also,
since u( f, T ) approaches zero at high frequencies (see Fig. 3.5),  must tend
to zero at high frequencies faster than 1/f 2. The fact that the mean oscillator
energy  must  become  extremely  small  when  the  frequency  becomes  high
guided Planck in the development of his theory. In the next section we shall
see  that  the  failure  of 
to  become  small  at  high  frequencies  in  the  classical
Rayleigh – Jeans theory led to the “ultraviolet catastrophe” — the prediction of
an inﬁnite spectral energy density at high frequencies in the ultraviolet region.

E

E

3.3 THE RAYLEIGH–JEANS LAW AND PLANCK’S LAW

O P T I O N A L

Rayleigh – Jeans Law
Both  Planck’s  law  and  the  Rayleigh – Jeans  law  (the  classical  theory  of  blackbody
radiation  formulated  by  Lord  Rayleigh,  John  William  Strutt,  1842 – 1919,  English
physicist,  and  James  Jeans,  1887 – 1946,  English  astronomer  and  physicist)  may  be
derived using the idea that the blackbody radiation energy per unit volume with fre-
quency between f and f ⫹ df can be expressed as the product of the number of oscil-
lators per unit volume in this frequency range and the average energy per oscillator:

u ( f, T )df ⫽ E N( f )df

(3.12)

It is instructive to perform both the Rayleigh – Jeans and Planck calculations to see
the  effect  on  u ( f, T )  of  calculating 
from  a  continuous distribution  of  classical
oscillator energies (Rayleigh – Jeans) as opposed to a discrete set of quantum oscilla-
tor  energies  (Planck).  We  discuss  Lord  Rayleigh’s  derivation  ﬁrst  because  it  is  a
more direct classical calculation.

E

While Planck concentrated on the thermal equilibrium of cavity radiation with oscillating
electric charges in the cavity walls, Rayleigh concentrated directly on the electromagnetic waves
in the cavity. Rayleigh and Jeans reasoned that the standing electromagnetic waves in
the cavity could be considered to have a temperature T, because they constantly ex-
changed energy with the walls and caused a thermometer within the cavity to reach
the  same  temperature  as  the  walls.  Further,  they  considered  a  standing  polarized
electromagnetic  wave  to  be  equivalent  to  a  one-dimensional  oscillator  (Fig.  3.11).
Using the same general idea as Planck, they expressed the energy density as a prod-
uct of the number of standing waves (oscillators) and the average energy per oscilla-
tor. They found the average oscillator energy 
to be independent of frequency and
equal  to  kBT from  the  Maxwell-Boltzmann  distribution  law  (see  Chapter  10).
According to this distribution law, the probability P of ﬁnding an individual system
(such  as  a  molecule  or  an  atomic  oscillator)  with  energy  E above  some  minimum
energy, E0, in a large group of systems at temperature T is

E

P (E ) ⫽ P0e⫺(E⫺E 0)/kBT

(3.15)

where P0 is the probability that a system has the minimum energy. In the case of a
discrete set of allowed energies, the average energy, 

, is given by

E

E ⫽

兺E ⭈ P(E )
兺P(E )

(3.16)

where  division  by  the  sum  in  the  denominator  serves  to  normalize  the  total
probability to 1. In the classical case considered by Rayleigh, an oscillator could have any

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

78

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

k1

m

ω1

k2

m

ω2

Figure  3.11 A  one-dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  is  equivalent  to  a  plane-
polarized electromagnetic standing wave.

energy E in a continuous range from 0 to ⬁. Thus the sums in Equation 3.16 must
be replaced with integrals, and the expression for  becomes

E

冕⬁
冕⬁

0

0

Ee⫺E/kBTdE

E ⫽

⫽ kBT

e⫺E/kBT dE

The calculation of N( f ) is a bit more complicated but is of importance here as
well as in the free electron model of metals. Appendix 1 on our Web site gives the
derivation of the density of modes, N( f ) df. One ﬁnds

or in terms of wavelength,

N ( f )df ⫽

8␲f 2

c 3

df

N (␭)d␭ ⫽

8␲
␭4 d␭

(3.45)

(3.46)

The spectral energy density is simply the density of modes multiplied by kBT, or

Density of standing waves in
a cavity

Rayleigh – Jeans blackbody
law

In terms of wavelength,

u( f, T )df ⫽

8␲f 2

c 3

k BT df

u(␭, T )d␭ ⫽

8␲
␭4 k BT d␭

(3.17)

(3.18)

However, as one can see from Figure 3.12, this classical expression, known as the
Rayleigh – Jeans  law,  does  not  agree  with  the  experimental  results  in  the  short
wavelength region. Equation 3.18 diverges as ␭ : 0, predicting unlimited energy
emission  in  the  ultraviolet  region,  which  was  dubbed  the  “ultraviolet  catastro-
phe.”  One  is  forced  to  conclude  that  classical  theory  fails  miserably  to  explain
blackbody radiation.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.3

THE RAYLEIGH – JEANS LAW AND PLANCK’S LAW

79

∞

Rayleigh–
Jeans Law

n

i
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
r
t
c
e
p
S

s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Wavelength (µm)

Figure 3.12 The failure of the classical Rayleigh – Jeans law (Equation 3.18) to ﬁt
the observed spectrum of a blackbody heated to 1000 K.

Planck’s Law
As mentioned earlier, Planck concentrated on the energy states of resonators in the
cavity walls and used the condition that the resonators and cavity radiation were in-
equilibrium  to  determine  the  spectral  quality  of  the  radiation.  By  thermodynamic 
reasoning (and apparently unaware of Rayleigh’s derivation), he arrived at the same
expression for N( f ) as Rayleigh. However, Planck arrived at a different form for 
E
by  allowing  only  discrete  values  of  energy  for  his  resonators.  He  found,  using  the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution law,

E ⫽

hf

e hf/kBT ⫺ 1

(3.19)

(See the book Web site at http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e for Planck’s derivation
of 

.)
E
Multiplying  by N( f ) gives the Planck distribution formula:

E

u( f, T )df ⫽

8␲f 2

c 3

冢

hf

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1 冣 df

(3.9)

Planck blackbody law

or in terms of wavelength, ␭,

u(␭, T )d␭ ⫽

8␲hc d␭

␭5(ehc/␭kBT ⫺ 1)

(3.20)

term dom-
Equation 3.9 shows that the ultraviolet catastrophe is avoided because the 
E
inates the f 2 term at high frequencies. One can qualitatively understand why 
tends to
E
zero at high frequencies by noting that the ﬁrst allowed oscillator level (hf ) is so large
for large f compared to the average thermal energy available (kBT ) that Boltzmann’s
law predicts almost zero probability that the ﬁrst excited state is occupied.

In  summary,  Planck  arrived  at  his  blackbody  formula  by  making  two  startling
assumptions:  (1)  the  energy  of  a  charged  oscillator  of  frequency  f is  limited  to

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

80

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

discrete values nhf and (2) during emission or absorption of light, the change in
energy  of  an  oscillator  is  hf .  But  Planck  was  every  bit  the  “unwilling  revolution-
ary.”  From  most  of  Planck’s  early  correspondence  one  gets  the  impression  that
his  concept  of  energy  quantization  was  really  a  desperate  calculational  device,
and  moreover  a  device  that  applied  only  in  the  case  of  blackbody  radiation.  It
remained  for  the  great  Albert  Einstein,  the  popular  icon  of  physics  in  the  20th
century, to elevate quantization to the level of a universal phenomenon by show-
ing that light itself was quantized.

EXAMPLE 3.3 Derivation of Stefan’s Law from

the Planck Distribution

In  this  example,  we  show  that  the  Planck  spectral  distri-
bution  formula  leads  to  the  experimentally  observed
Stefan law for the total radiation emitted by a blackbody
at all wavelengths,

etotal ⫽ 5.67 ⫻ 10⫺8 T 4 W ⭈ m⫺2 ⭈ K⫺4

Solution Since Stefan’s law is an expression for the to-
tal  power  per  unit  area  radiated  at  all  wavelengths,  we
must  integrate  the  expression  for  u(␭, T ) d␭ given  by
Equation  3.20  over ␭ and  use  Equation  3.7  for  the  con-
nection between the energy density inside the blackbody
cavity and the power emitted per unit area of blackbody
surface. We ﬁnd

etotal ⫽

c

4 冕⬁

0

u (␭, T )d␭ ⫽冕⬁

0

2␲hc 2

␭5(e hc/␭k BT ⫺ 1)

d␭

If we make the change of variable x ⫽ hc/␭kBT, the inte-
gral assumes a form commonly found in tables:

etotal ⫽

2␲k B

4T 4

c 2h3 冕⬁

0

x 3

(e x ⫺ 1)

dx

Using

we ﬁnd

冕⬁

0

x 3

(e x ⫺ 1)

dx ⫽

␲4
15

4
2␲5k B
15c 2h3 T 4 ⫽ ␴T 4
Finally, substituting for kB, c, and h, we have

e total ⫽

␴ ⫽

(2)(3.141)5(1.381 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K)4

(15) (2.998 ⫻ 108 m/s)2 (6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)3

⫽ 5.67 ⫻ 10⫺8 W ⭈m⫺2 ⭈K⫺4

Exercise 4 Show that

冕⬁

0

2␲hc2

␭5(ehc/␭kBT ⫺ 1)

d␭ ⫽

2␲k B

4T 4

h3c 2 冕⬁

x⫽0

x3

(e x ⫺ 1)

dx

3.4 LIGHT QUANTIZATION AND THE

PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

We now  turn  to  the  year  1905,  in  which  the  next  major  development  in
quantum  theory  took  place.  The  year  1905  was  an  incredible  one  for  the
“willing revolutionary” Albert Einstein (Fig. 3.13). In this year Einstein pro-
duced  three  immortal  papers  on  three  different  topics,  each  revolutionary
and  each  worthy  of  a  Nobel  prize.  All  three  papers  contained  balanced,
symmetric, and unifying new results achieved by spare and clean logic and
simple  mathematics.  The  ﬁrst  work,  entitled  “A  Heuristic7 Point  of  View

7A heuristic argument is one that is plausible and enlightening but not rigorously justiﬁed.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.4

LIGHT QUANTIZATION AND THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

81

About the Generation and Transformation of Light,” formulated the theory
of  light  quanta  and  explained  the  photoelectric  effect.8 The  second  paper
was entitled “On the Motion of Particles Suspended in Liquids as Required
by  the  Molecular-Kinetic  Theory  of  Heat.”  It  explained  Brownian  motion
and provided strong proof of the reality of atoms.9 The third paper, which
is perhaps his most famous, contained the invention of the theory of special
relativity10 and was entitled “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.” It
is  interesting  to  note  that  when  Einstein  was  awarded  the  Nobel  prize  in
1922,  the  Swedish  Academy  judged  his  greatest  contribution  to  physics  to
have  been  the  theory  of  the  photoelectric  effect.  No  mention  was  made  at
all of his theory of relativity!

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Let  us  turn  now  to  the  paper  concerning  the  light  quantum,  in  which
Einstein  crossed  swords  with  Maxwell  and  challenged  the  unqualiﬁed
successes of the classical wave theory of light. Einstein recognized an incon-
sistency  between  Planck’s  quantization  of  oscillators  in  the  walls  of  the
blackbody and Planck’s insistence that the cavity radiation consisted of clas-
sical electromagnetic waves. By showing that the change in entropy of black-
body radiation was like the change in entropy of an ideal gas consisting of
independent  particles,  Einstein  reached  the  conclusion  that  light  itself  is
composed  of  “grains,”  irreducible  ﬁnite  amounts,  or  quanta  of  energy.11
Furthermore,  he  asserted  that  light  interacting  with  matter  also  consists  of
quanta,  and  he  worked  out  the  implications  for  photoelectric  and  photo-
chemical  processes.  His  explanation  of  the  photoelectric  effect  offers  such
convincing proof that light consists of energy packets that we shall describe
it in more detail. First, however, we need to consider the main experimental
features  of  the  photoelectric  effect  and  the  failure  of  classical  theory  to
explain this effect.

As  noted  earlier,  Hertz  ﬁrst  established  that  clean  metal  surfaces  emit
charges when exposed to ultraviolet light. In 1888 Hallwachs discovered that
the emitted charges were negative, and in 1899 J. J. Thomson showed that the
emitted  charges  were  electrons,  now  called  photoelectrons.  He  did  this  by
measuring  the  charge-to-mass  ratio  of  the  particles  produced  by  ultraviolet
light  and  even  succeeded  in  measuring  e separately  by  a  cloud  chamber
technique (see Chapter 4).

The  last  crucial  discovery  before  Einstein’s  explanation  was  made  in  1902
by  Philip  Lenard,  who  was  studying  the  photoelectric  effect  with  intense
carbon arc light sources. He found that electrons are emitted from the metal
with a range of velocities and that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelec-
trons, K max, does not depend on the intensity of the exciting light. Although he

8A. Einstein, Ann. Physik, 17:132, 1905 (March).
9A. Einstein, Ann. Physik, 17:549, 1905 (May).
10A. Einstein, Ann. Physik, 17:891, 1905 ( June).
11Einstein, as Planck before him, fell back on the unquestionable solidity of thermodynamics and
statistical  mechanics  to  derive  his  revolutionary  results.  At  the  time  it  was  well  known  that  the
probability, W, for n independent gas atoms to be in a partial volume V of a larger volume V0 is
(V/V0)n. Einstein showed that light of frequency f and total energy E enclosed in a cavity obeys
an  identical  law,  where  in  this  case  W is  the  probability  that  all  the  radiation  is  in  the  partial
volume and n ⫽ E/hf.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

82

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Metallic
emitter

Light

Collector

–

was  unable  to  establish  the  precise  relationship,  Lenard  also  indicated  that
K max increases  with  light  frequency.  A  typical  apparatus  used  to  measure  the
maximum  kinetic  energy  of  photoelectrons  is  shown  in  Figure  3.14.  K max is
easily  measured  by  applying  a  retarding  voltage  and  gradually  increasing  it
until the most energetic electrons are stopped and the photocurrent becomes
zero. At this point,

K max ⫽ 1

2m ev 2

max ⫽ eVs

(3.21)

Sensitive
ammeter

A

V

+         –

10-V supply

Figure  3.14 Photoelectric  ef-
fect apparatus.

where me is  the  mass  of  the  electron,  vmax is  the  maximum  electron
speed, e is  the  electronic  charge,  and  Vs is  the  stopping  voltage.  A  plot
of the  type found  by  Lenard  is  shown  in  Figure  3.15a;  it  illustrates  that
K max or Vs is  independent  of  light  intensity  I.  The  increase  in  current
(or number  of electrons  per  second)  with  increasing  light  intensity
shown in  Figure 3.15a  was  expected  and  could  be  explained  classically.
However, the result that K max does not depend on the intensity was completely
unexpected.

Two other experimental results were completely unexpected classically as
well. One was the linear dependence of K max on light frequency, shown in Figure
3.15b.  Note  that  Figure  3.15b  also  shows  the  existence  of  a  threshold
frequency,  f0,  below  which  no  photoelectrons  are  emitted.  (Actually,  a
threshold  energy  called  the  work  function, ␾,  is  associated  with  the  binding
energy of an electron in a metal and is expected classically. That there is an
energy  barrier  holding  electrons  in  a  solid  is  evident  from  the  fact  that
electrons  are  not  spontaneously  emitted  from  a  metal  in  a  vacuum,  but
require  high  temperatures  or  incident  light  to  provide  an  energy  of  ␾
and cause  emission.)  The  other  interesting  result  impossible  to  explain
classically  is  that  there  is  no  time  lag  between  the  start  of  illumination  and
the start of  the  photocurrent.  Measurements  have  shown  that  if  there  is
a time lag, it  is  less  than  10⫺9 s.  In  summary,  as  shown  in  detail  in  the
following  example,  classical  electromagnetic  theory  has  major  difﬁcul-
ties explaining the  independence  of  K max and  light  intensity,  the linear
dependence  of K max on  light  frequency,  and  the  instantaneous  response
of the photocurrent.

Photocurrent

I 2 > I 1

I 2

I 1

K max

0

Applied voltage

–Vs

(a)

f 0

(b)

f

Figure 3.15 (a) A plot of photocurrent versus applied voltage. The graph shows that
K max is independent of light intensity I for light of ﬁxed frequency. (b) A graph show-
ing the dependence of K max on light frequency.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.4

LIGHT QUANTIZATION AND THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

83

EXAMPLE 3.4 Maxwell Takes a Licking

For  a  typical  case  of  photoemission  from  sodium,  show
that classical theory predicts that (a) K max depends on the
incident  light  intensity,  I,  (b)  K max does  not  depend  on
the  frequency  of  the  incident  light,  and  (c)  there  is  a
long  time  lag  between  the  start  of  illumination  and  the
beginning  of  the  photocurrent.  The  work  function  for
sodium  is ␾ ⫽ 2.28 eV  and  an  absorbed  power  per  unit
area  of  1.00 ⫻ 10⫺7 mW/cm2 produces  a  measurable
photocurrent in sodium.

Solution (a) According  to  classical  theory,  the  energy  in
a light wave is spread out uniformly and continuously over the
wavefront. Assuming that all absorption of light occurs in
the top atomic layer of the metal, that each atom absorbs
an  equal  amount  of  energy  proportional  to  its  cross-
sectional  area,  A,  and  that  each  atom  somehow  funnels
this  energy  into  one  of  its  electrons,  we  ﬁnd  that  each
electron absorbs an energy K in time t given by

K ⫽ CIAt

where C is a fraction accounting for less than 100% light
absorption.  Because  the  most  energetic  electrons  are
held  in  the  metal  by  a  surface  energy  barrier  or  work
function  of ␾,  these  electrons  will  be  emitted  with  K max
once they have absorbed enough energy to overcome the
barrier ␾. We can express this as

K max ⫽ CIAt ⫺ ␾

(3.22)

Thus, classical theory predicts that for a ﬁxed absorption
period, t, at low light intensities when CIAt ⬍ ␾, no elec-
trons  ought  to  be  emitted.  At  higher  intensities,  when
CIAt ⬎ ␾,  electrons  should  be  emitted  with  higher
kinetic energies the higher the light intensity. Therefore,
classical  predictions  contradict  experiment  at  both  very
low and very high light intensities.

(b) According to classical theory, the intensity of a light
wave is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the electric
2,  and  it  is  this  electric  ﬁeld  amplitude  that
ﬁeld, E 0
increases  with  increasing  intensity  and  imparts  an  in-
creasing  acceleration  and  kinetic  energy  to  an  electron.
2 in  Equa-
Replacing I with  a  quantity  proportional  to  E 0
tion  3.22  shows  that  K max should  not  depend  at  all  on
the frequency of the classical light wave, again contradict-
ing the experimental results.

(c) To estimate the time lag between the start of illu-
mination  and  the  emission  of  electrons,  we  assume  that
an electron must accumulate just enough light energy to
overcome  the  work  function.  Setting  K max ⫽ 0  in  Equa-
tion 3.22 gives

or

0 ⫽ CIAt ⫺ ␾

t ⫽

␾

CIA

⫽

␾

IA

assuming that I is the actual absorbed intensity. Because
␾ and I are given, we need A, the cross-sectional area of
an  atom,  to  calculate  the  time.  As  an  estimate  of  A we
simply  use  A ⫽ ␲r 2,  where  r is  a  typical  atomic  radius.
Taking r ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 10⫺8 cm,  we  ﬁnd  A ⫽ ␲ ⫻ 10⫺16 cm2.
Finally,  substituting  this  value  into  the  expression  for  t,
we obtain

t ⫽

2.28 eV ⫻ 1.60 ⫻ 10⫺16 mJ/eV

(10⫺7 mJ/s ⭈cm2)(␲ ⫻ 10⫺16 cm2)

⫽ 1.2 ⫻ 107 s ⬇ 130 days

Thus we see that the classical calculation of the time lag
for photoemission does not agree with the experimental
result, disagreeing by a factor of 1016!

Exercise 5 Why do the I – V curves in Figure 3.15a rise gradually between ⫺Vs and 0,
that is, why do they not rise abruptly upward at ⫺Vs? What statistical information about
the conduction electrons inside the metal is contained in the slope of the I – V curve?

Einstein’s explanation of the puzzling photoelectric effect was as brilliant
for what it focused on as for what it omitted. For example, he stressed that
Maxwell’s classical theory had been immensely successful in describing the
progress  of  light  through  space  over  long  time  intervals but  that  a  different
theory might be needed to describe momentary interactions of light and mat-
ter, as in light emission by oscillators or the transformation of light energy
to kinetic energy of the electron in the photoelectric effect. He also focused
only  on  the  energy  aspect  of  the  light  and  avoided  models  or  mechanisms
concerning the conversion of the quantum of light energy to kinetic energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

84

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Table 3.1 Work Functions

of Selected
Metals

y

E

Work Function, ␾,

Metal

(in eV)

Photon with

energy hf

y

Na
Al
Cu
Zn
Ag
Pt
Pb
Fe

2.28
4.08
4.70
4.31
4.73
6.35
4.14
4.50

Einstein’s theory of the
photoelectric effect

Vse  = hf –

φ

Vse

Metal 2

Metal 1

Slope = h

f

f02

f01

0

φ
– 2

φ
– 1

Figure  3.17 Universal  charac-
teristics  of  all  metals  undergo-
ing the photoelectric effect.

B

z

c

x

z

x

c

(a)

(b)

Figure  3.16 (a)  A  classical  view  of  a  traveling  light  wave.  (b)  Einstein’s  photon
picture of “a traveling light wave.”

of  the  electron.  In  short,  he  introduced  only  those  ideas  necessary  to
explain the photoelectric effect. He maintained that the energy of light
is  not  distributed  evenly  over  the  classical  wavefront,  but  is  concen-
trated  in  discrete  regions  (or  in  “bundles”),  called  quanta,  each  con-
taining  energy,  hf. A  suggestive  image,  not  to  be  taken  too  literally,  is
shown  in  Figure  3.16b.  Einstein’s  picture  was  that  a  light  quantum  was  so
localized  that  it  gave  all  its  energy,  hf,  directly  to  a  single  electron  in  the
metal.  Therefore,  according  to  Einstein,  the  maximum  kinetic  energy  for
emitted electrons is

Kmax ⫽ hf ⫺ ␾

(3.23)

where ␾ is the work function of the metal, which corresponds to the minimum
energy with which an electron is bound in the metal. Table 3.1 lists values of
work functions measured for different metals.

Equation  3.23  beautifully  explained  the  puzzling  independence  of  K max
and  intensity  found  by  Lenard.  For  a  ﬁxed  light  frequency  f,  an  increase  in
light  intensity  means  more  photons  and  more  photoelectrons  per  second,
although K max remains  unchanged  according  to  Equation  3.23.  In  addition,
Equation  3.23  explained  the  phenomenon  of  threshold  frequency.  Light  of
threshold frequency f0, which has just enough energy to knock an electron out
of  the  metal  surface,  causes  the  electron  to  be  released  with  zero  kinetic
energy. Setting K max ⫽ 0 in Equation 3.23 gives

f0 ⫽

␾

h

(3.24)

Thus  the  variation  in  threshold  frequency  for  different  metals  is  produced
by  the  variation  in  work  function.  Note  that  light  with  f ⬍ f0 has  insuf-
ficient energy  to  free  an  electron.  Consequently,  the  photocurrent  is  zero
for f ⬍ f0.

With any theory, one looks not only for explanations of previously observed
results  but  also  for  new  predictions.  This  was  indeed  the  case  here,  as  Equa-
tion  3.23  predicted  the  result  (new  in  1905)  that  K max should  vary  linearly
with f for any material and that the slope of the K max versus f plot should yield

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

3.4

LIGHT QUANTIZATION AND THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

85

 

the universal constant h (see Fig. 3.17). In 1916, the American physicist Robert
Millikan (1868 – 1953) reported photoelectric measurement data, from which
he substantiated the linear relation between K max and f and determined h with
a precision of about 0.5%.12

EXAMPLE 3.5 The Photoelectric Effect in Zinc

Philip  Lenard  determined  that  photoelectrons  released
from zinc by ultraviolet light were stopped by a voltage of
4.3 V. Find K max and v max for these electrons.

Solution

K max ⫽ eVs ⫽ (1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)(4.3 V) ⫽ 6.9 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

To  ﬁnd v max, we  set  the  work  done  by  the  electric  ﬁeld
equal  to  the  change  in  the  electron’s  kinetic  energy,  to
obtain

1
2m ev 2

max ⫽ eVs

or

vmax ⫽ √ 2eVs

me

⫽ √ 2(6.9 ⫻ 10⫺19 J)

9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg

⫽ 1.2 ⫻ 106 m/s

Therefore, a 4.3-eV electron is rather energetic and moves
with a speed of about a million meters per second. Note,
however,  that  this  is  still  only  about  0.4%  of  the speed  of
light, so relativistic effects are negligible in this case.

EXAMPLE 3.6 The Photoelectric Effect for Iron
Suppose that light of total intensity 1.0 ␮W/cm2 falls on
a clean iron sample 1.0 cm2 in area. Assume that the iron
sample  reﬂects  96%  of  the  light  and  that  only  3.0%  of
the absorbed energy lies in the violet region of the spec-
trum above the threshold frequency.

(a)  What  intensity  is  actually  available  for  the  photo-

electric effect?
Because  only  4.0%  of  the  incident  energy  is  absorbed,
and  only  3.0%  of  this  energy  is  able  to  produce  photo-
electrons, the intensity available is

(b) Assuming that all the photons in the violet region
have an effective wavelength of 250 nm, how many elec-
trons will be emitted per second?
For an efﬁciency of 100%, one photon of energy, hf, will
produce one electron, so

Number of electrons/s

⫽

⫽

1.2 ⫻ 10⫺9 W

hf

⫽

␭(1.2 ⫻ 10⫺9)

hc

(250 ⫻ 10⫺9 m)(1.2 ⫻ 10⫺9 J/s)
(6.6 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)(3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s)

⫽ 1.5 ⫻ 109

(c) Calculate the current in the phototube in amperes.

i ⫽ (1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)(1.5 ⫻ 109 electrons/s)
⫽ 2.4 ⫻ 10⫺10 A

A  sensitive  electrometer  is  needed  to  detect  this  small
current.

(d) If the cutoff frequency is f0 ⫽ 1.1 ⫻ 1015 Hz, ﬁnd

the work function, ␾, for iron.

From Equation 3.24, we have

␾ ⫽ hf 0 ⫽ (4.14 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV ⭈ s)(1.1 ⫻ 1015 s⫺1)

⫽ 4.5 eV

(e)  Find  the  stopping  voltage  for  iron  if  photoelec-

trons are produced by light with ␭ ⫽ 250 nm.
From the photoelectric equation,

eVs ⫽ hf ⫺ ␾ ⫽

hc
␭

⫺ ␾

⫽

(4.14 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV ⭈s)(3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s)

250 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

⫺ 4.5 eV

I ⫽ (0.030)(0.040)I 0 ⫽ (0.030)(0.040)(1.0 ␮W/cm2)

⫽ 0.46 eV

⫽ 1.2nW/cm2

Thus the stopping voltage is 0.46 V.

12R. A. Millikan, Phys. Rev., 7:355, 1916. Some of the experimental difﬁculties in the photoelec-
tric effect were the lack of strong monochromatic uv sources, small photocurrents, and large
effects  of  rough  and  impure  metal  surfaces  on  f0 and K max.  Millikan  cleverly  circumvented
these  difﬁculties  by  using  alkali  metal  cathodes,  which  are  sensitive  in  the  visible  to  about 
600 nm (thus making it possible to use the strong visible lines of the mercury arc), and ma-
chining fresh alkali surfaces while the metal sample was held under high vacuum. Also when
the phototube emitter and collector are composed of different metals, the work function ␾
determined  from  plots  of  VS vs. f is  actually  that  of  the  collector.  See  J.  Rudnick  and  D.  S.
Tannhauser, AJP 44, 796, 1976.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

86

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

3.5 THE COMPTON EFFECT AND X-RAYS

Although  Einstein  introduced  the  concept  that  light  consists  of  pointlike
quanta  of  energy in  1905,  he  did  not  directly  treat  the  momentum carried  by
light  until  1906.  In  that  year,  in  a  paper  treating  a  molecular  gas  in  thermal
equilibrium  with  electromagnetic  radiation  (statistical  mechanics  again!),
Einstein concluded that a light quantum of energy E travels in a single direc-
tion (unlike a spherical wave) and carries a momentum directed along its line
of motion of E/c, or hf/c. In his own words, “If a bundle of radiation causes a
molecule to emit or absorb an energy packet hf, then momentum of quantity
hf/c is  transferred  to  the  molecule,  directed  along  the  line  of  motion  of  the
bundle for absorption and opposite the bundle for emission.”

After  developing  the  ﬁrst  theoretical  justiﬁcation  for  photon  momentum,
and  treating  the  photoelectric  effect  much  earlier,  it  is  curious  that  Einstein
carried  the  treatment  of  photon  momentum  no  further.  The  theoretical
treatment  of  photon – particle  collisions  had  to  await  the  insight  of  Peter
Debye  (1884 – 1966,  Dutch  physical  chemist),  and  Arthur  Holly  Compton
(1892 – 1962,  American  physicist).  In  1923,  both  men  independently  realized
that  the  scattering  of  x-ray  photons  from  electrons  could  be  explained  by
treating photons as pointlike particles with energy hf and momentum hf/c and
by conserving relativistic energy and momentum of the photon – electron pair
in  a  collision.13,14 This  remarkable  development  completed  the  particle
picture  of  light  by  showing  that  photons,  in  addition  to  carrying  energy,  hf,
carry momentum, hf/c, and scatter like particles. Before treating this in detail,
a brief introduction to the important topic of x-rays will be given.

X-Rays
X-rays  were  discovered  in  1895  by  the  German  physicist  Wilhelm  Roentgen.
He  found  that  a  beam  of  high-speed  electrons  striking  a  metal  target  pro-
duced  a  new  and  extremely  penetrating  type  of  radiation  (Fig.  3.18).  Within
months  of  Roentgen’s  discovery  the  ﬁrst  medical  x-ray  pictures  were  taken,
and  within  several  years  it  became  evident  that  x-rays  were  electromagnetic
vibrations similar to light but with extremely short wavelengths and great pen-
etrating power (see Fig. 3.19). Rough estimates obtained from the diffraction
of x rays by a narrow slit showed x-ray wavelengths to be about 10⫺10 m, which
is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  atomic  spacing  in  crystals.  Because
the best artiﬁcially ruled gratings of the time had spacings of 10⫺7 m, Max von
Laue  in  Germany  and  William  Henry  Bragg  and  William  Lawrence  Bragg  (a
father and son team) in England suggested using single crystals such as calcite
as natural three-dimensional gratings, the periodic atomic arrangement in the
crystals constituting the grating rulings.

A  particularly  simple  method  of  analyzing  the  scattering  of  x-rays  from
parallel  crystal  planes  was  proposed  by  W.  L.  Bragg  in  1912.  Consider  two
successive planes of atoms as shown in Figure 3.20. Note that adjacent atoms
in  a  single  plane, A,  will  scatter  constructively  if  the  angle  of  incidence,  ␪i,

13P. Debye, Phys. Zeitschr., 24:161, 1923. In this paper, Debye acknowledges Einstein’s pioneering

work on the quantum nature of light.

14A. H. Compton, Phys. Rev., 21:484, 1923.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.5

THE COMPTON EFFECT AND X-RAYS

87

Filament

Metal target

Evacuated

glass envelope

Electrons

Focusing
electrode

X rays

50–100 kV

–

+

Figure 3.18 X-rays are produced by bombarding a metal target (copper, tungsten, and
molybdenum are common) with energetic electrons having energies of 50 to 100 keV.

equals the angle of reﬂection, ␪r. Atoms in successive planes (A and B) will scat-
ter constructively at an angle ␪ if the path length difference for rays (1) and
(2)  is  a  whole  number  of  wavelengths,  n␭.  From  the  diagram,  constructive
interference will occur when

AB ⫹ BC ⫽ n␭

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

and because AB ⫽ BC ⫽ d sin ␪, it follows that

Figure  3.19 One  of  the  ﬁrst
images  made  by  Roentgen  us-
ing x-rays (December 22, 1895).

n␭ ⫽ 2d sin ␪    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(3.25a)

Bragg equation

where n is the order of the intensity maximum, ␭ is the x-ray wavelength, d is
the spacing between planes, and ␪ is the angle of the intensity maximum mea-
sured from plane A. Note that there are several maxima at different angles for
a ﬁxed d and ␭ corresponding to n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ . Equation 3.25a is known as
the Bragg equation; it was used with great success by the Braggs to determine
atomic positions in crystals. A diagram of a Bragg x-ray spectrometer is shown
in  Figure  3.21a.  The  crystal  is  slowly  rotated  until  a  strong  reﬂection  is

Ray (1)

Ray (2)
θ

Reflected

rays

iθ

D

θr

θ

d

A

θ

θ

C

B

Plane A

Plane B

Figure 3.20 Bragg scattering of x-rays from successive planes of atoms. Constructive
interference occurs for ABC equal to an integral number of wavelengths.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

88

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

θ

Crystal

P

θ

Film

X-ray
source

Lead

collimators

(a)

Κα

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

λmin

Κβ

30

40

50

60

70

80 90

λ (pm)

(b)

Figure  3.21 (a)  A  Bragg  crystal  x-ray  spectrometer.  The  crystal  is  rotated  about  an
axis through P. (b) The x-ray spectrum of a metal target consists of a broad, continuous
spectrum  plus  a  number  of  sharp  lines,  which  are  due  to  the  characteristic  x-rays.
Those shown were obtained when 35-keV electrons bombarded a molybdenum target.
Note that 1 pm ⫽ 10⫺12 m ⫽ 10⫺3 nm.

observed,  which  means  that  Equation  3.25a  holds.  If  ␭ is  known,  d can  be
calculated and, from the series of d values found, the crystal structure may be
determined. (See Problem 38.) If measurements are made with a crystal with
known d, the  x-ray  intensity  vs.  wavelength  may  be  determined  and  the  x-ray
emission spectrum examined.

The actual x-ray emission spectrum produced by a metal target bombarded
by  electrons  is  interesting  in  itself  and  is  shown  in  Figure  3.21b.  Although
the broad, continuous spectrum is well explained by classical electromagnetic
theory, a feature of Figure 3.21b, ␭min, shows proof of the photon theory. The
broad continuous x-ray spectrum shown in Figure 3.21b results from glancing
or  indirect  scattering  of  electrons  from  metal  atoms.  In  such  collisions  only
part  of  the  electron’s  energy  is  converted  to  electromagnetic  radiation.  This
radiation is called bremsstrahlung (German for braking radiation), which refers

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

to the radiation given off by any charged particle when it is decelerated. The
minimum  continuous  x-ray  wavelength,  ␭min,  is  found  to  be  independent
of target  composition  and  depends  only  on  the  tube  voltage,  V.  It  may  be
explained by attributing it to the case of a head-on electron – atom collision in
which all of the incident electron’s kinetic energy is converted to electromag-
netic energy in the form of a single x-ray photon. For this case we have

3.5

THE COMPTON EFFECT AND X-RAYS

89

or

eV ⫽ hf ⫽

hc
␭min

␭min ⫽

hc
eV

(3.26)

where V is the x-ray tube voltage.

Superimposed  on  the  continuous  spectrum  are  sharp  x-ray  lines  labeled
K␣ and  K␤,  which  are  like  sharp  lines  emitted  in  the  visible  light  spectrum.
The  sharp  lines  depend  on  target  composition  and  provide  evidence  for
discrete  atomic  energy  levels  separated  by  thousands  of  electron  volts,  as
explained in Chapter 9.

The Compton Effect
Let us now turn to the year 1922 and the experimental conﬁrmation by Arthur
Holly Compton that x-ray photons behave like particles with momentum hf/c.
For some time prior to 1922, Compton and his coworkers had been accumu-
lating  evidence  that  showed  that  classical  wave  theory  failed  to  explain  the
scattering of x-rays from free electrons. In particular, classical theory predicted
that  incident  radiation  of  frequency  f0 should  accelerate  an  electron  in  the
direction  of  propagation  of  the  incident  radiation,  and  that  it  should
cause forced oscillations of the electron and reradiation at frequency f ⬘, where
f ⬘ ⱕ f0 (see Fig. 3.22a).15 Also, according to classical theory, the frequency or
wavelength of the scattered radiation should depend on the length of time the
electron was exposed to the incident radiation as well as on the intensity of the
incident radiation.

Imagine the surprise when Compton showed experimentally that the wave-
length shift of x-rays scattered at a given angle is absolutely independent of the
intensity  of  radiation  and  the  length  of  exposure,  and  depends  only  on  the
scattering  angle.  Figure  3.22b  shows  the  quantum  model  of  the  transfer  of
momentum and energy between an individual x-ray photon and an electron.
Note that the quantum model easily explains the lower scattered frequency f ⬘,
because the incident photon gives some of its original energy hf to the recoil-
ing electron.

A schematic diagram of the apparatus used by Compton is shown in Figure
3.23a.  In  the  original  experiment,  Compton  measured  the  dependence
of scattered  x-ray  intensity  on  wavelength  at  three  different  scattering  angles

15This  decrease  in  frequency  of  the  reradiated  wave  is  caused  by  a  double  Doppler  shift,  ﬁrst
because the electron is receding from the incident radiation, and second because the electron is
a moving radiator as viewed from the ﬁxed lab frame. See D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1961, p. 35.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

90

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

E

B

f 0

(a) Classical model

Electron

Electron motion

–

θ

f ′

B

E

pe

Recoiling electron

f 0, λ 0

(b) Quantum model

φ

θ

Scattered photon

f ′, λ′

Figure 3.22 X-ray scattering from an electron: (a) the classical model, (b) the quan-
tum model.

of  45⬚,  90⬚,  and  135⬚.  The  wavelength  was  measured  with  a  rotating  crystal
spectrometer, and the intensity was determined by an ionization chamber that
generated a current proportional to the x-ray intensity. Monochromatic x-rays
of wavelength ␭0 ⫽ 0.71 Å constituted the incident beam. A carbon target with
a  low  atomic  number,  Z ⫽ 12,  was  used  because  atoms  with  small  Z have  a
higher percentage of loosely bound electrons. The experimental intensity ver-
sus wavelength plots observed by Compton for scattering angles of 0⬚, 45⬚, 90⬚,
and  135⬚ are  shown  in  Figure  3.23b.  They  show  two  peaks,  one  at ␭0 and  a
shifted peak at a longer wavelength ␭⬘. The shifted peak at ␭⬘ is caused by the
scattering of x-rays from nearly free electrons. Assuming that x-rays behave like
particles, ␭⬘ was predicted by Compton to depend on scattering angle as

Compton effect

␭⬘ ⫺ ␭0 ⫽

h
mec

(1 ⫺ cos␪)

(3.27)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Graphite

target

  = 90°
θ

λ′

λ0
X-ray
source

3.5

THE COMPTON EFFECT AND X-RAYS

91

Intensity

Intensity

θ
  = 0°

Primary 

θ
  = 90°

λ0

λ

λ0

λ′

λ

θ
  = 45°

  = 135°
θ

Rotating crystal

λ′

Ionization
chamber

(a)

λ0

λ′

λ

λ0

(b)

λ′

λ

Figure  3.23 (a)  Schematic  diagram  of  Compton’s  apparatus.  The  wavelength  was
measured  with  a  rotating  crystal  spectrometer  using  graphite  (carbon)  as  the  target.
The  intensity  was  determined  by  a  movable  ionization  chamber  that  generated  a  cur-
rent proportional to the x-ray intensity. (b) Scattered x-ray intensity versus wavelength
of Compton scattering at ␪ ⫽ 0⬚, 45⬚, 90⬚, and 135⬚.

where me ⫽ electron  mass;  the  combination  of  constants  h/mec is  called
the Compton  wavelength  of  the  electron  and  has  a  currently  accepted
value of

h
m ec

⫽ 0.0243 Å ⫽ 0.00243 nm

Compton’s  careful  measurements  completely  conﬁrmed  the  dependence  of
␭⬘ on  scattering  angle  ␪ and  determined  the  Compton  wavelength  of  the
electron  to  be  0.0242 Å,  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  currently  accepted
value.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  these  results  were  the  ﬁrst  to  really  convince  most
American physicists of the basic validity of the quantum theory!

The unshifted peak at ␭0 in Figure 3.23 is caused by x-rays scattered from
electrons  tightly  bound  to  carbon  atoms.  This  unshifted  peak  is  actually  pre-
dicted by Equation 3.27 if the electron mass is replaced by the mass of a car-
bon atom, which is about 23,000 times the mass of an electron.

Let us now turn to the derivation of Equation 3.27 assuming that the pho-
ton  exhibits  particle-like  behavior  and  collides  elastically  like  a  billiard  ball
with  a  free  electron  initially  at  rest.  Figure  3.24  shows  the  photon – electron
collision  for  which  energy  and  momentum  are  conserved.  Because  the  elec-
tron  typically  recoils  at  high  speed,  we  treat  the  collision  relativistically.  The
expression for conservation of energy gives

E ⫹ mec 2 ⫽ E ⬘ ⫹ Ee

(3.28)

Energy conservation

where E is the energy of the incident photon, E ⬘ is the energy of the scattered
photon, mec2 is the rest energy of the electron, and Ee is the total relativistic
energy of the electron after the collision. Likewise, from momentum conserva-
tion we have

p ⫽ p⬘ cos ␪ ⫹ pe cos ␾

(3.29)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

92

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Incident
photon

E, p

φ

θ

Ee, pe

Recoiling electron

Scattered photon

E ′ < E, p′

Figure  3.24 Diagram  representing  Compton  scattering  of  a  photon  by  an
electron.  The  scattered  photon  has  less  energy  (or  longer  wavelength)  than  the
incident photon.

p⬘ sin ␪ ⫽ pe sin ␾

(3.30)

where p is the momentum of the incident photon, p⬘ is the momentum of the
scattered  photon,  and  pe is  the  recoil  momentum  of  the  electron.  Equations
3.29 and 3.30 may be solved simultaneously to eliminate ␾, the electron scat-
2:
tering angle, to give the following expression for p e

2 ⫽ (p⬘)2 ⫹ p 2 ⫺ 2pp⬘ cos ␪

p e

(3.31)

At  this  point  it  is  necessary,  paradoxically,  to  use  the  wave  nature  of
light to explain  the  particle-like  behavior  of  photons.  We  have  already
seen that  the energy  of  a  photon  and  the  frequency  of  the  associated
light wave  are  related  by  E ⫽ hf.  If  we  assume  that  a  photon  obeys  the
relativistic  expression  E 2 ⫽ p2c2 ⫹ m2c4 and  that  a  photon  has  a  mass  of
zero, we have

pphoton ⫽

E
c

⫽

hf
c

⫽

h
␭

(3.32)

Here  again  we  have  a  paradoxical  situation;  a  particle  property,  the  photon
momentum, is given in terms of a wave property, ␭, of an associated light wave.
If  the  relations  E ⫽ hf and p ⫽ hf/c are  substituted  into  Equations  3.28  and
3.31, these become respectively

and

Ee ⫽ hf ⫺ hf ⬘ ⫹ mec 2

2 ⫽ 冢 hf ⬘
c 冣2

p e

⫹ 冢 hf
c 冣2

⫺

2h2ff ⬘

c2

 cos ␪

(3.33)

(3.34)

Because  the  Compton  measurements  do  not  concern  the  total  energy
and momentum  of  the  electron,  we  eliminate  Ee and pe by  substi-
tuting Equations  3.33  and  3.34  into  the  expression  for  the  electron’s
relativistic energy,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.5

THE COMPTON EFFECT AND X-RAYS

93

E 2

e ⫽ pe

2c 2 ⫹ m 2

ec4

After some algebra (see Problem 33), one obtains Compton’s result for the in-
crease in a photon’s wavelength when it is scattered through an angle ␪:

␭⬘ ⫺ ␭0 ⫽

h
mec

(1 ⫺ cos ␪)

(3.27)

EXAMPLE 3.7 The Compton Shift for Carbon

X-rays of wavelength ␭ ⫽ 0.200 nm are aimed at a block
of carbon. The scattered x-rays are observed at an angle
of  45.0⬚ to  the  incident  beam.  Calculate  the increased
wavelength of the scattered x-rays at this angle.

Solution The shift in wavelength of the scattered x-rays
is given by Equation 3.27. Taking ␪ ⫽ 45.0⬚, we ﬁnd

⌬␭ ⫽

h
m ec

(1 ⫺ cos ␪)

⫽

6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s

(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

⫽ 7.11 ⫻ 10⫺13 m ⫽ 0.00071 nm

 (1 ⫺ cos 45.0⬚)

Hence, the wavelength of the scattered x-ray at this angle is

␭ ⫽ ⌬␭ ⫹ ␭0 ⫽ 0.200711 nm

Exercise 6 Find the fraction of energy lost by the photon in this collision.

Answer Fraction ⫽ ⌬E/E ⫽ 0.00355.

EXAMPLE 3.8 X-ray Photons versus 

Visible Photons

(a) Why are x-ray photons used in the Compton experi-
ment,  rather  than  visible-light  photons?  To  answer  this
question,  we  shall  ﬁrst  calculate  the  Compton  shift  for
scattering  at  90⬚ from  graphite  for  the  following  cases:
(1)  very  high  energy  ␥-rays  from  cobalt,  ␭ ⫽ 0.0106 Å;
(2) x-rays from molybdenum, ␭ ⫽ 0.712 Å; and (3) green
light from a mercury lamp, ␭ ⫽ 5461 Å.

Solution In  all  cases,  the  Compton  shift  formula  gives
⌬␭ ⫽ ␭⬘ ⫺ ␭0 ⫽ (0.0243 Å)(1 ⫺ cos 90⬚) ⫽ 0.0243 Å ⫽
0.00243 nm.  That  is,  regardless  of  the  incident  wave-
length,  the  same  small  shift  is  observed.  However,  the
fractional change in wavelength, ⌬␭/␭0, is quite different
in each case:

␥-rays from cobalt:

⌬␭
␭0

⫽

0.0243 Å
0.0106 Å

⫽ 2.29

X-rays from molybdenum:

⌬␭
␭0

⫽

0.0243 Å
0.712 Å

⫽ 0.0341

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Visible light from mercury:

⌬␭
␭0

⫽

0.0243 Å
5461 Å

⫽ 4.45 ⫻ 10⫺6

Because  both  incident  and  scattered  wavelengths  are
simultaneously  present  in  the  beam,  they  can  be  easily
resolved only if ⌬␭/␭0 is a few percent or if ␭0 ⱕ 1 Å.

(b) The so-called free electrons in carbon are actually
electrons  with  a  binding  energy  of  about  4 eV.  Why
may this binding energy be ignored for x-rays with ␭0 ⫽
0.712 Å?

Solution The energy of a photon with this wavelength
is

E ⫽ hf ⫽

hc
␭

⫽

12 400 eV ⭈Å

0.712 Å

⫽ 17 400 eV

Therefore, the electron binding energy of 4 eV is negligi-
ble in comparison with the incident x-ray energy.

94

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

3.6 PARTICLE–WAVE COMPLEMENTARITY

As we have seen, the Compton effect offers ironclad evidence that when light
interacts with matter it behaves as if it were composed of particles with energy
hf and momentum h/␭. Yet the very success of Compton’s theory raises many
questions.  If  the  photon  is  a  particle,  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  the
“frequency” and “wavelength” of the particle, which determine its energy and
momentum?  Is  light  in  some  sense  simultaneously  a  wave  and  a  particle?
Although photons have zero mass, is there a simple expression for an effective
gravitational photon mass that determines a photon’s gravitational attraction?
What  is  the  spatial  extent  of  a  photon,  and  how  does  an  electron  absorb  or
scatter a photon?

Although answers to some of these questions are possible, it is well to be
aware that some demand a view of atomic processes that is too pictorial and
literal.  Many  of  these  questions  issue  from  the  viewpoint  of  classical  me-
chanics, in which all matter and energy are seen in the context of colliding
billiard  balls  or  water  waves  breaking  on  a  shore.  Quantum  theory  gives
light a more flexible nature by implying that different experimental condi-
tions elicit either the wave properties or particle properties of light. In fact,
both  views  are  necessary  and  complementary. Neither model can be used exclu-
sively  to  describe  electromagnetic  radiation  adequately.  A  complete  under-
standing is obtained only if the two models are combined in a complemen-
tary manner.

The  physicist  Max  Born,  an  important  contributor  to  the  foundations  of

quantum theory, had this to say about the particle – wave dilemma:

The  ultimate  origin  of  the  difﬁculty  lies  in  the  fact  (or  philosophical  principle)
that we are compelled to use the words of common language when we wish to de-
scribe  a  phenomenon,  not  by  logical  or  mathematical  analysis,  but  by  a  picture
appealing  to  the  imagination.  Common  language  has  grown  by  everyday  experi-
ence  and  can  never  surpass  these  limits.  Classical  physics  has  restricted  itself  to
the use of concepts of this kind; by analyzing visible motions it has developed two
ways  of  representing  them  by  elementary  processes:  moving  particles  and  waves.
There  is  no  other  way  of  giving  a  pictorial  description  of  motions — we  have  to
apply  it  even  in  the  region  of  atomic  processes,  where  classical  physics  breaks
down.

Every  process  can  be  interpreted  either  in  terms  of  corpuscles  or  in  terms  of
waves, but on the other hand it is beyond our power to produce proof that it is actu-
ally corpuscles or waves with which we are dealing, for we cannot simultaneously de-
termine all the other properties which are distinctive of a corpuscle or of a wave, as
the  case  may  be.  We  can  therefore  say  that  the  wave  and  corpuscular  descriptions
are only to be regarded as complementary ways of viewing one and the same objec-
tive process, a process which only in deﬁnite limiting cases admits of complete picto-
rial interpretation.16
Thus  we  are  left  with  an  uneasy  compromise  between  wave  and  particle
concepts and must accept, at this point, that both are necessary to explain the
observed behavior of light. Further considerations of the dual nature of light
and indeed of all matter will be taken up again in Chapters 4 and 5.

16M. Born, Atomic Physics, fourth edition, New York, Hafner Publishing Co., 1946, p. 92.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

3.7 DOES GRAVITY AFFECT LIGHT?

O P T I O N A L

3.7

DOES GRAVITY AFFECT LIGHT?

95

Source

emits frequency f

H

Detector
measures

frequency f ′

A

B

Earth’s surface

Figure  3.25 Schematic  dia-
gram  of  the  falling-photon  ex-
periment.

It is interesting to speculate on how far the particle model of light may be carried.
Encouraged by the successful particle explanation of the photoelectric and Comp-
ton  effects,  one  may  ask  whether  the  photon  possesses  an  effective  gravitational-
mass, and whether photons will be attracted gravitationally by large masses, such as
those of the Sun or Earth, and experience an observable change in energy.

To investigate these questions, recall that the photon has zero mass, but its effec-
tive inertial mass, mi, may reasonably be taken to be the mass equivalent of the pho-
ton energy, E, or

m i ⫽

E
c 2 ⫽

hf
c 2

(3.35)

The  same  result  is  obtained  if  we  divide  the  photon  momentum  by  the  photon
speed c:

m i ⫽

p
c

⫽

hf
c 2

Recall  that  the  effective  inertial  mass determines  how  the  photon  responds  to  an
applied  force  such  as  that  exerted  on  it  during  a  collision  with  an  electron.  The
gravitational mass of an object determines the force of gravitational attraction of that
object to another, such as the Earth. Although it is a remarkable unexplained fact in
Newtonian  mechanics  that  the  inertial  mass  of  all  material  bodies  is  equal  to  the
gravitational  mass  to  within  one  part  in  1012,  Einstein’s  Equivalence  Principle  of
general relativity requires this result as mentioned in Chapter 2.

Let  us  assume  that  the  photon,  like  other  objects,  also  has  a  gravitational  mass
equal  to  its  inertial  mass.  In  this  case  a  photon  falling  from  a  height  H should
increase in energy by mgH and therefore increase in frequency, although its speed
cannot  increase  and  remains  at  c.  In  fact,  experiments  have  been  carried  out  that
show this increase in frequency and conﬁrm that the photon indeed has an effective
gravitational  mass  of  hf/c2.  Figure  3.25  shows  a  schematic  representation  of  the
experiment. An expression for f ⬘ in terms of f may be derived by applying conserva-
tion of energy to the photon at points A and B.

K EB ⫹ PEB ⫽ K EA ⫹ PEA

Because the photon’s kinetic energy is E ⫽ pc ⫽ hf and its potential energy is mgH,
where m ⫽ hf/c 2, we have

or

hf ⬘ ⫹ 0 ⫽ hf ⫹ 冢 hf

c 2 冣 gH

f ⬘ ⫽ f 冢1 ⫹

gH

c 2 冣

The fractional change in frequency, ⌬f/f, is given by

⌬f
f

⫽

f ⬘ ⫺ f

f

⫽

gH
c 2

For H ⫽ 50 m, we ﬁnd

⌬f
f

⫽

(9.8 m/s2)(50 m)
(3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s)2 ⫽ 5.4 ⫻ 10⫺15

(3.36)

(3.37)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

96

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

f

f ′

R  = ∞

Star of

mass M and
radius R s

Figure 3.26 Gravitational redshift from a high-density star.

This incredibly small increase in frequency has actually been measured (with difﬁ-
culty)!17 The shift amounts to only about 1/250 of the line width of the monochro-
matic ␥-ray photons used in the falling-photon experiment.

The increase in frequency for a photon falling inward suggests a decrease in fre-
quency for a photon that escapes outward to inﬁnity against the gravitational pull of
a star (see Fig. 3.26). This effect, known as “gravitational redshift,” would cause an
emitted photon to be shifted in frequency toward the red end of the spectrum. An
expression for the redshift may be derived once again by conserving photon energy:

[KE ⫹ PE ]R⫽⬁ ⫽ [KE ⫹ PE ]R⫽R s

Using hf for the photon’s kinetic energy and ⫺GMm/R for its potential energy, with
m equal to hf/c 2 and R s equal to the star’s radius, yields

or

hf ⬘ ⫺ 0 ⫽ hf ⫺

GM

R s 冢 hf
c 2 冣

f ⬘ ⫽ f 冢1 ⫺

GM

R sc 2 冣

(3.38)

(3.39)

EXAMPLE 3.9 The Gravitational Redshift for a White Dwarf

White  dwarf  stars  are  extremely  massive,  compact  stars  that  have  a  mass  on  the
order of the Sun’s mass concentrated in a volume similar to that of the Earth. Calcu-
late the gravitational redshift for 300-nm light emitted from such a star.

Solution We can write Equation 3.39 in the alternate form

f ⬘ ⫺ f

f

⫽

⌬f
f

⫽

GM
R sc 2

Using the values

M ⫽ mass of Sun ⫽ 1.99 ⫻ 1030 kg

17R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Lett., 4:337, 1960.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

3.7

DOES GRAVITY AFFECT LIGHT?

97

 

we ﬁnd

R s ⫽ radius of Earth  ⫽ 6.37 ⫻ 106 m
G ⫽ 6.67 ⫻ 10⫺11 N ⭈m2/kg2

⌬f
f

⫽

(6.67 ⫻ 10⫺11 N ⭈m2/kg2)(1.99 ⫻ 1030 kg)

(6.37 ⫻ 106 m)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)2

⫽ 2.31 ⫻ 10⫺4

Because ⌬f/f ⬇ df/f,  and  df ⫽ ⫺(c/␭2) d␭ (from f ⫽ c/␭),  we  ﬁnd 
Therefore, the shift in wavelength is

兩 df/f 兩

⫽ d␭/␭.

⌬␭ ⫽ (300 nm)(2.31 ⫻ 10⫺4) ⫽ 0.0695 nm ⬇ 0.7 Å

Note that this is a redshift, so the observed wavelength would be 300.07 nm.

One  more  observation  about  Equation  3.39  is  irresistible.  Is  it  possible  for  a
very massive star in the course of its life cycle to become so dense that the term
GM/R sc 2 becomes  greater  than  1?  In  that  case  Equation  3.38  suggests  that  the
photon  cannot  escape  from  the  star,  because  escape  requires  more  energy  than
the photon initially possesses. Such a star is called a black hole because it emits no
light and acts like a celestial vacuum cleaner for all nearby matter and radiation.
Even though the black hole itself is not luminous, it may be possible to observe it
indirectly  in  two  ways.  One  way  is  through  the  gravitational  attraction  the  black
hole  would  exert  on  a  normal  luminous  star  if  the  two  constituted  a  binary  star
system.  In  this  case  the  normal  star  would  orbit  the  center  of  mass  of  the  black
hole/normal star pair, and the orbital motion might be detectable. A second in-
direct  technique  for  “viewing”  a  black  hole  would  be  to  search  for  x-rays  pro-
duced by inrushing matter attracted to the black hole. Although the black hole it-
self  would  not  emit  x-rays,  an  x-ray-emitting  region  of  roughly  stellar  diameter
should  be  observable,  as  shown  in  Figure  3.27.  X-rays  are  produced  by  the

X-rays

Black hole

HDE 226868

Figure 3.27 The Cygnus X-1 black hole. The stellar wind from HDE 226868 pours
matter  onto  a  huge  disk  around  its  black  hole  companion.  The  infalling  gases  are
heated  to  enormous  temperatures  as  they  spiral  toward  the  black  hole.  The  gases
are so hot that they emit vast quantities of x-rays. 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

98

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

heating of the infalling matter as it circulates, is compressed, and eventually falls
into the black hole. Such an intense nonluminous point source of x-rays has been
detected in the constellation of the Swan. This source, designated Cygnus X-1, is
believed  by  most  astronomers  to  be  a  black  hole;  it  possesses  a  luminosity,  or
power output, of 1030 W in the 2- to 10-keV x-ray range.

Recently, even more convincing evidence of a black hole has been obtained from
radio telescope measurements of a dust torus rotating rapidly around a huge central
mass at the center of galaxy NGC 4258. (See Figure 3.28.) These observations pin-
point  a  mass  of  39  million  solar  masses  within  a  radius  of  4.0 ⫻ 1015 m,  a  density
10,000  times  greater  than  any  known  cluster  of  stars  and  almost  certainly  high
enough to produce a black hole. The central gravitational mass of 39 million solar
masses was calculated from the observed speed of rotation of the dust torus, which
is about 1 million m/s. And we needn’t even go so far away as NGC 4258. Evidence
of a black hole at the center of our own galaxy has been rapidly accumulating, indi-
cating that a black hole of about 3 million solar masses, concealed by dust, is located
in the constellation Sagittarius.18

SUMMARY

The  work  of  Maxwell  and  Hertz  in  the  late  1800s  conclusively  showed  that
light, heat radiation, and radio waves were all electromagnetic waves differing
only in frequency and wavelength. Thus it astonished scientists to ﬁnd that the

18See  the  interesting  book  The  Black  Hole  at  the  Center  of  our  Galaxy,  by  Fulvio  Melia,  Princeton

University Press, 2003.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

spectral distribution of radiation from a heated cavity could not be explained
in terms of classical wave theory. Planck was forced to introduce the concept
of  the  quantum  of  energy  in  order  to  derive  the  correct  blackbody  formula.
According  to  Planck,  the  atomic  oscillators  responsible  for  blackbody  radia-
tion can have only discrete, or quantized, energies given by

E ⫽ nhf

(3.10)

SUMMARY

99

where n is  an  integer,  h is  Planck’s  constant,  and  f is  the  oscillator’s  natural
frequency. Using general thermodynamic arguments, Planck was able to show
that u( f, T ), the blackbody radiation energy per unit volume with frequency
between f and f ⫹ df,  could  be  expressed  as  the  product  of  the  number  of
oscillators per unit volume in this frequency range, N( f ) df, and the average
energy emitted per oscillator, 

. That is,

E

u( f, T )df ⫽ E N ( f )df

(3.12)

E

E

If 

is calculated by allowing a continuous distribution of oscillator energies,
the incorrect Rayleigh – Jeans law is obtained. If 
is calculated from a discrete
set  of  oscillator  energies  (following  Planck),  the  correct  blackbody  radiation
formula is obtained:

u( f, T )df ⫽

8␲f 2

c3

冢

hf

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1 冣 df

(3.9)

Planck quantized the energy of atomic oscillators, but Einstein extended
the  concept  of  quantization  to  light  itself.  In  Einstein’s  view,  light  of  fre-
quency f consists  of  a  stream  of  particles,  called  photons,  each  with  energy 
E ⫽ hf .  The  photoelectric  effect,  a  process  in  which  electrons  are  ejected
from a metallic surface when light of sufﬁciently high frequency is incident
on the surface, can be simply explained with the photon theory. According
to  this  theory,  the  maximum  kinetic  energy  of  the  ejected  photoelectron,
K max, is given by

K max ⫽ hf ⫺ ␾

(3.23)

where ␾ is the work function of the metal.

Although the idea that light consists of a stream of photons with energy hf
was  put  forward  in  1905,  the  idea  that  these  photons  also  carry  momentum
was  not  experimentally  conﬁrmed  until  1923.  In  that  year  it  was  found  that 
x-rays  scattered  from  free  electrons  suffer  a  simple  shift  in  wavelength  with
scattering angle, known as the Compton shift. When an x-ray of frequency f is
viewed as a particle with energy hf and momentum hf/c, x-ray – electron scattering
can be simply analyzed to yield the Compton shift formula:

⌬␭ ⫽

h
mec

 (1 ⫺ cos ␪)

(3.27)

Here, me is the mass of the electron and ␪ is the x-ray scattering angle.

The  striking  success  of  the  photon  theory  in  explaining  interactions
between  light  and  electrons  contrasts  sharply  with  the  success  of  classical
wave  theory  in  explaining  the  polarization,  reflection,  and  interference  of
light. This leaves us with the dilemma of whether light is a wave or a parti-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

100

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

cle. The currently accepted view suggests that light has both wave and parti-
cle  characteristics  and  that  these  characteristics  together  constitute  a  com-
plementary view of light.

QUESTIONS

1. What assumptions were made by Planck in dealing with
the problem of blackbody radiation? Discuss the conse-
quences of these assumptions.

2. If  the  photoelectric  effect  is  observed  for  one  metal,
can  you  conclude  that  the  effect  will  also  be  observed
for another metal under the same conditions? Explain.
3. Suppose the photoelectric effect occurs in a gaseous tar-
get rather than a solid. Will photoelectrons be produced
at all frequencies of the incident photon? Explain.

4. How  does  the  Compton  effect  differ  from  the  photo-

electric effect?

5. What  assumptions  were  made  by  Compton  in  dealing

with the scattering of a photon from an electron?

6. An x-ray photon is scattered by an electron. What hap-
pens to the frequency of the scattered photon relative
to that of the incident photon?

7. Why  does  the  existence  of  a  cutoff  frequency  in  the
photoelectric  effect  favor  a  particle  theory  for  light
rather than a wave theory?

8. All objects radiate energy. Why, then, are we not able to

see all objects in a dark room?

9. Which  has  more  energy,  a  photon  of  ultraviolet  radia-

tion or a photon of yellow light?

10. What  effect,  if  any,  would  you  expect  the  temperature
of a material to have on the ease with which electrons
can be ejected from it in the photoelectric effect?

11. Some  stars  are  observed  to  be  reddish,  and  some  are
blue. Which stars have the higher surface temperature?
Explain.

12. When  wood  is  stacked  on  a  special  elevated  grate
(which  is  commercially  available)  in  a  ﬁreplace,  a
pocket  of  burning  wood  forms  beneath  the  grate
whose temperature is higher than that of the burning
wood at the top of the stack. Explain how this device
provides  more  heat  to  the  room  than  a  conventional
ﬁre  does  and  thus  increases  the  efﬁciency  of  the 
ﬁreplace.

13. What  physical  process  described  in  this  chapter  might
reasonably be called “the inverse photoelectric effect”?
Can  you  account  for  this  process  classically  or  must  it
be  accounted  for  by  viewing  light  as  a  collection  of
many little particles each with energy hf ? Explain.

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14. In  the  photoelectric  effect,  if  the  intensity  of  incident
light  is  very  low,  then  the  number  of  photons  per  sec-
ond  striking  the  metal  surface  will  be  small  and  the
probability  per  second  of  electron  emission  per  surface
atom will  also  be  small.  Account  for  the  observed
instantaneous  emission  of  photoelectrons  under  these
conditions.

15. Blacker than black, brighter than white. (a) Take a large,
closed,  empty  cardboard  box.  Cut  a  slot  a  few  mil-
limeters  wide  in  one  side.  Use  black  pens,  markers,
and  soot  to  make  some  stripes  next  to  the  slot,  as
shown  in  Figure  Q3.15a.  Inspect  them  with  care  and
choose  which  is  blackest — the  ﬁgure  does  not  show
enough contrast to reveal which it is. Explain why it is
blackest.  (b)  Locate  an  intricately  shaped  compact
fluorescent light ﬁxture, as in Figure Q3.15b. Look at
it through dark glasses and describe where it appears
brightest. Explain why it is brightest there. Suggestion:

PROBLEMS

3.1 Light as an Electromagnetic Wave

1. Classical  Zeeman  effect  or  the  triumph  of  Maxwell’s  equations!
As  pointed  out  in  Section  3.1,  Maxwell’s  equations  may
be  used  to  predict  the  change  in  emission  frequency
when gas atoms are placed in a magnetic ﬁeld. Consider
the situation shown in Figure P3.1. Note that the applica-
tion  of  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  perpendicular  to  the  orbital
plane  of  the  electron  induces  an  electric  ﬁeld,  which
changes the direction of the velocity vector. (a) Using

冖 E ⭈ ds ⫽ ⫺

d ⌽B
dt

show that the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld is given by

E ⫽

r
2

dB
dt

PROBLEMS

101

Gustav Kirchhoff, professor at Heidelberg and master
of  the  obvious,  gave  the  same  answer  to  part  (a)  as
you  likely  will.  His  answer  to  part  (b)  would  begin
like  this:  When  electromagnetic  radiation  falls  on  its
surface,  an  object  reﬂects  some  fraction  r of  the 
energy  and  absorbs  the  rest.  Whether  the  fraction 
reﬂected  is  0.8  or  0.001,  the  fraction  absorbed  is 
a ⫽ 1 ⫺ r.  Suppose  the  object  and  its  surroundings
are  at  the  same  temperature.  The  energy  the  object
absorbs joins its fund of internal energy, but the sec-
ond law of thermodynamics implies that the absorbed
energy cannot raise the object’s temperature. It does
not  produce  a  temperature  increase  because  the  ob-
ject’s energy budget has one more term: energy radi-
ated . . . . You still have to make the observations and
answer  questions  (a)  and  (b),  but  you  can  incorpo-
rate some of Kirchhoff’s ideas into your answer if you
wish. (Alexandra Héder)

␻0 ⫹ ⌬␻ is  produced  by  atoms  with  electrons  rotating
as shown in Figure P3.1, whereas the line at ␻0 ⫺ ⌬␻ is
produced by atoms with electrons rotating in the oppo-
site  sense.  The  line  at  ␻0 is  produced  by  atoms  with
electronic  planes  of  rotation  oriented  parallel  to  B.
Explain.

ω0

+

r

e

v

Initial

ω0 + ∆ω

r

e

v + ∆v

B

+

Final

(b)  Using  F dt ⫽ m dv,  calculate  the  change  in  speed,
⌬v, of the electron. Show that if r remains constant,

Figure P3.1

⌬v ⫽

erB
2m e

(c)  Find  the  change  in  angular  frequency,  ⌬␻,  of  the
electron and calculate the numerical value of ⌬␻ for B
equal  to  1 T.  Note  that  this  is  also  the  change  in
frequency  of  the  light  emitted  according  to  Maxwell’s
equations.  Find  the  fractional  change  in  frequency,
⌬␻/␻, for an ordinary emission line of 500 nm. (d) Ac-
tually, the original emission line at ␻0 is split into three
components at ␻0 — ⌬␻, ␻0, and ␻0 ⫹ ⌬␻. The line at

3.2 Blackbody Radiation

2. The  temperature  of  your  skin  is  approximately  35⬚C.
What is the wavelength at which the peak occurs in the
radiation emitted from your skin?

3. A  2.0-kg  mass  is  attached  to  a  massless  spring  of  force
constant k ⫽ 25 N/m.  The  spring  is  stretched  0.40 m
from  its  equilibrium  position  and  released.  (a)  Find
the total energy and frequency of oscillation according
to  classical  calculations.  (b)  Assume  that  the  energy  is
quantized and ﬁnd the quantum number, n, for the sys-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

102

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

tem. (c) How much energy would be carried away in a
1-quantum change?

wavelength  per  unit  length, 

⌬n
L ⌬␭

.  (c)  Show  that  in

general the number of modes per unit wavelength per
unit length for a string of length L is given by

1

L 兩 dn

d␭ 兩 ⫽

2
␭2

Does this expression yield the same numerical answer as
found  in  (a)?  (d)  Under  what  conditions  is  it  justiﬁed

to replace 

兩冢 ⌬n
L ⌬␭冣兩

with 

兩冢 dn
L d␭冣兩

?  Is  the  expression

n ⫽ 2L/␭a continuous function?

3.4 Light Quantization and 
the Photoelectric Effect

8. Calculate  the  energy  of  a  photon  whose  frequency  is
(a) 5 ⫻ 1014 Hz, (b) 10 GHz, (c) 30 MHz. Express your
answers in electron volts.

9. Determine the corresponding wavelengths for the pho-

tons described in Problem 8.

10. An FM radio transmitter has a power output of 100 kW
and  operates  at  a  frequency  of  94 MHz.  How  many
photons per second does the transmitter emit?

11. The average power generated by the Sun has the value
3.74 ⫻ 1026 W. Assuming the average wavelength of the
Sun’s radiation to be 500 nm, ﬁnd the number of pho-
tons emitted by the Sun in 1 s.

12. A sodium-vapor lamp has a power output of 10 W. Using
589.3 nm as the average wavelength of the source, calcu-
late the number of photons emitted per second.

13. The  photocurrent  of  a  photocell  is  cut  off  by  a  re-
tarding potential of 2.92 V for radiation of wavelength
250 nm. Find the work function for the material.

14. The  work  function  for  potassium  is  2.24 eV.  If  potas-
sium  metal  is  illuminated  with  light  of  wavelength
350 nm,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  maximum  kinetic  energy  of  the
photoelectrons and (b) the cutoff wavelength.

15. Molybdenum has a work function of 4.2 eV. (a) Find
frequency
the  cutoff  wavelength  and 
for the  photoelectric  effect.  (b)  Calculate  the  stop-
ping  potential  if  the  incident  light  has  a  wavelength
of 200 nm.

threshold 

16. When  cesium  metal  is  illuminated  with  light  of  wave-
length 300 nm, the photoelectrons emitted have a max-
imum  kinetic  energy  of  2.23 eV.  Find  (a)  the  work
function  of  cesium  and  (b)  the  stopping  potential  if
the incident light has a wavelength of 400 nm.

17. Consider the metals lithium, beryllium, and mercury,
which  have  work  functions  of  2.3 eV,  3.9 eV,  and 
4.5 eV,  respectively.  If  light  of  wavelength  300 nm  is
incident on each of these metals, determine (a) which
metals  exhibit  the  photoelectric  effect  and  (b) the

4. (a)  Use  Stefan’s  law  to  calculate  the  total  power  radi-
ated per unit area by a tungsten ﬁlament at a tempera-
ture  of  3000 K.  (Assume  that  the  ﬁlament  is  an  ideal
radiator.) (b) If the tungsten ﬁlament of a lightbulb is
rated at 75 W, what is the surface area of the ﬁlament?
(Assume that the main energy loss is due to radiation.)
5. Consider  the  problem  of  the  distribution  of  black-
body  radiation  described  in  Figure  3.3.  Note  that  as
T  increases,  the  wavelength  ␭max at  which  u(␭, T )
reaches  a  maximum  shifts  toward  shorter  wave-
lengths. (a) Show that there is a general relationship
that 
between 
T␭max ⫽ constant (Wien’s displacement law). (b) Ob-
tain  a  numerical  value  for  this  constant.  (Hint: Start
with Planck’s radiation law and note that the slope of
u(␭, T ) is zero when ␭ ⫽ ␭max.)

temperature 

and  ␭max

stating 

6. Planck’s  fundamental  constant,  h. Planck  ultimately  real-
ized  the  great  and  fundamental  importance  of  h,
which, much more than a curve-ﬁtting parameter, is ac-
tually the measure of all quantum phenomena. In fact,
Planck suggested using the universal constants h, c (the
velocity  of  light),  and  G (Newton’s  gravitational  con-
stant)  to  construct  “natural”  or  universal  units  of
length,  time,  and  mass.  He  reasoned  that  the  current
units of length, time, and mass were based on the acci-
dental size, motion, and mass of our particular planet,
but  that  truly  universal  units  should  be  based  on  the
quantum  theory,  the  speed  of  light  in  a  vacuum,  and
the  law  of  gravitation — all  of  which  hold  anywhere  in
the universe and at all times. Show that the expressions

冢 hG
c 3 冣1/2

, 

冢 hG
c 5 冣1/2

,  and 

冢 hc
G 冣1/2

have  dimensions  of

length, time, and mass and ﬁnd their numerical values.
These  quantities  are  called,  respectively,  the  Planck
length,  the  Planck  time,  and  the  Planck  mass.  Would
you care to speculate on the physical meaning of these
quantities?

3.3 Derivation of the Rayleigh – Jeans Law and
Planck’s Law (Optional)

7. Density  of  modes. The  essentials  of  calculating  the  num-
ber of modes of vibration of waves conﬁned to a cavity
may  be  understood  by  considering  a  one-dimensional
example. (a) Calculate the number of modes (standing
waves  of  different  wavelength)  with  wavelengths  be-
tween 2.0 cm and 2.1 cm that can exist on a string with
ﬁxed  ends  that  is  2 m  long.  (Hint: use n(␭/2) ⫽ L,
where n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 . . . . Note that a speciﬁc value of
n deﬁnes a speciﬁc mode or standing wave with differ-
ent wavelength.) (b) Calculate, in analogy to our three-
dimensional calculation, the number of modes per unit

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

maximum  kinetic  energy  for  the  photoelectron  in
each case.

18. Light  of  wavelength  500 nm  is  incident  on  a  metallic
surface. If the stopping potential for the photoelectric
effect  is  0.45 V,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  maximum  energy  of  the
emitted  electrons,  (b)  the  work  function,  and  (c)  the
cutoff wavelength.

19. The active material in a photocell has a work function
of  2.00 eV.  Under  reverse-bias  conditions  (where  the
polarity  of  the  battery  in  Figure  3.14  is  reversed),  the
cutoff  wavelength  is  found  to  be  350 nm.  What  is
the value of the bias voltage?

20. A light source of wavelength ␭ illuminates a metal and
ejects  photoelectrons  with  a  maximum  kinetic  energy
of  1.00 eV.  A  second  light  source  with  half  the  wave-
length  of  the  ﬁrst  ejects  photoelectrons  with  a  maxi-
mum kinetic energy of 4.00 eV. What is the work func-
tion of the metal?

21. Figure  P3.21  shows  the  stopping  potential  versus  inci-
dent photon frequency for the photoelectric effect for
sodium.  Use  these  data  points  to  ﬁnd  (a)  the  work
function,  (b)  the  ratio  h/e,  and  (c)  the  cutoff  wave-
length.  (d)  Find  the  percent  difference  between  your
answer to (b) and the accepted value. (Data taken from
R. A. Millikan, Phys. Rev., 7:362, 1916.)

Vs (volts)

3.0

2.0

1.0

0

4

8

6
f × 1014 (Hz)

10

12

Figure P3.21 Some of Millikan’s original data for sodium.

22. Photons of wavelength 450 nm are incident on a metal.
The  most  energetic  electrons  ejected  from  the  metal
are  bent  into  a  circular  arc  of  radius  20 cm  by  a  mag-
netic  ﬁeld  whose  strength  is  equal  to  2.0 ⫻ 10⫺5 T.
What is the work function of the metal?

2.5 The Compton Effect and X-Rays
23. Calculate  the  energy  and  momentum  of  a  photon  of

wavelength 500 nm.

24. X-rays  of  wavelength  0.200 nm  are  scattered  from  a
block of carbon. If the scattered radiation is detected at

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

103

90⬚ to  the  incident  beam,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  Compton  shift,
⌬␭,  and  (b)  the  kinetic  energy  imparted  to  the  recoil-
ing electron.

25. X-rays with an energy of 300 keV undergo Compton scat-
tering from a target. If the scattered rays are detected at
30⬚ relative  to  the  incident  rays,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  Compton
shift  at  this  angle,  (b)  the  energy  of  the  scattered  x-ray,
and (c) the energy of the recoiling electron.

26. X-rays  with  a  wavelength  of  0.040 nm  undergo  Comp-
ton scattering. (a) Find the wavelength of photons scat-
tered  at  angles  of  30⬚,  60⬚,  90⬚,  120⬚,  150⬚,  180⬚,  and
210⬚. (b) Find the energy of the scattered electrons cor-
responding to these scattered x-rays. (c) Which one of
the  given  scattering  angles  provides  the  electron  with
the greatest energy?

27. Show that a photon cannot transfer all of its energy to
a  free  electron.  (Hint: Note  that  energy  and  momen-
tum must be conserved.)

28. In  the  Compton  scattering  event  illustrated  in  Figure
3.24,  the  scattered  photon  has  an  energy  of  120 keV
and  the  recoiling  electron  has  an  energy  of  40 keV.
Find  (a)  the  wavelength  of  the  incident  photon,
(b) the  angle ␪ at  which  the  photon  is  scattered,  and
(c) the recoil angle ␾ of the electron.

29. Gamma rays (high-energy photons) of energy 1.02 MeV
are  scattered  from  electrons  that  are  initially  at  rest.  If
the scattering is symmetric, that is, if ␪ ⫽ ␾ in Figure 3.24,
ﬁnd (a) the scattering angle ␪ and (b) the energy of the
scattered photons.

30. If  the  maximum  energy  given  to  an  electron  during
Compton scattering is 30 keV, what is the wavelength of
the  incident  photon?  (Hint: What  is  the  scattering  an-
gle for maximum energy transfer?)

31. A  photon  of  initial  energy  0.1 MeV  undergoes  Comp-
ton scattering at an angle of 60⬚. Find (a) the energy of
the  scattered  photon,  (b)  the  recoil  kinetic  energy  of
the electron, and (c) the recoil angle of the electron.

32. An  excited  iron  (Fe)  nucleus  (mass  57 u)  decays  to
its ground  state  with  the  emission  of  a  photon.  The
energy available from this transition is 14.4 keV. (a) By
how much is the photon energy reduced from the full
14.4 keV as a result of having to share energy with the
recoiling atom? (b) What is the wavelength of the emit-
ted photon?

33. Show that the Compton formula

␭⬘ ⫺ ␭0 ⫽

h
m ec

 (1 ⫺ cos ␪)

results when expressions for the electron energy (Equa-
tion  3.33)  and  momentum  (Equation  3.34)  are  substi-
tuted into the relativistic energy expression,

E e

2 ⫽ p e

2c 2 ⫹ m e

2c 4

104

CHAPTER 3

THE QUANTUM THEORY OF LIGHT

 

34. Find  the  energy  of  an  x-ray  photon  that  can  impart  a
maximum energy of 50 keV to an electron by Compton
collision.

35. Compton  used  photons  of  wavelength  0.0711 nm.
(a) What  is  the  energy  of  these  photons?  (b)  What  is
the wavelength of the photons scattered at an angle of
180⬚ (backscattering  case)?  (c)  What  is  the  energy  of
the  backscattered  photons?  (d)  What  is  the  recoil  en-
ergy of the electrons in this case?

36. A  photon  undergoing  Compton  scattering  has  an  en-
ergy after scattering of 80 keV, and the electron recoils
with  an  energy  of  25 keV.  (a)  Find  the  wavelength  of
the  incident  photon.  (b)  Find  the  angle  at  which  the
photon  is  scattered.  (c)  Find  the  angle  at  which  the
electron recoils.

37. X-radiation from a molybdenum target (0.626 Å) is in-
cident on a crystal with adjacent atomic planes spaced
4.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 m apart. Find the three smallest angles at
which intensity maxima occur in the diffracted beam.

38. As a single crystal is rotated in an x-ray spectrometer (Fig.
3.22a), many parallel planes of atoms besides AA and BB
produce  strong  diffracted  beams.  Two  such  planes  are
shown in Figure P3.38. (a) Determine geometrically the
interplanar  spacings  d1 and d 2 in  terms  of  d0.  (b)  Find
the angles (with respect to the surface plane AA) of the
n ⫽ 1, 2, and 3 intensity maxima from planes with spac-
ing d1.  Let  ␭ ⫽ 0.626 Å  and  d0 ⫽ 4.00 Å.  Note  that  a
given crystal structure (for example, cubic) has interpla-
nar  spacings  with  characteristic  ratios,  which  produce
characteristic  diffraction  patterns.  In  this  way,  measure-
ment of the angular position of diffracted x-rays may be
used to infer the crystal structure.

d0

A

B

d0

d1

d2

A

B

Figure P3.38 Atomic planes in a cubic lattice.

39. The  determination  of  Avogadro’s  number  with  x-rays. X-rays
from  a  molybdenum  target  (0.626 Å)  are  incident
on an  NaCl  crystal,  which  has  the  atomic  arrange-
ment shown  in  Figure  P3.39.  If  NaCl  has  a  density  of
2.17 g/cm3 and  the  n ⫽ 1  diffraction  maximum  from
planes  separated  by  d is  found  at  ␪ ⫽ 6.41⬚,  compute

Avogadro’s  number.  (Hint: First  determine  d.  Using
Figure  P3.39,  determine  the  number  of  NaCl  mole-
cules  per  primitive  cell  and  set  the  mass  per  unit  vol-
ume of the primitive cell equal to the density.)

Cl–

d

Na+

d

d

Figure P3.39 The primitive cell of NaCl.

3.7 Does Gravity Affect Light? (Optional)
40. In deriving expressions for the change in frequency of
a  photon  falling  or  rising  in  a  gravitational  ﬁeld,  we
have  assumed  a  small  change  in  frequency  and  a  con-
stant  photon  mass  of  hf/c 2.  Suppose  that  a  star  is  so
dense that ⌬f is not small. (a) Show that f ⬘, the photon
frequency at ⬁, is related to f, the photon frequency at
the star’s surface, by

f ⬘ ⫽ fe⫺GMs/Rsc2

(b) Show that this expression reduces to Equation 3.39
for small Ms/R s. (Hint: The decrease in photon energy,
h df, as the photon moves dr away from the star is equal
to the work done against gravity, FG dr.)

41. If  the  Sun  were  to  contract  and  become  a  black  hole,
(a)  what  would  its  approximate  radius  be  and  (b)  by
what factor would its density increase?

Additional Problems
42. Two  light  sources  are  used  in  a  photoelectric  experi-
ment  to  determine  the  work  function  for  a  particular
metal surface. When green light from a mercury lamp
(␭ ⫽ 546.1 nm) is used, a retarding potential of 1.70 V
reduces  the  photocurrent  to  zero.  (a)  Based  on  this
measurement, what is the work function for this metal?
(b)  What  stopping  potential  would  be  observed  when
using  the  yellow  light  from  a  helium  discharge  tube
(␭ ⫽ 587.5 nm)?

43. In  a  Compton  collision  with  an  electron,  a  photon  of
violet  light  (␭ ⫽ 4000 Å)  is  backscattered  through  an
angle of 180⬚. (a) How much energy (eV) is transferred
to  the  electron  in  this  collision?  (b)  Compare  your
result with the energy this electron would acquire in a
photoelectric process with the same photon. (c) Could

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

105

violet  light  eject  electrons  from  a  metal  by  Compton
collision? Explain.

44. Ultraviolet  light  is  incident  normally  on  the  surface
of a  certain  substance.  The  work  function  of  the
electrons in this substance is 3.44 eV. The incident light
has  an  intensity  of  0.055 W/m2.  The  electrons  are
photoelectrically  emitted  with  a  maximum  speed  of
4.2 ⫻ 105 m/s. What is the maximum number of elec-
trons  emitted  from  a  square  centimeter  of  the  surface
per  second?  Pretend  that  none  of  the  photons  are  re-
ﬂected or heat the surface.

45. The  following  data  are  found  for  photoemission  from

calcium:

␭ (nm)

Vs (V )

253.6

1.95

313.2

0.98

365.0

0.50

404.7

0.14

Plot Vs versus f,  and  from  the  graph  obtain  Planck’s
constant,  the  threshold  frequency,  and  the  work  func-
tion for calcium.

46. A 0.500-nm x-ray photon is deﬂected through 134⬚ in a
Compton scattering event. At what angle (with respect
to the incident beam) is the recoiling electron found?

47. An  electron  initially  at  rest  recoils  from  a  head-on
collision  with  a  photon.  Show  that  the  kinetic  energy
acquired  by  the  electron  is  2hf␣/(1 ⫹ 2␣),  where ␣ is
the  ratio  of  the  photon’s  initial  energy  to  the  rest
energy of the electron.

48. In  a  Compton  scattering  experiment,  an  x-ray  photon
scatters through an angle of 17.4⬚ from a free electron
that is initially at rest. The electron recoils with a speed
of 2180 km/s. Calculate (a) the wavelength of the inci-
dent photon and (b) the angle through which the elec-
tron scatters.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4
The Particle Nature
of Matter

Chapter Outline

4.1 The Atomic Nature of Matter
4.2 The Composition of Atoms

Millikan’s Value of the Elementary

Charge

Rutherford’s Model of the Atom

4.3 The Bohr Atom

4.4 Bohr’s Correspondence Principle,

or Why Is Angular Momentum
Quantized?

4.5 Direct Conﬁrmation of Atomic

Energy Levels: The Franck – Hertz
Experiment

Spectral Series
Bohr’s Quantum Model of the Atom

Summary

In Chapter 3 we reviewed the evidence for the wave nature of electromagnetic
radiation and dealt with major experimental puzzles of the ﬁrst quarter of the
20th century, which required a particle-like behavior of radiation for their so-
lution. In particular, we discussed Planck’s revolutionary idea of energy quanti-
zation  of  oscillators  in  the  walls  of  a  perfect  radiator,  Einstein’s  extension  of
energy  quantization  to  light  in  the  photoelectric  effect,  and  Compton’s  fur-
ther  conﬁrmation  of  the  existence  of  the  photon  as  a  particle  carrying  mo-
mentum in x-ray scattering experiments.

In  this  chapter  we  shall  examine  the  evidence  for  the  particle  nature  of
matter. We only mention brieﬂy the early atomists and concentrate instead on
the developments from 1800 onward that dealt with the composition of atoms.
In particular, we review the ingenious and fascinating experiments that led to
the  discoveries  of  the  electron,  the  proton,  the  nucleus,  and  the  important
Rutherford – Bohr planetary model of the atom.

4.1 THE ATOMIC NATURE OF MATTER

To say that the world is made up of atoms is, today, commonplace. Because
the  atomic  picture  of  reality  is  often  accepted  without  question,  students
can miss out on the rich and fascinating story of how atoms were shown to

106

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.1

THE ATOMIC NATURE OF MATTER

107

be  real.  The  discovery  and  proof  of  the  graininess  of  the  world  seem
especially fascinating for two reasons. First, because of the size of individual
atoms,  measurements  of  atomic  properties  are  usually  indirect  and
necessarily  involve  clever  manipulations  of  large-scale  measurements  to
infer  properties  of  microscopic  particles.  Second,  the  historical  evolution
of
ideas  about  atomicity  shows  clearly  the  real  way  in  which  science
progresses. This progression is often nonlinear and involves an interdepen-
dence of physics, chemistry, and mathematics, and the convergence of many
different lines of investigation.

There is also an exalted romance in honoring the great atomists who were
able to pick out organizing principles from the confusing barrage of market-
place ideas of their time: Democritus and Leucippus, who speculated that the
unchanging  substratum  of  the  world  was  atoms  in  motion;  the  debonair
French  chemist  Lavoisier  and  his  wife  (see  Fig.  4.1),  who  established  the
conservation  of  matter  in  many  careful  chemical  experiments;  Dalton,  who
perceived  the  atomicity  of  nature  in  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  of
compounds;  Avogadro,  who  in  a  most  obscure  and  little-appreciated  paper,
postulated that all pure gases at the same temperature and pressure have the
same number of molecules per unit volume; and Maxwell,1 who showed with
his  molecular-kinetic  theory  of  gases  how  macroscopic  quantities,  such  as
pressure and temperature, could be derived from averages over distributions

Figure  4.1 Antoine  Lavoisier  (French  chemist,  1743 – 1794)  and  Madame  Lavoisier
who together established the principle of conservation of mass in chemical reactions.
In  this  painting  they  appear  to  have  matters  other  than  chemistry  on  the  mind.
(© Bettmann/CORBIS)

1Maxwell  was  a  genius  twice  over.  Either  his  theory  of  electricity  and  magnetism  or  his  kinetic
theory of gases would qualify him for that rank.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

108

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

of  molecular  properties.  The  list  could  run  on  and  on.  We  abbreviate  it  by
naming Jean Perrin and the ubiquitous Albert Einstein,2 who carried on very
important  theoretical  and  experimental  work  concerning  Brownian  motion,
the  zigzag  movement  of  small  suspended  particles  caused  by  molecular  im-
pacts.  Their  work  produced  additional  conﬁrmation  of  the  atomic-molecular
hypothesis  and  resulted  in  improved  values  of  Avogadro’s  number  as  late
as the early 1900s.

4.2 THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

We now  turn  our  attention  to  answering  the  rather  dangerous  question,  “If
matter is primarily composed of atoms, what are atoms composed of ?” Again,
we  can  point  to  some  primary  discoveries  that  showed  that  atoms  are  com-
posed of light, negatively charged particles orbiting a heavy, positively charged
nucleus. These were

• The  discovery  of  the  law  of  electrolysis  in  1833  by  Michael  Faraday.  Through
careful experimental work on electrolysis, Faraday showed that the mass
of  an  element  liberated  at  an  electrode  is  directly  proportional  to  the
charge transferred and to the atomic weight of the liberated material but
is inversely proportional to the valence of the freed material.

• The identiﬁcation of cathode rays as electrons and the measurement of the charge-to-
mass ratio (e/m e) of these particles by Joseph John ( J. J.) Thomson in 1897. Thom-
son  measured  the  properties  of  negative  particles  emitted  from  different
metals and found that the value of e/me was always the same. He thus came
to the conclusion that the electron is a constituent of all matter!

• The  precise  measurement  of  the  electronic  charge  (e)  by  Robert  Millikan  in  1909.
By  combining  his  result  for  (e)  with  Thomson’s  e/me value,  Millikan
showed  unequivocally  that  particles  about  1000  times  less  massive  than
the hydrogen atom exist.

• The  establishment  of  the  nuclear  model  of  the  atom  by  Ernest  Rutherford  and
coworkers Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden in 1913. By scattering fast-moving
␣ particles  (charged  nuclei  of  helium  atoms  emitted  spontaneously  in
radioactive  decay  processes)  from  metal  foil  targets,  Rutherford  estab-
lished that atoms consist of a compact positively charged nucleus (diame-
ter ⬇ 10⫺14 m)  surrounded  by  a  swarm  of  orbiting  electrons  (electron
cloud diameter ⬇ 10⫺10 m).

Let  us  describe  these  developments  in  more  detail.  We  start  with  a  brief
example  of  Faraday’s  experiments,  in  particular  the  electrolysis  of  molten
common  salt  (NaCl).  Faraday  found  that  if  96,500 C  of  charge  (1  faraday)
is passed  through  such  a  molten  solution,  23.0 g  of  Na  will  deposit  on  the
cathode  and  35.5 g  of  chlorine  gas  will  bubble  off  the  anode  (Fig.  4.2).
In this case, exactly 1 gram atomic weight or mole of each element is released
1
because  both  are  monovalent.  For  divalent  and  trivalent  elements,  exactly 
2
and  of  a  mole,  respectively,  would  be  released.  As  expected,  doubling  the

1
3

2Much  of  Einstein’s  earliest  work  was  concerned  with  the  molecular  analysis  of  solutions  and
determinations  of  molecular  radii  and  Avogadro’s  number.  See  A.  Pais,  “Subtle  is  the  Lord . . .”
The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, New York, Oxford University Press, 1982, Chapter 5.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

109

Anode

A

+

Cathode

–

e –

e –

Cl –

Na+

e –

Cl –

E

e –

Na+

Molten NaCl

Figure 4.2 Electrolysis of molten NaCl.

quantity of charge passed doubles the mass of the neutral element liberated.
Faraday’s results may be given in equation form as

m ⫽

(q)(molar mass)

(96,500 C)(valence)

(4.1)

Faraday’s law of electrolysis

where m is  the  mass  of  the  liberated  substance  in  grams,  q is  the  total  charge
passed in coulombs, the molar mass is in grams, and the valence is dimensionless.

EXAMPLE 4.1 The Electrolysis of BaCl2
How  many  grams  of  barium  and  chlorine  (cough!)  will
you  get  if  you  pass  a  current  of  10.0 A  through  molten
BaCl2 for 1 h? Barium has a molar weight of 137 g and a
valence of 2. Chlorine has a molar weight of 35.5 g and a
valence of 1.

Solution Using Equation 4.1 and q ⫽ It, where I is the
current and t is the time, we have

m Ba ⫽

(q)(molar mass)

(96,500 C)(valence)

⫽

m C1 ⫽

(10.0 C/s)(3600 s)(137 g)

(96,500 C)(2)

(10.0 C/s)(3600 s)(35.5 g)

(96,500 C)(1)

⫽ 25.6 g

⫽ 13.2 g

Faraday’s  law  of  electrolysis  is  explained  in  terms  of  an  atomic  picture
shown in Figure 4.2. Charge passes through the molten solution in the form of
ions,  which  possess  an  excess  or  deﬁciency  of  one  or  more  electrons.  Under
the inﬂuence of the electric ﬁeld produced by the battery, these ions move to
the anode or cathode, where they respectively lose or gain electrons and are
liberated as neutral atoms.

Although  it  was  far  from  clear  in  1833,  Faraday’s  law  of  electrolysis
conﬁrmed three important parts of the atomic picture. First, it offered proof
that matter consists of molecules and that molecules consist of atoms. Second,
it showed that charge is quantized, because only integral numbers of charges
are transferred at the electrodes. Third, it showed that the subatomic parts of
atoms are positive and negative charges, although the mass and the size of the
charge of these subatomic particles remained unknown.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

110

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

The  next  major  step  explaining  the  composition  of  atoms  was  taken  by
Joseph  John  ( J.  J.)  Thomson  (see  Figure  4.3).  His  discovery  in  18973 that
the “rays” seen in low-pressure gas discharges were actually caused by nega-
tive particles (electrons) ended a debate dating back nearly 30 years: Were
cathode  rays  material  particles  or  waves?  Contrary  to  our  rather  blasé
present acceptance of the electron, many of Thomson’s distinguished con-
temporaries responded with utter disbelief to the idea that electrons were a
constituent  of  all  matter.  Much  of  the  opposition  to  Thomson’s  discovery
stemmed  from  the  fact  that  it  required  the  abandonment  of  the  recently
established  concept  of  the  atom  as  an  indivisible  entity.  Thomson’s  discov-
ery of the electron disturbed this newly established order in atomic theory
and  provoked  startling  new  developments — Rutherford’s  nuclear  model
and  the  ﬁrst  satisfactory  theory  of  the  emission  of  light  by  atomic  systems,
the Bohr model of the atom.

Figure 4.4 shows the original vacuum tube used by Thomson in his e/m e
experiments. Figure 4.5 shows the various parts of the Thomson apparatus
for  easy  reference.  Electrons  are  accelerated  from  the  cathode  to  the
anode,  collimated  by  slits  in  the  anodes,  and  then  allowed  to  drift  into  a
region  of  crossed  (perpendicular)  electric  and  magnetic  ﬁelds.  The  simul-
taneously  applied  E and B ﬁelds  are  ﬁrst  adjusted  to  produce  an
undeﬂected  beam.  If  the  B ﬁeld  is  then  turned  off,  the  E ﬁeld  alone
produces  a  measurable  beam  deﬂection  on  the  phosphorescent  screen.
From  the  size  of  the  deﬂection  and  the  measured  values  of  E and B,  the
charge-to-mass ratio, e/me, may be determined. The truly ingenious feature
of  this  experiment  is  the  manner  in  which  Thomson  measured  vx ,  the
horizontal  velocity  component  of  the  beam.  He  did  this  by  balancing  the
magnetic  and  electric  forces.  In  effect,  he  created  a  velocity  selector,  which
could  select  out  of  the  beam  those  particles  having  a  velocity  within  a
narrow range of values. This device was extensively used in the ﬁrst quarter

Figure 4.3 J. J. Thomson. (AIP
Emilio  Segrè  Visual  Archives/W.  F.
Meggers Collection)

Figure 4.4 The original e/m e tube used by J. J. Thomson. (After Figure 1.3, p. 7, R . L.
Sproull and W. A. Phillips, Modern Physics, 3rd ed., New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1980 ).

3J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. 44:269, 1897.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

111

+

+

C

A1

A2

C = Cathode
A1, A2 = Collimating anodes
S = Phosphorescent screen

+

V

B

d

D

F

E

S

ᐉ

Figure 4.5 A diagram of Thomson’s e/m e tube (patterned after J. J. Thomson, Philo-
sophical Magazine (5)44:293, 1897). Electrons subjected to an electric ﬁeld alone land at
D,  while  those  subjected  to  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  alone  land  at  E.  When  both  electric  and
magnetic ﬁelds are present and properly adjusted, the electrons experience no net de-
ﬂection and land at F.

of  the  20th  century  in  charge-to-mass  measurements  (q/m)  on  many  parti-
cles and in early mass spectrometers.

To gain a clearer picture of the Thomson experiment, let us analyze the
electron’s  motion  in  his  apparatus.  Figure  4.6  shows  the  trajectory  of  a
beam of negative particles entering the E and B ﬁeld regions with horizon-
tal  velocity  vx .  Consider  ﬁrst  only  an  E ﬁeld  between  the  plates.  For  this
case, vx remains constant throughout the motion because there is no force
acting in the x direction. The y component of velocity, v y , is constant every-
where except between the plates, where the electron experiences a constant
upward acceleration due to the electric force and follows a parabolic path.
To solve for the deﬂection angle, ␪, we must solve for vx and v y. Because vy

y

+

V

x

F =

–

e E

vx

–

vy

θ

vx

–

d

ᐉ

Figure 4.6 Deﬂection of negative particles by an electric ﬁeld.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

112

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

initially is zero, the electron leaves the plates with a y component of velocity
given by

v y ⫽ a yt

(4.2)

Because ay ⫽ F/me ⫽ Ee/me ⫽ Ve/med,  and  t ⫽ ᐉ/vx,  where  d and ᐉ are  the
dimensions  of  the  region  between  the  plates  and  V is  the  applied  potential,
we obtain

vy ⫽

Vᐉe
mevxd

From Figure 4.6, tan ␪ ⫽ vy/vx, so using Equation 4.3 we obtain

tan ␪ ⫽

Vᐉ
vx

2d 冢 e
me 冣

Assuming small deﬂections, tan ␪ ⬇ ␪, so we have

␪ ⬇ Vᐉ
vx

2d 冢 e
me 冣

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

Note  that ␪,  the  beam  deﬂection,  V,  the  voltage  applied  to  the  horizontal
deﬂecting  plates,  and  d and ᐉ,  the  spacing  and  length,  respectively,  of
the horizontal  deﬂecting  plates  can  all  be  measured.  Hence,  one  only
needs to measure  vx to determine  e/me. Thomson determined  vx by apply-
ing  a  B ﬁeld  and  adjusting  its  magnitude  to  just  balance  the  deﬂection
of the still present E ﬁeld. Equating the magnitudes of the electric and mag-
netic forces gives

or

qE ⫽ qvx B

vx ⫽

E
B

⫽

V
Bd

(4.6)

Substituting Equation 4.6 into Equation 4.5 immediately yields a formula for
e/m e entirely in terms of measurable quantities:

e
me

⫽

V␪
B2ᐉd

(4.7)

The currently accepted value of e/me is 1.758803 ⫻ 1011 C/kg. Although
Thomson’s  original  value  was  only  about  1.0 ⫻ 1011 C/kg,  prior  experi-
ments on the electrolysis of hydrogen ions had given q/m values for hydro-
gen of about 108 C/kg. It was clear that Thomson had discovered a particle
with a mass about 1000 times smaller than the smallest atom! In his observa-
tions, Thomson noted that the e/me ratio was independent of the discharge
gas and the cathode metal. Furthermore, the particles emitted when electri-
cal  discharges  were  passed  through  different  gases  were  found  to  be  the
same as those observed in the photoelectric effect. Based on these observa-
tions,  Thomson  concluded  that  these  particles  must  be  a  universal
constituent  of  all  matter.  Humanity  had  achieved  its  ﬁrst  glimpse  into  the
subatomic world!

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

113

EXAMPLE 4.2 Deﬂection of an Electron Beam

by E and B Fields

Using  the  accepted  e/me value,  calculate  the  magnetic
ﬁeld  required  to  produce  a  deﬂection  of  0.20 rad  in
Thomson’s  experiment,  assuming  the  values  V ⫽ 200 V,
ᐉ ⫽ 5.0 cm,  and  d ⫽ 1.5 cm  (the  approximate  values
used  by  Thomson).  Compare  this  value  of  B to  the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.

Solution Because e/me ⫽ V␪/B2ᐉd, solving for B gives

so

B ⫽ 冤

(0.050 m)(0.015 m)(1.76 ⫻ 1011 C/kg)冥1/2

(200 V)(0.20 rad)

⫽ [3.03 ⫻ 10⫺7 V ⭈kg/m2 C]1/2
⫽ [3.03 ⫻ 10⫺7 N2/(m/s)2 C2]1/2
⫽ 5.5 ⫻ 10⫺4 N/(m/s) ⭈C ⫽ 5.5 ⫻ 10⫺4 T

B ⫽ √ V␪

ᐉd(e/me)

As  the  Earth’s  magnetic  ﬁeld  has  a  magnitude  of  about
0.5 ⫻ 10⫺4 T, we require a ﬁeld 11 times as strong as the
Earth’s ﬁeld.

Exercise 1 Find the horizontal speed vx for this case.
Answer 2.4 ⫻ 107 m/s ⫽ 0.080c, where c is the speed of light.

Millikan’s Value of the Elementary Charge
In 1897, Thomson had been unable to determine e or me separately. However,
about  two  years  later  this  great  British  experimentalist  had  bracketed  the  ac-
cepted  value  of  e (1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)  with  values  of  2.3 ⫻ 10⫺19 C  for  charges
emitted  from  zinc  illuminated  by  ultraviolet  light  and  1.1 ⫻ 10⫺19 C  for
charges produced by ionizing x rays and radium emissions. He was also able to
conclude that “e is the same in magnitude as the charge carried by the hydro-
gen  atom  in  the  electrolysis  of  solutions.”  The  technique  used  by  Thomson
and his students to measure e is especially interesting because it represents the
ﬁrst use of the cloud chamber technique in physics and also formed the start-
ing point for the famous Millikan oil-drop experiment. Charles Wilson, one of
Thomson’s students, had discovered that ions act as condensation centers for
water droplets when damp air is cooled by a rapid expansion. Thomson used
this idea to form charged clouds by using the apparatus shown in Figure 4.7a.
Here Q is the measured total charge of the cloud, W is the measured weight of
the cloud, and v is the rate of fall or terminal speed. Thomson assumed that
the  cloud  was  composed  of  spherical  droplets  having  a  constant  mass  (no
evaporation)  and  that  the  magnitude  of  the  drag  force  D on  a  single  falling
droplet was given by Stokes’s law,

D ⫽ 6␲a␩v

(4.8)

where a is  the  droplet  radius,  ␩ is  the  viscosity  of  air,  and  v is  the  terminal
speed of the droplet. The following procedure was used to ﬁnd a and w, the
weight of a single drop. Because v is constant, the droplet is in equilibrium un-
der the combined action of its weight, w, and the drag force,  D, as shown in
Figure 4.7b. Hence, we require that w ⫽ D, or

w ⫽ 4

3␲a3␳g ⫽ D ⫽ 6␲a␩v

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

114

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Radioactive source

Total charge

Q

+

+

+

+
++

+

+

w

v

Damp air

Moveable

piston

D

v

+

a

w

(a)

(b)

Figure  4.7 (a)  A  diagram  of  Thomson’s  apparatus  for  determining  e.  (b)  A  single
droplet in the cloud.

so

a ⫽ √ 9␩v

2␳g

(4.9)

where ␳ is  the  mass  density  of  the  droplet  and  g is  the  free-fall  acceleration.
From  the  droplet  radius  and  the  known  density  we  can  ﬁnd  w,  the  weight.
Once w is  obtained,  the  number  of  drops  n (or  number  of  ions)  is  given  by
W/w and the electronic charge e is equal to Q/n, assuming that each droplet
carries only one electronic charge. Although ingenious, this method is inaccu-
rate because the theory applies only to a single particle and the particles are
all assumed to be identical in order to compare the theory to experiments per-
formed on a cloud.

The tremendous advance of Millikan was made possible by his clever idea of
making  the  experiment  “ﬁt”  the  theory.  By  observing  single  droplets  he  elimi-
nated the problems of assuming all particles to be identical and of making uncer-
tain measurements on a cloud. Millikan’s basic idea was to measure the rate of
fall of a single drop acted on by gravity and drag forces, apply Stokes’s law to de-
termine the drop radius and mass, then to measure its upward velocity in an op-
posing  electric  ﬁeld,  and  hence  determine  the  total  charge  on  an  individual
drop.4 A schematic of the Millikan apparatus is shown in Figure 4.8. Oil droplets
charged  by  an  atomizer  are  allowed  to  pass  through  a  small  hole  in  the  upper
plate of a parallel-plate capacitor. If these droplets are illuminated from the side,
they  appear  as  brilliant  stars  against  a  dark  background,  and  the  rate  of  fall  of

4Actually, the idea of allowing charges to “fall” under a combined gravitational and electric ﬁeld was
ﬁrst applied to charged clouds of water vapor by H. A. Wilson in 1903. Millikan switched from water
to oil to avoid the problems of a changing droplet mass and radius caused by water evaporation.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Oil droplets

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

115

Pin hole

Battery
+
–

d

– 3e

v

Illumination

View through

eyepiece

Telescope with
scale in eyepiece

Figure 4.8 A schematic view of the Millikan oil-drop apparatus.

individual drops may be determined.5 If an electrostatic ﬁeld of several thousand
volts  per  meter  is  applied  to  the  capacitor  plates,  the  drop  may  move  slowly
upward, typically at rates of hundredths of a centimeter per second. Because the
rate of fall is comparable, a single droplet with constant mass and radius may be
followed  for  hours,  alternately  rising  and  falling,  by  simply  turning  the  electric
ﬁeld on and off. The atomicity of charge is shown directly by the observation that
after a long series of measurements of constant upward velocities one observes a
discontinuous change or jump to a different upward velocity (higher or lower).
This discontinuous change is caused by the attraction of an ion to the charged
droplet and a consequent change in droplet charge. Such changes become more
frequent when a source of ionizing radiation is placed between the plates.

The quantitative analysis of the Millikan experiment starts with Newton’s sec-
ond law applied to the oil drop, 兺Fy ⫽ may. Because the drag force D is large, a
constant velocity of fall is quickly achieved, and all measurements are made for
the case ay ⫽ 0, or 兺Fy ⫽ 0. If we assume that the magnitude of the drag force is
proportional to the speed (D ⫽ Cv), and refer to Figure 4.9, we ﬁnd

Cv ⫺ mg ⫽ 0

(ﬁeld off )

q1E ⫺ mg ⫺ C v ⬘1 ⫽ 0

(ﬁeld on)

Eliminating C from these expressions gives

Millikan’s determination of
the electronic charge

q1 ⫽

mg

E 冢 v ⫹ v ⬘1

v

冣

(4.10)

5Perhaps the reason for the failure of “Millikan’s Shining Stars” as a poetic and romantic image
has  something  to  do  with  the  generations  of  physics  students  who  have  experienced  hallucina-
tions, near blindness, migraine attacks, etc. while repeating his experiment!

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

116

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

D = C v

q1E

v

q1

v1′

E

w = m g

m g

C v1′

(a) Field off

(b) Field on

Figure 4.9 The forces on a charged oil droplet in the Millikan experiment.

When the droplet undergoes a discontinuous change in its upward speed from
v⬘1 to v⬘2 (m, g, E, and v remaining constant), its new charge q2 is given by

q 2 ⫽

mg

E 冢 v ⫹ v ⬘2

v

Dividing Equation 4.10 by Equation 4.11 gives

q1
q 2

⫽

v ⫹ v ⬘1
v ⫹ v ⬘2

冣

(4.11)

(4.12)

Robert Millikan (1868 – 1953). Although Millikan (left) studied Greek as an undergrad-
uate at Oberlin College, he fell in love with physics during his graduate training after
teaching  school  for  a  few  years.  He  was  the  ﬁrst  student  to  receive  a  Ph.D.  in  physics
from  Columbia  University  in  1895.  Following  postdoctoral  work  in  Germany  under
Planck  and  Nernst,  Millikan  obtained  an  academic  appointment  at  the  University  of
Chicago  in  1910,  where  he  worked  with  Michelson.  He  received  the  Nobel  prize  in
1923 for his famous experimental determination of the electronic charge. He is also re-
membered for his careful experimental work to verify the theory of the photoelectric
effect deduced by Einstein. Following World War I, he transferred to the California In-
stitute of Technology, where he worked in atmospheric physics and remained until his
retirement. (Courtesy AIP Emìlio Segrè Visual Archives)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

117

Equation 4.12 constitutes a remarkably direct and powerful proof of the quan-
tization of charge, because if successive speed ratios are ratios of whole num-
bers, successive charges on the drop must be multiples of the same elementary
charge! Millikan’s experimental measurements of speed ratios beautifully con-
ﬁrmed this quantization of charge to within about 1% accuracy.6

Up to this point our arguments have been quite general and have assumed
only that the drag force on the droplet is proportional to its velocity. To deter-
mine the actual value of the electronic charge, e, the mass of the drop must be
determined, as can be seen from Equation 4.10. As noted earlier, the droplet
radius a may be determined from the application of Stokes’s law. This value of
a, in turn, can be used to ﬁnd m from the oil density, ␳. In this procedure, a is

a ⫽ √ 9␩v

2␳g

and the mass of the droplet can be expressed as
m ⫽ ␳⭈volume ⫽ ␳ 4

3 ␲a3

(4.9)

(4.13)

An example of this technique for determining e using Stokes’s law is given in
Example 4.3.

EXAMPLE 4.3 Experimental Determination of e

In a Millikan experiment the distance of rise or fall of a
droplet is 0.600 cm and the average time of fall (ﬁeld off)
is  21.0 s.  The  observed  successive  rise  times  are  46.0,
15.5, 28.1, 12.9, 45.3, and 20.0 s.

(a) Prove that charge is quantized.

Solution Charge is quantized if q1/q2, q2/q3, q3/q4, and
so on are ratios of small whole numbers. Because

q1
q2

⫽

v ⫹ v ⬘1
v ⫹ v ⬘2

,  q2
q3

⫽

v ⫹ v⬘2
v ⫹ v⬘3

,  etc.

we must ﬁnd the speeds. Thus,

v ⫽

v ⬘1 ⫽

⌬y
⌬t

⌬y
⌬t

⫽

⫽

0.600 cm

21.0 s

0.600 cm

46.0 s

⫽ 0.0286 cm/s

⫽ 0.0130 cm/s

v ⬘2 ⫽ 0.600/15.5 ⫽ 0.0387 cm/s

v ⬘3 ⫽ 0.600/28.1 ⫽ 0.0214 cm/s

v ⬘4 ⫽ 0.600/12.9 ⫽ 0.0465 cm/s

v ⬘5 ⫽ 0.600/45.3 ⫽ 0.0132 cm/s

v ⬘6 ⫽ 0.600/20.0 ⫽ 0.0300 cm/s

6R. A. Millikan, Phys. Rev. 1911, p. 349.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

so

q1
q 2

q2
q3

q3
q4

q4
q5

q5
q6

⫽

⫽

⫽

⫽

⫽

v ⫹ v ⬘2
v ⫹ v ⬘3

v ⫹ v ⬘3
v ⫹ v ⬘4

v ⫹ v ⬘4
v ⫹ v ⬘5

v ⫹ v ⬘5
v ⫹ v ⬘6

⫽

⫽

⫽

⫽

v ⫹ v ⬘1
v ⫹ v ⬘2

⫽

0.0286 ⫹ 0.0130
0.0286 ⫹ 0.0387

⫽ 0.618 ⬇

3
5

0.0286 ⫹ 0.0387
0.0286 ⫹ 0.0214

0.0286 ⫹ 0.0214
0.0286 ⫹ 0.0465

0.0286 ⫹ 0.0465
0.0286 ⫹ 0.0132

⫽ 1.35 ⬇

⫽ 0.666 ⬇

⫽ 1.80 ⬇

4
3

2
3

9
5

0.0286 ⫹ 0.0132
0.0286 ⫹ 0.0300

⫽ 0.713 ⬇ 8/11  or 7/10

(b) If the oil density is 858 kg/m3 and the viscosity of
air  is  1.83 ⫻ 10⫺5 kg/m ⭈ s,  ﬁnd  the  radius,  volume,  and
mass of the drop used in this experiment.

Solution The radius of the drop is

a ⫽ √ 9␩v

2␳g

118

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

⫽ 冤 9(1.83 ⫻ 10⫺5 kg/m ⭈s)(0.0286 ⫻ 10⫺2 m/s)
⫽ [2.80 ⫻ 10⫺12 m2]1/2
⫽ 1.67 ⫻ 10⫺6 m  or 1.67 ␮m

2(858 kg/m3)(9.81 m/s2)

冥1/2

The volume is

V ⫽ 4

3 ␲a3 ⫽ 1.95 ⫻ 10⫺17 m3

The mass is

m ⫽ ␳V ⫽ (858 kg/m3)(1.95 ⫻ 10⫺17 m3)

⫽ 1.67 ⫻ 10⫺14 kg

(c) Calculate the successive charges on the drop, and
from  these  results  determine  the  electronic  charge.  As-
sume a plate separation of 1.60 cm and a potential differ-
ence of 4550 V for the parallel-plate capacitor.

Solution To calculate  the  charge  on  each  drop  using
Equation  4.10,  we  must  ﬁrst  calculate  the  magnitude  of
the electric ﬁeld, E. Thus,

E ⫽

V
d

⫽

4550 V
0.0160 m

⫽ 2.84 ⫻ 105 V/m

Now we can ﬁnd the charges on the drop:

q1 ⫽ 冢 mg

E 冣冢 v ⫹ v ⬘1

v

冣

⫽

(1.67 ⫻ 10⫺14 kg)(9.81 m/s2)

(2.84 ⫻ 105 V/m)

冢 0.0286 ⫹ 0.0130

0.0286

冣

⫽ 8.39 ⫻ 10⫺19 C

Likewise, q 2 ⫽ 13.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 C, q 3 ⫽ 10.1 ⫻ 10⫺19 C, q4 ⫽
15.2 ⫻ 10⫺19 C, q 5 ⫽ 8.43 ⫻ 10⫺19 C,  and  q6 ⫽ 11.8 ⫻
10⫺19 C.

To ﬁnd  the  average  value  of  e,  we  shall  use  the  fact
that  at  the  time  of  Millikan’s  work  e was  known  to  be
between  1.5 ⫻ 10⫺19 C  and  2.0 ⫻ 10⫺19 C. Dividing q1
through q6 by  these  values  gives  the  range  of  integral
charges  on  each  drop.  Thus,  the  range  of q1 is  8.39/1.5
⫽ 5.6  electronic  charges  to  8.39/2.0 ⫽ 4.2  electronic
charges. Similarly, q2 has 9.1 to 5.8 charges, q3 has 6.7 to
5.1  charges,  q4 has  10.1  to  7.6  charges,  q5 has  5.6  to  4.2
charges,  and  q6 has  7.9  to  5.9  charges.  Because  there
must be an integral number of charges on each drop, we
pick  an  integer  in  the  middle  of  the  allowed  range.
Therefore,  in  terms  of  the  electronic  charge  e,  we  con-
clude that q1 ⫽ 5e, q2 ⫽ 8e, q3 ⫽ 6e, q4 ⫽ 9e, q5 ⫽ 5e, and
q6 ⫽ 7e. Using the preceding values, we ﬁnd

e1 ⫽ q/5 ⫽ 1.68 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
e 2 ⫽ q1/8 ⫽ 1.70 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
e 3 ⫽ q2/6 ⫽ 1.68 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
e 4 ⫽ q3/9 ⫽ 1.69 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
e 5 ⫽ q4/5 ⫽ 1.69 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
e 6 ⫽ q5/7 ⫽ 1.69 ⫻ 10⫺19 C

Taking  the  average  of  these  values,  we  ﬁnd  the  value  of
the  electronic  charge  to  be  e ⫽ 1.688 ⫻ 10⫺19 C  for  this
data set.

Stokes’s  law,  as  Millikan  was  aware,  is  only  approximately  correct  for  tiny
spheres  moving  through  a  gas.  The  expression  D ⫽ 6␲a␩v holds  quite  accu-
rately  for  a  0.1-cm  radius  sphere  moving  through  a  liquid  or  for  any  case
where the moving-object radius, a, is large compared with the mean free path,
L, of the surrounding molecules. (The mean free path is essentially the aver-
age distance between molecules.) In the Millikan experiment, however, a is of
the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  mean  free  path  of  air  at  STP.  Conse-
quently, Stokes’s law overestimates the drag force, because the droplet actually
moves  for  appreciable  times  through  a  frictionless  “vacuum.”  Millikan  cor-
rected Stokes’s law by using a drag force whose magnitude is

D ⫽

6␲a␩v

1 ⫹ ␣(L/a)

(4.14)

and found that ␣ ⫽ 0.81 gave the most consistent values of e for drops of dif-
ferent  radii.  Further  corrections  to  Stokes’s  law  were  made  by  Perrin  and
Roux,  and  corrections  to  Stokes’s  law  and  the  correct  value  of  e remained  a
controversial issue for more than 20 years. The currently accepted value of the
magnitude of the electronic charge is

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

119

e ⫽ 1.60217733 ⫻ 10⫺19 C

Electronic charge

Rutherford’s Model of the Atom
The  early  years  of  the  20th  century  were  generally  a  period  of  incredible
ferment  and  change  in  physics,  including  the  advent  of  relativity,  quantum
theory, and atomic and subatomic physics. Hardly had the reality of pristine,
indivisible  atoms  been  established  (“They  are  the  only  material  things  which
still remain in the precise condition in which they ﬁrst began to exist” wrote
Maxwell in 1872), when Thomson announced their divisibility in 1899: “Elec-
triﬁcation  essentially  involves  the  splitting  of  the  atom,  a  part  of  the  mass  of
the  atom  getting  free  and  becoming  detached  from  the  original  atom.”  Fur-
ther daring assaults on the indivisibility of the chemical atom came from the
experimental work on radioactivity by Marie Curie (1867 – 1934, a Polish physi-
cist – chemist), and by Ernest Rutherford (1871 – 1937, New Zealand physicist),
and Frederick Soddy, a British physicist, who explained radioactive transforma-
tions of elements in terms of the emission of subatomic particles. The porosity
of  atoms  was  also  known  before  1910  from  Lenard’s  experiments,  which
showed that electrons are easily transmitted through thin metal and mica foils.
All these discoveries, plus the suspicion that the intricate atomic spectral lines
(light emitted at a discrete set of frequencies characteristic of each element)
must  be  produced  by  charge  rattling  around  inside  the  atom,  led  to  various
proposals  concerning  the  internal  structure  of  atoms.  The  most  famous  of
these  early  atomic  models  was  the  Thomson  “plum-pudding”  model  (1898).
This proposal viewed the atom as a homogeneous sphere of uniformly distrib-
uted mass and positive charge in which were embedded, like raisins in a plum
pudding, negatively charged electrons, which just balanced the positive charge
to produce electrically neutral atoms. Although such models possessed electri-
cal  stability  against  collapse  or  explosion  of  the  atom,  they  failed  to  explain
the rich line spectra of even the simplest atom, hydrogen.

The  key  to  understanding  the  mysterious  line  spectra  and  the  correct
model  of  the  atom  were  both  furnished  by  Ernest  Rutherford  and  his  stu-
dents Hans  Geiger  (1882 – 1945,  German  physicist)  and  Ernest  Marsden
(1899 – 1970,  British  physicist)  through  a  series  of  experiments  conducted
from 1909 to 1914. Noticing that a beam of collimated ␣ particles broadened
on  passing  through  a  metal  foil  yet  easily  penetrated  the  thin  ﬁlm  of  metal,
they  embarked  on  experiments  to  probe  the  distribution  of  mass  within  the
atom  by  observing  in  detail  the  scattering  of  ␣ particles  from  foils.  These
experiments  ultimately  led  Rutherford  to  the  discovery  that  most  of  the
atomic  mass  and  all  of  the  positive  charge  lie  in  a  minute  central  nucleus  of
the atom. The accidental chain of events and the clever capitalization on the
accidental discoveries leading up to Rutherford’s monumental nuclear theory
of  the  atom  are  nowhere  better  described  than  in  Rutherford’s  own  essay
summarizing the development of the theory of atomic structure:

. . . I  would  like  to  use  this  example  to  show  how  you  often  stumble  upon  facts  by
accident.  In  the  early  days  I  had  observed  the  scattering  of  ␣-particles,  and
Dr. Geiger in my laboratory had examined it in detail. He found, in thin pieces of
heavy metal, that the scattering was usually small, of the order of one degree. One

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Rutherford’s nuclear model

120

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

day Geiger came to me and said, “Don’t you think that young Marsden, whom I am
training  in  radioactive  methods,  ought  to  begin  a  small  research?”  Now  I  had
thought that, too, so I said, “Why not let him see if any ␣-particles can be scattered
through a large angle?” I may tell you in conﬁdence that I did not believe that they
would be, since we knew that the ␣-particle was a very fast, massive particle, with a
great deal of energy, and you could show that if the scattering was due to the accu-
mulated effect of a number of small scatterings the chance of an ␣-particle’s being
scattered backwards was very small. Then I remember two or three days later Geiger
coming  to  me  in  great  excitement  and  saying,  “We  have  been  able  to  get  some  of
the ␣-particles  coming  backwards. . . .”  It  was  quite  the  most  incredible  event  that
has ever happened to me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you ﬁred a 15-
inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you. On consideration,
I realized that this scattering backwards must be the result of a single collision, and
when I made calculations I saw that it was impossible to get anything of that order of
magnitude  unless  you  took  a  system  in  which  the  greater  part  of  the  mass  of  the
atom  was  concentrated  in  a  minute  nucleus.  It  was  then  that  I  had  the  idea  of  an
atom with a minute massive center carrying a charge. I worked out mathematically
what laws the scattering should obey, and I found that the number of particles scat-
tered through a given angle should be proportional to the thickness of the scatter-
ing foil, the square of the nuclear charge, and inversely proportional to the fourth
power of the velocity. These deductions were later veriﬁed by Geiger and Marsden
in a series of beautiful experiments.7
The essential experimental features of Rutherford’s apparatus are shown in
Figure  4.10.  A  ﬁnely  collimated  beam  of  ␣ particles  emitted  with  speeds  of
about 2 ⫻ 107 m/s struck a thin gold foil several thousand atomic layers thick.
Most  of  the  ␣’s passed  straight  through  the  foil  along  the  line  DD⬘ (again
showing the porosity of the atom), but some were scattered at an angle ␾. The
number of scattered ␣’s at each angle per unit detector area and per unit time

D′

Gold
foil

φ

R

D

Microscope

Zinc sulfide

screen

Vacuum
chamber

α-emitter (radon)

and collimator

Figure 4.10 A schematic view of Rutherford’s ␣ scattering apparatus.

7An essay on “The Development of the Theory of Atomic Structure,” 1936, Lord Rutherford, pub-
lished in Background to Modern Science, New York, Macmillan Company, 1940.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

121

–

–

Nucleus

–

+
+
+

+

+

+
+
+

–

–

–

–

–

++

++

++

++

Incident
α particles

++

++

++

Figure 4.11 Scattering of ␣ particles by a dense, positively charged nucleus.

was measured by counting the scintillations produced by scattered ␣’s on the
ZnS screen. These scintillations were counted with the aid of the microscope.
The distance from the point where ␣ particles strike the foil to the zinc sulﬁde
screen is denoted R in Figure 4.10.

Rutherford’s basic insight was that because the mass and kinetic energy of
the ␣’s are large, even a nearly head-on collision with a particle with the mass
of  a  hydrogen  atom  would  deﬂect  the ␣ particle  only  slightly  and  knock  the
hydrogen  atom  straight  ahead.  Multiple  scattering  of  the  ␣ particles  in  the
foil accounted  for  the  small  broadening  (about  1⬚)  originally  observed  by
Rutherford, but it could not account for the occasional large-scale deﬂections.
On the other hand,8 if all of the positive charge in an atom is assumed to be
concentrated  at  a  single  central  point  and  not  spread  out  throughout  the
atom, the electric repulsion experienced by an incident ␣ particle in a head-
on collision becomes much greater. Because the charge and mass of the gold
atom are concentrated at the nucleus, large deﬂections of the ␣ particle could
be experienced in a single collision with the massive nucleus. This situation is
shown in Figure 4.11.

EXAMPLE 4.4 Collision of an ␣ Particle

with a Proton

(a)  An ␣ particle  of  mass  m␣ and  speed  v␣ strikes  a  sta-
tionary proton with mass m p. If the collision is elastic and
head-on, show that the speed of the proton after the col-
lision, vp, and the speed of the ␣ particle after the colli-
sion, v⬘␣, are given by

and

v ⬘␣ ⫽ 冢 m␣ ⫺ m p

m␣ ⫹ m p 冣 v␣

vp ⫽ 冢

2m␣

m␣ ⫹ m p 冣 v␣

(b) Calculate the percent change in velocity for an ␣

particle colliding with a proton.

8A dangerous expression that never fails to bring to mind President Truman’s infamous request:
“If you know of any one-handed economists, bring them to me.”

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

122

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Solution (a)  Because  the  collision  is  elastic,  the  total
kinetic energy is conserved; therefore,

and

1
2 m␣v ␣

2 ⫽ 1

2 m␣v⬘␣

2 ⫹ 1

2
2 m pv p

(1)

vp ⫽ 冢

2m␣

m␣ ⫹ m p 冣 v␣

(4)

Conservation  of  momentum  for  this  one-dimensional
collision yields

m␣v␣ ⫽ mpvp ⫹ m␣v⬘␣

Solving Equation 1 for (m␣v ⬘␣)2 yields

(m␣v ⬘␣)2 ⫽ m␣(m␣v␣

2 ⫺ mpv p
2)

(2)

(3)

Solving  Equation  2  for  (m␣v ⬘␣)2 and  equating  this  to
Equation 3 gives

2
(m␣v␣)2 ⫹ (mpvp)2 ⫺ 2m␣m pv␣vp ⫽ (m␣v␣)2 ⫺ m␣mpvp

or

Because the proton must move when struck by the heavy
␣ particle, Equation 4 is the only physically reasonable so-
lution  for  vp.  The  solution  for  v ⬘␣ follows  immediately
from the substitution of Equation 4 into Equation 2.

Solution (b) Because an ␣ particle consists of two pro-
tons and two neutrons, m␣ ⫽ 4mp. Thus,

2m␣

vp ⫽ 冢
v⬘␣ ⫽ 冢 m␣ ⫺ m p

m␣ ⫹ m p 冣 v␣ ⫽ 冢 8m p
m␣ ⫹ m p 冣 v␣ ⫽ 冢 3m p

5m p 冣 v␣ ⫽ 1.60v␣
5m p 冣 v␣ ⫽ 0.60v␣

(mpvp)(mpvp ⫺ 2m␣v␣ ⫹ m␣vp) ⫽ 0

The percent change in velocity of the ␣ particle is

The solutions to this equation are

vp ⫽ 0

% change in v␣ ⫽ 冢 v ⬘␣ ⫺ v␣

v␣

冣 ⫻ 100% ⫽ ⫺40%

Exercise  2 An ␣ particle  with  initial  velocity  v␣ undergoes  an  elastic,  head-on  colli-
sion  with  an  electron  initially  at  rest.  Using  the  fact  that  an  electron’s  mass  is  about
1/2000 of the proton mass, calculate the ﬁnal velocities of the electron and ␣ particle
and the percent change in velocity of the ␣ particle.

Answers

ve ⫽ 1.998v␣, v ⬘␣ ⫽ 0.9998v␣, and the percent change in v␣ ⫽ ⫺0.02%.

In his analysis, Rutherford assumed that large-angle scattering is produced
by a single nuclear collision and that the repulsive force between an ␣ particle
and a nucleus separated by a distance r is given by Coulomb’s law,

F ⫽ k

(2e)(Ze)

r 2

(4.15)

where ⫹2e is  the  charge  on  the  ␣, ⫹Ze is  the  nuclear  charge,  and  k is  the
Coulomb  constant.  With  this  assumption,  Rutherford  was  able  to  show  that
the number of ␣ particles entering the detector per unit time, ⌬n, at an angle
␾ is given by

⌬n ⫽

k2Z 2e4NnA

4R2(1

2 m␣v␣

2)2sin4(␾/2)

(4.16)

Here R and ␾ are deﬁned in Figure 4.10, N is the number of nuclei per unit
area of the foil (and is thus proportional to the foil thickness), n is the total
number of ␣ particles incident on the target per unit time, and A is the area of
the detector. The dependence of scattering on foil thickness, ␣ particle speed,
and  scattering  angle  was  conﬁrmed  experimentally  by  Geiger  and  Marsden.9

9H. Geiger and E. Marsden, “Deﬂection of ␣-Particles through Large Angles,” Phil. Mag. (6)25:605,
1913.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

log10 ∆n

4.2

THE COMPOSITION OF ATOMS

123

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Z  =  60

Z  =  47

=  experimental points

for silver

=  theory for Z  =  60

=  theory for Z  =  47

π
−
2

π

φ

Figure  4.12 Comparison  of  theory  and  experiment  for ␣ particle  scattering  from  a
silver foil. (From E. Rutherford, J. Chadwick, and J. Ellis, Radiations from Radioactive Sub-
stances, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1951.)

Because  the  values  of  atomic  number  (Z )  were  uncertain  at  the  time,  the
scattering dependence on Z could not be directly checked. Turning the argu-
ment  around,  however,  and  assuming  the  correctness  of  Equation  4.16,  one
could ﬁnd the value of Z that gave the best ﬁt of this equation to the experi-
mental data points. An illustration of this sensitive technique for determining
Z for a silver foil is shown in Figure 4.12. Note that changing Z produces only a
vertical shift in the graph and not a change in shape.

Much  of  the  remarkable  experimental  work  of  the  ingenious  Lord
Rutherford can be credited to an ability to use his current discoveries to probe
even deeper into nature’s mysteries. For example, he turned his studies of the
transmission of radioactive particles through matter into a sensitive and deli-
cate  technique  for  probing  the  atom.  Another  example  was  his  clever  tech-
nique  for  measuring  the  size  of  the  nucleus.  Realizing  that  Equation  4.15
would  hold  only  if  the ␣ particle  did  not  have  enough  energy  to  deform  or
penetrate the scattering nucleus, he systematically looked for the threshold ␣
energy  at  which  departures  from  his  scattering  equation  occurred,  the  idea
being  that  at  this  threshold  energy  the  ␣ should  be  just  penetrating  the
nuclear radius at its distance of closest approach. Following Rutherford, we set
the kinetic energy of the ␣ at inﬁnity equal to the potential energy of the sys-
tem (␣ ⫹ target nucleus) at the distance of closest approach, d min, or

1
2 m␣v␣

2 ⫽ k

(Ze)(2e)

dmin

(4.17)

Equation 4.17 may then be solved for d min to determine the distance of closest
approach. In the case when the kinetic energy of the ␣ is so high that Equa-
tion  4.16  begins  to  fail,  this  distance  of  closest  approach  is  approximately
equal to the nuclear radius.

Rutherford  was  confronted  with  the  experimental  dilemma  that  no  fail-
ures of Equations 4.15 or 4.16 were found for heavy metal foils with the most

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

124

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

energetic naturally occurring ␣ particles available to him (⬇ 8 MeV). Showing
characteristic  economy,  instead  of  embarking  on  a  particle  accelerator  pro-
gram,  he  made  use  of  metals  like  aluminum  with  lower  Z ’s and  hence  lower
Coulomb barriers to ␣ penetration.10 Thus, in 1919, he was able to determine
the nuclear radius of aluminum to be about 5 ⫻ 10⫺15 m.

EXAMPLE 4.5 Estimate of the Radius of the

Aluminum Nucleus

In  1919,  Rutherford  was  able  to  show  a  breakdown  in
Equation  4.16  for  7.7-MeV ␣ particles  scattered  at  large
angles  from  aluminum  nuclei  (Z ⫽ 13).  Estimate  the
radius of the aluminum nucleus from these facts.

which we may take to be the radius of the aluminum nu-
cleus.  At  this  point,  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  system  is
zero  and  the  total  energy  is  just  the  potential  energy  of
the system. Applying conservation of energy gives

Solution Rutherford’s  scattering  formula  is  no  longer
valid  when  ␣ particles  begin  to  penetrate  or  touch  the
nucleus.  When  the  ␣ particle  is  very  far  from  the  alu-
minum nucleus, its kinetic energy is 7.7 MeV. This is also
the total energy of the system (␣ particle plus aluminum
nucleus),  because  the  aluminum  nucleus  is  at  rest  and
the potential energy is zero for an inﬁnite separation of
particles.  When  the  ␣ particle  is  at  the  point  of  closest
approach  to  the  aluminum  nucleus  in  a  head-on  colli-
sion, its kinetic energy is zero and it is at a distance d min,

K␣ ⫽ potential energy at closest approach ⫽

k(Ze)(2e)

d min

or

d min ⫽ k

2Ze 2
K␣

⫽

2(13)(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)2 (8.99 ⫻ 109 N ⭈m2/C2)

(7.7 ⫻ 106 eV)(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 J/eV)

⫽ 4.9 ⫻ 10⫺15 m

The  overall  success  of  the  Rutherford  nuclear  model  was  striking.
Rutherford and his students had shown that all the mass and positive charge
Z e were  concentrated  in  a  minute  nucleus  of  the  atom  of  diameter  10⫺14 m
and  that  Z electrons  must  circle  the  nucleus  in  some  way.  As  with  all  great
discoveries, however, the idea of the nuclear atom raised a swarm of questions
at  the  next  deeper  level:  (1)  If  there  are  only  Z protons  in  the  nucleus,
what composes  the  other  half  of  the  nuclear  mass?  (2)  What  provides  the
cohesive force to keep many protons conﬁned in the incredibly small distance
of 10⫺14 m? (3) How do the electrons move around the nucleus to form a sta-
ble atom, and how does their motion account for the observed spectral lines?

Rutherford had no precise answer to the ﬁrst question. He speculated that
the difference between the mass of Z protons and the total nuclear mass could
be accounted for by additional groupings of neutral particles, each consisting
of a bound electron – proton pair. This conjecture seemed especially satisfying
because it built the atom out of the most fundamental particles then known to
exist.

In answer to the second question, Rutherford cautiously held that electrical
forces  provided  the  cement  to  hold  the  nucleus  together.  He  wrote,  “The
nucleus,  though  of  minute  dimensions,  is  in  itself  a  very  complex  system

10Rutherford was famous for the remark to his graduate students, “There is no money for appara-
tus — we shall have to use our heads” (A. Keller, Infancy of Atomic Physics: Hercules in His Cradle,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1983, p. 215).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

125

Figure 4.13 Bohr (on the right) and Rutherford (on the left) were literal as well as
intellectual  supports  for  each  other.  This  photograph  of  Bohr  and  Rutherford  sitting
back to back was taken at a rowing regatta in June, 1923 at Cambridge University. (AIP
Niels Bohr Library, and Physics Today October 1985, an issue devoted to Bohr.)

consisting of positively and negatively charged bodies bound closely together
by intense electrical forces.” In fact, it was not until 1921 that it was clearly rec-
ognized that the Coulomb force did not hold the nucleus together and that a
completely new and very strong type of force binds protons together. Interest-
ingly  it  was  James  Chadwick,  the  discoverer  of  the  neutron,  who  ﬁrst  recog-
nized that a new force of much more than electric intensity was at work in the
nucleus.11 Perhaps  Rutherford’s  magniﬁcent  achievement  of  explaining  ␣
scattering  with  the  Coulomb  law  blinded  him  to  the  possibility  that  this  was
not the ultimate law at work within the nucleus.

The answer to the third question was not to be given by Rutherford. That
was to be the masterwork of Niels Bohr (Fig. 4.13). Even so, with characteristic
insight,  Rutherford  mentioned  a  planetary  model  of  the  atom  or,  more
precisely, that negative charges revolved around the dense positive core as the
planets revolved around the Sun.12

4.3 THE BOHR ATOM

Bohr’s original quantum theory of spectra was one of the most revolutionary, I sup-
pose, that was ever given to science, and I do not know of any theory that has been
more  successful  . . .  .  I  consider  the  work  of  Bohr  one  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of
the human mind. (Lord Rutherford)

Then it is one of the greatest discoveries. (Albert Einstein, on hearing of Bohr’s theo-
retical calculation of the Rydberg constants for hydrogen and singly ionized helium)

11J. Chadwick and E. S. Biele, Phil. Mag. 42:923, 1921.
12Thomson  and  Hantaro  Nagaoka,  a  Japanese  physicist,  had  worked  even  earlier  with  planetary

atomic models in 1904.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

126

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Spectral Series
Before  looking  in  detail  at  the  ﬁrst  successful  theory  of  atomic  dynamics,
we review  the  experimental  work  on  line  spectra  that  served  as  the  impetus
for and  the  clear  conﬁrmation  of  the  ﬁrst  quantum  theory  of  the  atom.  As
already pointed out in Chapter 3, glowing solids and liquids (and even gases
at the  high  densities  found  in  stars)  emit  a  continuous  distribution  of
wavelengths.  This  distribution  exhibits  a  common  shape  for  the  intensity-
versus-wavelength  curve,  and  the  peak  in  this  curve  shifts  toward  shorter
wavelengths  with  increasing  temperature.  This  universal  “blackbody”  curve  is
shown in Figure 4.14.

In sharp contrast to this continuous spectrum is the discrete line spectrum
emitted by a low-pressure gas subject to an electric discharge. When the light
from such a low-pressure gas discharge is examined with a spectroscope, it is
found to consist of a few bright lines of pure color on a dark background. This
contrasts sharply with the continuous rainbow of colors seen when a glowing
solid  is  viewed  through  a  spectroscope.  Furthermore,  as  can  be  seen  from
Figure 4.15, the wavelengths contained in a given line spectrum are character-
istic  of  the  particular  element  emitting  the  light.  (Also  see  the  inside  front
cover.)  The  simplest  line  spectrum  is  observed  for  atomic  hydrogen,  and  we
shall describe this spectrum in detail. Other atoms, such as mercury, helium,
and  neon,  give  completely  different  line  spectra.  Because  no  two  elements
emit  the  same  line  spectrum,  this  phenomenon  represents  a  practical  and
sensitive technique for identifying the elements present in unknown samples.
In  fact,  by  1860  spectroscopy  had  advanced  so  far  in  the  hands  of  Gustav
Robert  Kirchhoff  (Fig.  4.16)  and  Robert  Wilhelm  von  Bunsen  (Fig.  4.17)  at
the University of Heidelberg that they were able to discover two new elements,
rubidium and cesium, by observing new sequences of spectral lines in mineral
samples.  Improvements  in  instruments  and  techniques  resulted  in  an
enormous growth in spectral analysis in Europe from 1860 to 1900. Even the
European  public  imagination  was  captured  by  spectroscopy  when  spectro-
scopic  techniques  showed  that  “celestial”  meteorites  consisted  only  of  known
Earth elements after all.

Intensity

Visible

UV

0

λmax

IR

1

2

3

λ µ

( m)

Figure 4.14 Intensity versus wavelength for a body heated to 6000 K.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Visible

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

127

Hydrogen

Helium

Mercury

700

600

500

400

Wavelength (nm)

Figure 4.15 Emission line spectra of a few representative elements.

Kirchhoff’s immense contribution to spectroscopy is also shown by another
advance he made in 1859 — the foundation of absorption spectroscopy and
the explanation of Fraunhofer’s dark D-lines in the solar spectrum.13 In 1814,
Joseph  Fraunhofer  had  passed  the  continuous  spectrum  from  the  Sun
through  a  narrow  slit  and  then  through  a  prism.  He  observed  the  surprising
result  of  nearly  1000  ﬁne  dark  lines,  or  gaps,  in  the  continuous  rainbow
spectrum  of  the  Sun,  and  he  assigned  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D . . .  to  the  most

Figure  4.16 Gustav  Robert
Kirchhoff  (1824 – 1887).  Yes,
this  is  the  same  fellow  who
brought us the circuit loop the-
orem  and  established  the  con-
nection between the absorption
and  emission  of  an  object  (see
Section  3.2).  (AIP  Emilio  Segrè
Visual  Archives,  W. F.  Meggers 
Collection)

Figure  4.17 Robert  Wilhelm  von  Bunsen  (1811 – 1899).  Bunsen  is  pictured  with 
his  most  famous  invention,  the  gas  laboratory  burner  named  for  him.  The  great-
est achievement of this ﬁne chemist, however, was the development, with Kirchhoff, of
the  powerful  analytical  method  of  spectral  analysis.  (AIP  Emilio  Segrè  Visual  Archives, 
E. Scott Barr Collection)

13G. Kirchhoff, Monatsber., Berlin, 1859, p. 662.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

128

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

prominent  dark  lines.  These  lines  and  many  more  are  shown  in  Figure  4.18.
Kirchhoff correctly deduced that the mysterious dark lines are produced by a
cloud of vaporized atoms in the Sun’s outer, cooler layers, which absorb at dis-
crete frequencies the intense continuous radiation from the center of the Sun.
Further,  he  showed  that  the  Fraunhofer  D-lines  were  produced  by  vaporized
sodium and that they had the same wavelengths as the strong yellow lines in
the emission spectrum of sodium. Kirchhoff also correctly deduced that all of
Fraunhofer’s  dark  lines  should  be  attributable  to  absorption  by  different  ele-
ments present in the Sun. In a single stroke he opened the way to determining
the  elemental  composition  of  stars  trillions  of  miles  from  the  Earth.  His  ele-
gant  yet  simple  method  for  demonstrating  the  presence  of  sodium  vapor  in
the solar atmosphere is shown in schematic form in Figure 4.19.

Today,  absorption  spectroscopy  is  certainly  as  important  as  emission  spec-
troscopy  for  qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  of  elements  and  molecular
groups. In general, one obtains an absorption spectrum by passing light from
a continuous source [whether in the ultraviolet (uv), visible (vis), or infrared
(IR)  regions]  through  a  gas  of  the  element  being  analyzed.  The  absorption
spectrum consists of a series of dark lines superimposed on the otherwise con-
tinuous spectrum emitted by the source. Each line in the absorption spectrum
of  an  element  coincides  with  a  line  in  the  emission  spectrum  of  that  same
element;  however,  not  all  of  the  emission  lines  are  present  in  an  absorption
spectrum. The differences between emission and absorption spectra are com-
plicated in general and depend on the temperature of the absorbing vapor.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

129

Sodium vapor

Slit

Prism

NaCl

Sun

Lens

The

D-lines

of sodium

D

Green

Yellow

Red

Figure  4.19 Kirchhoff’s  experiment  explaining  the  Fraunhofer  D-lines.  The  D-lines
darken noticeably when sodium vapor is introduced between the slit and the prism.

An  interesting  use  of  the  coincidence  of  absorption  and  emission  lines  is
made  in  the  atomic  absorption  spectrometer.  This  device  is  routinely  used  to
measure parts per million (ppm) of metals in unknowns. For example, if sodium
is to be measured, a sodium lamp emitting a line spectrum is chosen as the light
source. The unknown is heated in a hot ﬂame (usually oxyacetylene) to vaporize
the  sample,  to  break  the  chemical  bonds  of  sodium  to  other  elements,  and  to
produce a gas of elemental sodium. The spectrometer is then tuned to a wave-
length for which both absorption and emission lines exist (say, one of the D-lines
at 588.99 or 589.59 nm), and the amount of darkening or decrease in intensity is
measured with a sensitive photomultiplier. The decrease in intensity is a measure
of the sodium concentration. With proper calibration, concentrations of 0.1 ppm
can  be  measured  with  this  extremely  selective  technique.  Atomic  absorption
spectroscopy  has  been  a  useful  technique  in  analyzing  heavy-metal  contamina-
tion  of  the  food  chain.  For  example,  the  ﬁrst  determinations  of  high  levels  of
mercury in tuna ﬁsh were made with atomic absorption.

From 1860 to 1885 spectroscopic measurements accumulated voluminously,
burying  frenzied  theoreticians  under  a  mountain  of  data.  Accurate  measure-
ments  of  four  visible  emission  lines  of  hydrogen  had  recently  been  made  by
Anders  Ångström,  a  Swedish  physicist,  when  in  1885  a  Swiss  schoolteacher,
Johann Jakob Balmer, published a paper with the unpretentious title “Notice
Concerning  the  Spectral  Lines  of  Hydrogen.”  By  trial  and  error  Balmer  had
found  a  formula  that  correctly  predicted  the  wavelengths  of  Ångström’s  four
visible  lines:  H␣ (red),  H␤ (green),  H␥ (blue),  and  H␦ (violet).  Figure  4.20
shows  these  and  other  lines  in  the  emission  spectrum  of  hydrogen.  Balmer
gave his formula in the form

␭(cm) ⫽ C 2 冢

n2

n2 ⫺ 22 冣    n ⫽ 3, 4, 5,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

where ␭ is  the  wavelength  emitted  in  cm  and  C 2 ⫽ 3645.6 ⫻ 10⫺8 cm,  a
constant  called  the  convergence  limit because  it  gave  the  wavelength  of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Convergence

limit

Hδ
δ

Hγ
γ

Hβ
β

Hα
α

486.1

656.3

364.6

410.2

434.1

(4.18)

λ  (nm)
λ

Figure  4.20 The  Balmer  se-
ries  of  spectral  lines  for  hydro-
gen (emission spectrum).

130

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

the  line  with  the  largest  n value  (n ⫽ ⬁).  Also,  note  that  n ⫽ 3,  4,  5,  . . . ,
where  H␣ has n ⫽ 3,  H␤ has n ⫽ 4,  and  so  forth.  Although  only  four  lines
were  known  to  Balmer  when  he  started  his  paper,  by  the  time  he  had  ﬁn-
ished, ten more lines in the violet and ultraviolet had been measured. Much
to his delight and satisfaction, these lines agreed with his empirical formula
to within  0.1%!  Encouraged  by  his  success  and  because  he  was  a  bit  of  a
numerologist,  Balmer  suggested  that  other  hydrogen  series  might  exist
of the form

␭ ⫽ C3 冢
␭ ⫽ C4 冢

n2

n2 ⫺ 32 冣    n ⫽ 4, 5, 6,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈
n2 ⫺ 42 冣    n ⫽ 5, 6, 7,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

n2

(4.19)

(4.20)

As  we  now  know,  his  speculations  were  correct,  and  these  series  do  indeed
exist. In today’s notation, all of these series are given by a single formula:

1
␭

⫽ R 冢 1
n 2
f

⫺

1
n 2

i 冣

(4.21)

where n f and n i are integers. The Rydberg constant, R, is the same for all series
and has the value

R ⫽ 1.0973732 ⫻ 107 m⫺1

(4.22)

Note that for a given series, n f has a constant value. Furthermore, for a given
series n i ⫽ n f ⫹ 1, n f ⫹ 2, . . . . Table 4.1 lists the name of each series (named
after their discoverers) and the integers that deﬁne the series.

Bohr’s Quantum Model of the Atom
In April of 1913, a young Danish physicist, Niels Bohr (who had recently been
working  with  both  Thomson  and  Rutherford),  published  a  three-part  paper
that  shook  the  world  of  physics  to  its  foundations.14 Not  only  did  this  young
rebel give the ﬁrst successful theory of atomic line spectra but in the process
he  overthrew  some  of  the  most  cherished  principles  of  the  reigning  king  of
electromagnetism, James Clerk Maxwell.

Table 4.1 Some Spectral Series for the

Hydrogen Atom

Lyman Series (uv)
Balmer Series (vis – uv)
Paschen Series (IR)
Brackett Series IR)
Pfund Series (IR)

n f ⫽ 1
n f ⫽ 2
n f ⫽ 3
n f ⫽ 4
n f ⫽ 5

n i ⫽ 2, 3, 4, . . .
n i ⫽ 3, 4, 5, . . .
n i ⫽ 4, 5, 6, . . .
n i ⫽ 5, 6, 7, . . .
n i ⫽ 6, 7, 8, . . .

14N.  Bohr,  “On  the  Constitution  of  Atoms  and  Molecules,”  Phil. Mag. 26:1,  1913.  Also,  N.  Bohr,

Nature 92:231, 1913.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

131

Stationary states

From  our  point  of  view,  Bohr’s  model  may  seem  only  a  reasonable  next
step,  but  it  appeared  astounding,  confounding,  and  incredibly  bold  to
his contemporaries.  As  mentioned  earlier,  both  Thomson  and  Rutherford
realized that the electrons must revolve about the nucleus in order to avoid
falling  into  it.  They,  along  with  Bohr,  realized  that  according  to  Maxwell’s
theory, accelerated charges revolving with orbital frequency f should radiate
light  waves  of  frequency  f.  Unfortunately,  pushed  to  its  logical  conclusion,
this  classical  model  leads  to  disaster.  As  the  electron  radiates  energy,  its
orbit  radius  steadily  decreases  and  its  frequency  of  revolution  increases.
This  leads  to  an  ever-increasing  frequency  of  emitted  radiation  and  an
ultimate  catastrophic  collapse  of  the  atom  as  the  electron  plunges  into
the nucleus (Fig. 4.21).

These  deductions  of  electrons  falling  into  the  nucleus  and  a  continuous
emission spectrum from elements were boldly circumvented by Bohr. He sim-
ply  postulated  that  classical  radiation  theory,  which  had  been  conﬁrmed  by
Hertz’s detection of radio waves using large circuits, did not hold for atomic-
sized  systems.  Moreover,  he  drew  on  the  work  of  Planck  and  Einstein  as
sources of the correct theory of atomic systems. He overcame the problem of a
classical  electron  that  continually  lost  energy  by  applying  Planck’s  ideas  of
quantized energy levels to orbiting atomic electrons. Thus he postulated that
electrons  in  atoms  are  generally  conﬁned  to  certain  stable,  nonradiating
energy levels and orbits known as stationary states.15 He applied Einstein’s
concept of the photon to arrive at an expression for the frequency of the light
emitted when the electron jumps from one stationary state to another. Thus, if
⌬E is the separation of two possible electronic stationary states, then ⌬E ⫽ hf,
where h is Planck’s constant and f is the frequency of the emitted light regard-
less of the frequency of the electron’s orbital motion. In this way, by combin-
ing  certain  principles  of  classical  mechanics  with  new  quantum  principles  of
light  emission,  Bohr  arrived  at  a  theory  of  the  atom  that  agreed  remarkably
with experiment.

Radiated light of
ever shorter λ

e –

+ Ze

“plop”

f  cycles/s

Figure 4.21 The classical model of the nuclear atom.

15Stationary state was a term used by Bohr to mean a state of an atom that was stable, nonradiating,
and had an energy constant with time. It does not mean “ﬁxed in position” or “without motion,”
since electrons in stationary orbits move with high speed. 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

132

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Assumptions of the Bohr
theory

– e

me

v

+ e

F

r

Figure  4.22 Diagram  repre-
senting Bohr’s model of the hy-
drogen atom.

Now  that  we  have  looked  at  the  general  principles  of  Bohr’s  model  of  hy-
drogen  and  at  the  detailed  experimental  spectra  already  discovered  by  1913,
let us examine Bohr’s quantum theory in detail. The basic ideas of the Bohr
theory as it applies to an atom of hydrogen are as follows:

• The  electron  moves  in  circular  orbits  about  the  proton  under  the
inﬂuence  of  the  Coulomb  force  of  attraction,  as  in  Figure  4.22.  So  far
nothing new!

• Only  certain  orbits  are  stable.  These  stable  orbits  are  ones  in  which  the
electron does not radiate. Hence the energy is ﬁxed or stationary in time,
and  ordinary  classical  mechanics  may  be  used  to  describe  the  electron’s
motion in these stable orbits.

• Radiation is emitted by the atom when the electron “jumps” from a more
energetic  initial  stationary  state  to  a  less  energetic  lower  state.  This
“jump”  cannot  be  visualized  or  treated  classically.  In  particular,  the  fre-
quency f of  the  photon  emitted  in  the  jump  is  independent  of  the
frequency  of  the  electron’s  orbital  motion. Instead,  the  frequency  of
the  light  emitted  is  related  to  the  change  in  the  atom’s  energy  and  is
given by the Planck – Einstein formula

E i ⫺ E f ⫽ hf

(4.23)

where E i is  the  energy  of  the  initial  state,  E f is  the  energy  of  the  ﬁnal
state, and E i ⬎ E f.

• The  size  of  the  allowed  electron  orbits  is  determined  by  an  addi-
tional quantum  condition  imposed  on  the  electron’s  orbital  angular
momentum. Namely, the allowed orbits are those for which the electron’s
orbital  angular  momentum  about  the  nucleus  is  an  integral  multiple
of

ប ⫽ h/2␲
,

m evr ⫽ nប

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(4.24)

Using  these  four  assumptions,  we  can  now  calculate  the  allowed  energy
levels and emission wavelengths of the hydrogen atom. Recall that the elec-
trical  potential  energy  of  the  system  shown  in  Figure  4.22  is  given  by
U ⫽ qV ⫽ ⫺ke 2/r,  where  k (the  Coulomb  constant)  has  the  value  1/4␲␧0.
Thus, the total energy of the atom, which contains both kinetic and poten-
tial energy terms, is

E ⫽ K ⫹ U ⫽ 1

2 m ev 2 ⫺ k

e 2
r

(4.25)

Applying Newton’s second law to this system, we see that the Coulomb attrac-
tive  force  on  the  electron,  ke 2/r 2,  must  equal  the  mass  times  the  centripetal
acceleration of the electron, or

ke 2
r 2 ⫽

m ev 2

r

From this expression, we immediately ﬁnd the kinetic energy to be

K ⫽

m ev 2

2

⫽

ke 2
2r

(4.26)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

133

Substituting  this  value  of  K into  Equation  4.25  gives  the  total  energy  of  the
atom as

E ⫽ ⫺

ke 2
2r

(4.27)

Note  that  the  total  energy  is  negative,  indicating  a  bound electron – proton
system. This means that energy in the amount of ke 2/2r must be added to the
atom to remove the electron to inﬁnity and leave it motionless. An expression
for r,  the  radius  of  the  electron  orbit,  may  be  obtained  by  eliminating  v
between Equations 4.24 and 4.26:

rn ⫽

n2ប2
m eke 2

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(4.28)

Radii of Bohr orbits in
hydrogen

Equation  4.28  shows  that  only  certain  orbits  are  allowed  and  that  these
preferred  orbits  follow  from  the  nonclassical  step  of  requiring  the  electron’s
angular momentum to be an integral multiple of 
. The smallest radius occurs
for n ⫽ 1,  is  called  the  Bohr  radius, and  is  denoted  a 0. The  value  for  the
Bohr radius is

ប

a0 ⫽

ប2
m eke 2 ⫽ 0.529 Å ⫽ 0.0529 nm

(4.29)

The  fact  that  Bohr’s  theory  gave  a  value  for  a0 in  good  agreement  with  the
experimental size of hydrogen without any empirical calibration of orbit size
was considered a striking triumph for this theory. The ﬁrst three Bohr orbits
are shown to scale in Figure 4.23.

The  quantization  of  the  orbit  radii  immediately  leads  to  energy  quantiza-
tion. This can be seen by substituting rn ⫽ n2a 0 into Equation 4.27, giving for
the allowed energy levels

9a0

4a0

– e

a0

+ e

rn  = n2a 0

n  =  1, 2, 3,...

Figure  4.23 The  ﬁrst  three
Bohr orbits for hydrogen.

En ⫽ ⫺

ke 2

2a0 冢 1
n2 冣

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(4.30)

Energy levels of hydrogen

Inserting numerical values into Equation 4.30 gives

En ⫽ ⫺

13.6

n2  eV    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(4.31)

The  integers  n corresponding  to  the  discrete,  or  quantized,  values  of
the atom’s  energy  have  the  special  name  quantum  numbers. Quantum
numbers  are  central  to  quantum  theory  and  in  general  refer  to  the  set  of
integers  that  label  the  discrete  values  of  important  atomic  quantities,
such as energy and angular momentum. The lowest stationary, or nonradiat-
ing,  state  is  called  the  ground  state, has n ⫽ 1,  and  has  an  energy
E1 ⫽ ⫺13.6 eV. The next state, or ﬁrst excited state, has n ⫽ 2 and an en-
ergy E2 ⫽ E 1/22 ⫽ ⫺3.4 eV.  An  energy-level  diagram  showing  the  energies
of  these  discrete  energy  states  and  the  corresponding  quantum  numbers
is shown  in  Figure  4.24.  The  uppermost  level,  corresponding  to  n ⫽ ⬁  (or
r ⫽ ⬁)  and  E ⫽ 0,  represents  the  state  for  which  the  electron  is  removed
from  the  atom  and  is  motionless.  The  minimum  energy  required  to  ionize

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Quantum numbers

134

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

the  atom  (that  is,  to  completely  remove  an  electron  in  the  ground  state
from  the  proton’s  inﬂuence)  is  called  the  ionization  energy. As  can  be
seen from Figure 4.24, the ionization energy for hydrogen based on Bohr’s
calculation  is  13.6  eV.  This  constituted  another  major  achievement  for  the
Bohr theory, because the ionization energy for hydrogen had already been
measured to be precisely 13.6 eV.

Equation 4.30 together with Bohr’s third postulate can be used to calculate
the frequency of the photon emitted when the electron jumps from an outer
orbit to an inner orbit:

f ⫽

E i ⫺ E f

h

⫽

ke 2

2a0h 冢 1

n f

2 ⫺

2 冣

1
n i

(4.32)

Because the quantity actually measured is wavelength, it is convenient to con-
vert frequency to wavelength using c ⫽ f ␭ to get

Emission wavelengths of
hydrogen

1
␭

⫽

f
c

⫽

ke 2

2a0hc 冢 1

n f

2 ⫺

2 冣

1
n i

(4.33)

The remarkable fact is that the theoretical expression, Equation 4.33, is identi-
cal to Balmer’s empirical relation

1
␭

⫽ R 冢 1

n f

2 ⫺

2 冣

1
n i

(4.34)

n
∞

5
4
3

2

1

E (eV)
0.00

– 0.54
– 0.85
–1.51

–3.40

–13.6

Paschen

series

Balmer
series

Lyman
series

Figure  4.24 An  energy-level
diagram  for  hydrogen.  In  such
diagrams  the  allowed  energies
are  plotted  on  the  vertical  axis.
Nothing  is  plotted  on  the  hori-
zontal axis, but the horizontal ex-
tent of the diagram is made large
enough  to  show  allowed  transi-
tions.  Note  that  the  quantum
numbers are given on the left.

provided  that  the  combination  of  constants  ke 2/2a 0hc is  equal  to  the  experi-
mentally  determined  Rydberg  constant,  R ⫽ 1.0973732 ⫻ 107 m⫺1.  When
Bohr  demonstrated  the  agreement  of  these  two  quantities  to  a  precision  of
about 1% late in 1913, it was recognized as the crowning achievement of his
quantum  theory  of  hydrogen.  Furthermore,  Bohr  showed  that  all  of  the
observed  spectral  series  for  hydrogen  mentioned  previously  in  this  section
have a natural interpretation in his theory. These spectral series are shown as
transitions between energy levels in Figure 4.24.

Bohr  immediately  extended  his  model  for  hydrogen  to  other  elements  in
which all but one electron had been removed. Ionized elements such as He⫹,
Li2⫹, and Be3⫹ were suspected to exist in hot stellar atmospheres, where fre-
quent  atomic  collisions  occurred  with  enough  energy  to  completely  remove
one  or  more  atomic  electrons.  Bohr  showed  that  several  mysterious  lines
observed  in  the  Sun  and  stars  could  not  be  due  to  hydrogen,  but  were
correctly  predicted  by  his  theory  if  attributed  to  singly  ionized  helium.  In
general, to describe a single electron orbiting a ﬁxed nucleus of charge ⫹Z e,
Bohr’s theory gives

rn ⫽ (n2)

a0
Z

and

En ⫽ ⫺

ke 2

2a0 冢 Z 2

n2 冣    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(4.35)

(4.36)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

135

EXAMPLE 4.6 Spectral Lines from

the Star ␨-Puppis

The  mysterious  lines  observed  by  the  American  as-
tronomer Edward Charles Pickering in 1896 in the spec-
trum of the star ␨-Puppis ﬁt the empirical formula

1
␭

⫽ R 冢

1

(n f/2)2 ⫺

1

(n i/2)2 冣

where R is, again, the Rydberg constant. Show that these
lines can be explained by the Bohr theory as originating
from He⫹.

Solution He⫹ has Z ⫽ 2.  Thus,  the  allowed  energy
levels are given by Equation 4.36 as

En ⫽

ke 2

2a0 冢 4
n2 冣

Using hf ⫽ E i ⫺ E f we ﬁnd

f ⫽

⫽

E i ⫺ E f

h
ke 2

2a0h 冢

⫽

1

ke 2

2 ⫺

2a0h 冢 4
(n f/2)2 ⫺

2 冣
(n i/2)2 冣

4
n i

n f

1

or

1
␭

⫽

f
c

⫽

ke 2

2a0hc 冢

1

(n f/2)2 ⫺

1

(n i/2)2 冣

This is the desired solution, because R ⬅ ke 2/2a 0hc.

EXAMPLE 4.7 An Electronic Transition

in Hydrogen

The electron in a hydrogen atom at rest makes a transition
from the n ⫽ 2 energy state to the n ⫽ 1 ground state.

(a)  Find  the  wavelength,  frequency,  and  energy  (eV)

of the emitted photon.

Solution We can use Equation 4.34 directly to obtain ␭,
with n i ⫽ 2 and n f ⫽ 1:

1
␭

⫽ R 冢 1
n f

2 ⫺

2 冣 ⫽ R 冢 1
1
n i

12 ⫺

1

22 冣 ⫽

3R
4

␭ ⫽

⫽

4
3R

3(1.097 ⫻ 107 m⫺1)
⫽ 1.215 ⫻ 10⫺7 m ⫽ 121.5 nm

4

This wavelength lies in the ultraviolet region.

Because c ⫽ f ␭, the frequency of the photon is

f ⫽

c
␭

⫽

3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s
1.215 ⫻ 10⫺7 m

⫽ 2.47 ⫻ 1015 Hz

The energy of the photon is given by E ⫽ hf, so

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

E ⫽ hf

⫽ (4.136 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV ⭈ s)(2.47 ⫻ 1015 Hz) ⫽ 10.2 eV

(b)  The  calculation  of  part  (a)  assumes  that  all of
the n ⫽ 2 to n ⫽ 1 transition energy is carried off by the
photon;  however,  this  is  technically  incorrect  because
some of this energy must go into the recoil motion of the
atom.  Using  conservation  of  momentum  as  it  applies  to
the  system  (atom ⫹ photon),  and  assuming  that  the  re-
coil energy of the atom is small compared with the n ⫽ 2
to n ⫽ 1  energy-level  separation,  ﬁnd  the  momentum
and energy of the recoiling hydrogen atom.

Solution Because momentum is conserved, and the to-
tal momentum before emission is zero, the total momen-
tum  after  emission  must  also  be  zero.  The  photon  and
atom therefore move off in opposite directions, with

mv ⫽

Ephoton

c

where m and v are  the  mass  and  recoil  speed  of  the  hy-
drogen atom, E photon is the actual energy of the photon
(less  than  10.2 eV),  and  c is  the  speed  of  light.  Because
the  energy  difference  between  the  n ⫽ 2  and  n ⫽ 1 lev-
els, E,  is  the  source  of  both  the  photon  energy  and  the
recoil kinetic energy of the atom, we can write

E ⫽ E photon ⫹ 1

2 mv2

Because the atom is massive, we can assume that its recoil
speed v and kinetic energy are so small that E ⬇ Ephoton.
Substituting Ephoton ⫽ 10.2 eV into the expression for mv
yields

mv ⫽ 10.2 eV/c

The (approximate) recoil kinetic energy of the hydrogen
atom can now be calculated:

K ⫽

⫽

(mv)2

1
2

mv2 ⫽

1
2
m
(0.5)(10.2 eV)2
938.8 ⫻ 106 eV

⫽ (0.5)

(10.2 eV)2

mc 2

⫽ 5.56 ⫻ 10⫺8 eV

Thus  the  fraction  of  the  energy  difference  between
the n ⫽ 2 and n ⫽ 1 levels that goes into atomic recoil en-
ergy is very small, approximately 5 parts per billion:

K
E

⫽

5.56 ⫻ 10⫺8 eV

10.2 eV

⫽ 5.4 ⫻ 10⫺9

Evidently the process of simply equating the photon’s
energy to the atomic energy-level separation yields accu-
rate  answers  because  little  energy  is  needed  to  conserve
momentum.

136

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

Exercise  3 Check  the  approximation  that E ⬇ E photon made  in  Example  4.7  by
directly  calculating  the  recoil  kinetic  energy  of  the  hydrogen  atom,  1/2m v 2.  (Hint:
Solve m v ⫽ E photon/c and E ⫽ E photon ⫹ 1/2m v 2 simultaneously  to  show  v ⬇ E/mc,
calculate the numerical value of 1/2m v 2, and compare this answer to the result given
in Example 4.7.)

Exercise 4 What is the wavelength of the photon emitted by hydrogen when the elec-
tron makes a transition from the n ⫽ 3 state to the n ⫽ 1 state?

Answer

9
8R

⫽ 102.6 nm
.

EXAMPLE 4.8 The Balmer Series for Hydrogen

The Balmer series for the hydrogen atom corresponds to
electronic transitions that terminate in the state of quan-
tum number n ⫽ 2, as shown in Figure 4.24.

(a)  Find  the  longest-wavelength  photon  emitted  and

determine its energy.

Solution The longest-wavelength (least-energetic) pho-
ton in the Balmer series results from the transition from
n ⫽ 3 to n ⫽ 2. Using Equation 4.34 gives

1
␭

1

␭max

⫽ R 冢 1
n f
⫽ R 冢 1

2 ⫺

22 ⫺

2 冣
1
n i
32 冣 ⫽
1

5
36

R

␭max ⫽

36
5R

⫽

36

5(1.097 ⫻ 107 m⫺1)

⫽ 656.3 nm

This  wavelength  is  in  the  red  region  of  the  visible  spec-
trum.

The energy of this photon is

Ephoton ⫽ hf ⫽

hc
␭max

⫽

(6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

656.3 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

⫽ 3.03 ⫻ 10⫺19 J ⫽ 1.89 eV

We could also obtain the energy of the photon by using the
expression hf ⫽ E3 ⫺ E 2,  where  E 2 and E3 are  the  energy
levels of the hydrogen atom, which can be calculated from
Equation 4.31. Note that this is the lowest-energy photon in
this series because it involves the smallest energy change.

(b)  Find  the  shortest-wavelength  photon  emitted  in

the Balmer series.

Solution The shortest-wavelength (most-energetic) pho-
ton  in  the  Balmer  series  is  emitted  when  the  electron
makes a transition from n ⫽ ⬁ to n ⫽ 2. Therefore,

1

␭min

⫽ R 冢 1

22 ⫺

1

⬁ 冣 ⫽

R
4

␭min ⫽

4
R

⫽

4

1.097 ⫻ 107 m⫺1 ⫽ 364.6 nm

This  wavelength  is  in  the  ultraviolet  region  and  corre-
sponds to the series limit.

Exercise 5 Find the energy of the shortest-wavelength photon emitted in the Balmer
series for hydrogen.

Answer 3.40 eV.

Although the theoretical derivation of the line spectrum was a remarkable feat
in itself, the scope and impact of Bohr’s monumental achievement is truly seen
only when it is realized what else he treated in his three-part paper of 1913:

• He  explained  why  fewer  lines  are  seen  in  the  absorption  spectrum  of

hydrogen than in the emission spectrum.

• He explained the emission of x rays from atoms.
• He explained the nuclear origin of ␤ particles.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.3

THE BOHR ATOM

137

• He explained the chemical properties of atoms in terms of the electron

shell model.

• He explained how atoms associate to form molecules.

Two of these topics, the comparison of absorption and emission in hydrogen
and  the  shell  structure  of  atoms,  are  of  such  general  importance  that  they
deserve more explanation.

We have already pointed out that a gas will absorb at wavelengths that corre-
spond exactly to some emission lines, but not every line present in emission is
seen  as  a  dark  absorption  line.  Bohr  explained  absorption  as  the  reverse  of
emission; that is, an electron in a given energy state can only absorb a photon
of the exact frequency required to produce a “jump” from a lower energy state
to  a  higher  energy  state.  Ordinarily,  hydrogen  atoms  are  in  the  ground  state
(n ⫽ 1)  and  so  only  the  high-energy  Lyman  series  corresponding  to  transi-
tions from the ground state to higher energy states is seen in absorption. The
longer-wavelength  Balmer  series  corresponding  to  transitions  originating  in
the ﬁrst excited state (n ⫽ 2) is not seen because the average thermal energy
of each atom is insufﬁcient to raise the electron to the ﬁrst excited state. That
is, the number of electrons in the ﬁrst excited state is insufﬁcient at ordinary
temperatures to produce measurable absorption.

EXAMPLE 4.9 Hydrogen in Its First

Excited State

Calculate  the  temperature  at  which  many  hydrogen
atoms  will  be  in  the  ﬁrst  excited  state  (n ⫽ 2).  What
series should be prominent in absorption at this temper-
ature?  (Calculate  both  from  N2/N 1 ⫽ exp(⫺⌬E/k BT )
and from  kBT ⫽ average thermal energy.)

3
2

Solution At  room  temperature  almost  all  hydrogen
atoms  are  in  the  ground  state  with  an  energy  of
⫺13.6 eV.  The  ﬁrst  excited  state  (n ⫽ 2)  has  an  energy
equal  to  E 2 ⫽ ⫺3.4 eV.  Therefore,  each  hydrogen  atom
must gain an energy of 10.2 eV to reach the ﬁrst excited
state. If the atoms are to obtain this energy from heat, we
must have

3
2 k BT ⫽

average thermal energy

atom

⬇ 10.2 eV

or

or

T ⫽

10.2 eV
(3/2)k B
⫽ 79,000 K

⫽

10.2 eV

(1.5)(8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)

Let us check this result by using the Boltzmann distri-
bution. In Section 3.3 we saw that the probability of ﬁnd-
ing an atom with energy E at temperature T is

P(E ) ⫽ P0e⫺(E⫺E 0)/kBT

where P0 is  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  atom  in  the
ground  state  of  energy,  E 0.  From  this  expression,  it

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

follows  that  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  atoms  in  two
different energy levels in thermal equilibrium at temper-
ature T is

N 2
N 1

⫽

P(E 2)
P(E 1)

⫽ e⫺(E2⫺E1)/kBT

where N 2 is  the  number  in  the  upper  level,  N1 is  the
number  in  the  lower  level,  and  ⌬E is  the  energy  separa-
tion  of  the  two  levels.  Let  us  use  this  equation  to  deter-
mine  the  temperature  at  which  approximately  10%  of
the hydrogen atoms are in the n ⫽ 2 state.

N2
N1

⫽ 0.10 ⫽ e⫺(10.2 eV)/kBT

ln(0.10) ⫽ ⫺

10.2 eV

k BT

Solving for T gives

T ⫽ ⫺

10.2 eV

k B ln(0.10)

⫽ ⫺

⫽ 51,000 K

10.2 eV

(8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)ln(0.10)

Thus  the  two  estimates  agree  in  order  of  magnitude
and show  that  the  Balmer  series  will  only  be  seen  in
absorption if the absorbing gas is quite hot, as in a stellar
atmosphere.

138

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

The  ﬁnal  comment  on  Bohr’s  work  concerns  his  development  of  electronic
shell theory to treat multielectron atoms. In part II of his paper he attempted to
ﬁnd stable electronic arrangements subject to the conditions that the total angu-
lar momentum of all the electrons is quantized and, simultaneously, that the total
energy is a minimum. This is a difﬁcult problem, and one that becomes more dif-
ﬁcult  as  more  electrons  are  introduced  into  a  system.  Nevertheless,  Bohr  had
considerable success in explaining the chemical activity of multielectron atoms.
For example, he was able to show that neutral hydrogen could add another elec-
tron to become H⫺, and that neutral helium was particularly stable with a closed
innermost  shell  of  two  electrons  and  a  high  ionization  potential.  He  also  pro-
posed that lithium (Z ⫽ 3) had an electronic arrangement consisting of two elec-
trons in one orbit near the nucleus and the third in a large, loosely bound outer
orbit. This explains the tendency of lithium atoms to lose an electron and “take a
positive  charge  in  chemical  combinations  with  other  elements.”  Although  we
cannot  afford  the  luxury  of  looking  in  detail  at  all  of  Bohr’s  predictions  about
multielectron atoms, his basic ideas of shell structure are as follows:

• Electrons of elements with higher atomic number form stable concentric

rings, with deﬁnite numbers of electrons allowed for each ring or shell.

• The number of electrons in the outermost ring determines the valency.16

10 – 8 cm
Hydrogen

Helium

Lithium

Carbon

Neon

Sodium

Figure 4.25 Bohr’s sketches of electronic orbits.

Argon

16G. N. Lewis, an American chemist, contributed much to our understanding of shell structure in

1916, building on Bohr’s remarkable foundation.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.4

BOHR’S CORRESPONDENCE PRINCIPLE, OR WHY IS ANGULAR MOMENTUM QUANTIZED?

139

Correspondence principle

With  almost  magical  insight,  Bohr  ended  part  II  of  his  classic  paper
with the  explanation  of  the  similar  chemical  properties  of  the  iron  group
(Fe,  Co,  Ni)  and  the  rare  earths,  which  have  atomic  numbers  that  pro-
gressively  increase  by  1  and  would  not  normally  be  expected  to  be  chemi-
cally  alike.  The  answer,  according  to  Bohr,  is  that  the  conﬁguration  of
electrons  in  the  outermost  ring  of  these  elements  is  identical  and  that  it
is energetically  more  favorable  to  add  electrons  to  inner  rings.  At  the  risk
of encouraging  some  to  take  the  idea  of  electronic  orbits  too  seriously,
Figure  4.25  shows  some  sketches  of  electronic  orbits  as  drawn  by  Bohr
in the early 1900s.

4.4 BOHR’S CORRESPONDENCE PRINCIPLE, OR

WHY IS ANGULAR MOMENTUM QUANTIZED?

Where others might have left a wild and lawless gap between the revolutionary
new laws that apply to atomic systems and those that hold for classical systems,
Bohr provided a gentle and reﬁned continuum in the form of the correspon-
dence  principle. This  principle  states  that  predictions  of  quantum  theory
must correspond to the predictions of classical physics in the region of
sizes  where  classical  theory  is  known  to  hold. These  classical  sizes  for
length,  mass,  and  time  are  on  the  order  of  centimeters,  grams,  and  seconds
and typically involve very large quantum numbers, as can be seen by calculat-
ing n for  a  hydrogen  atom  with  a  radius  of  1 cm.  If  the  quantum  number
becomes large because of increased size or mass, we may state the correspon-
dence principle symbolically as

lim
n : ⬁

[quantum physics] ⫽ [classical physics]

where n is  a  typical  quantum  number  of  the  system  such  as  the  quantum
number for hydrogen. In the hands of Bohr, the correspondence principle
became  a  masterful  tool  to  test  new  quantum  results  as  well  as  a  source  of
fundamental postulates about atomic systems. In fact, Bohr used reasoning
of  this  type  to  arrive  at  the  concept  of  the  quantization  of  the  electron’s
orbital  angular  momentum.  Both  Bohr’s  idea  of  discrete,  nonradiating
energy  states  and  the  emission  postulate  for  atoms  were  foreshadowed
by Planck’s  quantization  of  the  energy  of  blackbody  oscillators  and  by
Einstein’s  treatment  of  the  photoelectric  effect.  However,  the  concept  of
angular  momentum  quantization  seems  to  have  sprung  full  blown  from
Bohr’s  Gedankenkuche (thought  kitchen),  as  so  aptly  expressed  by  Einstein.
Indeed, in some of his later writings Bohr emphasized the point of view that
the  quantization  of  angular  momentum  was  a  postulate,  underivable  from
any  deeper  law,  and  that  its  validity  depended  simply  on  the  agreement  of
his model with experimental spectra.

What  is  most  interesting  is  that  in  his  1913  paper  Bohr  ingeniously
showed  that  the  quantization  of  angular  momentum  is  a  consequence  of
the  smooth  and  gradual  emergence  of  classical  results  from  quantum  the-
ory  in  the  limit  of  large  quantum  number.  In  particular,  Bohr  argued  that
according  to  his  correspondence  principle,  the  quantum  condition  for
emission  (⌬E ⫽ hf )  and  Maxwell’s  classical  radiation  theory  (electronic
charges  with  orbital  frequency  f radiate  light  waves  of  frequency  f ) must
simultaneously  hold  for  the  case  of  extremely  large  electronic  orbits.  This  case  is

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

140

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

ω′

– e

me

+

p

r 1

r 2

ω

Figure  4.26 The  classical  limit
of  the  Bohr  atom.  Note  that  r 1
and r 2 are  the  radii  of  the  two
adjacent  quantum  orbits, 
in
which  the  electron  has  orbital
angular  frequencies  of  ␻1 and
␻2.  We  assume  r 1 ⬇ r 2 ⬇ r and
␻1 ⬇ ␻2 ⬇ ␻; ␻⬘ is  the  angular
frequency of a photon emitted in
a transition from r 1 to r 2.

shown  in  Figure  4.26.  In  this  ﬁgure,  r 1 and r 2 are  the  radii  of  two  large
adjacent  orbits  that  are  separated  in  energy  by  an  amount  dE and ␻ is  the
orbital  angular  frequency  of  the electron,  where  ␻ is  approximately
constant  in  a  transition  between  large  orbits.  (The  algebra  is  simpler  if
we use angular frequency instead of frequency. Recall that the connection is
␻ ⫽ 2␲f .)  Because  we  want  to  determine  the  allowed  values  of the  angu-
lar momentum  from  the  known  change  in  the  atom’s  energy  when light
is emitted,  we  need  the  relation  between  the  total  energy  of  the  atom, 
E ⫽ ⫺ke 2/2r (Equation  4.27)  and  the  magnitude  of  the  total  angular
momentum  of  the  atom,  L ⫽ m evr ⫽ m e␻r 2.  Using  the  fact  that  the
electron is kept in orbit by the Coulomb force, it is not difﬁcult to show that
1/r ⫽ m eke 2/L2 (see Problem 30), so Equation 4.27 becomes

E ⫽ ⫺

1
2

m ek2e4

L2

(4.37)

Taking a derivative of Equation 4.37 gives the desired connection between the
change in energy and the change in angular momentum for the Bohr atom.

dE
dL

⫽

m ek2e4

L3

(4.38)

Finally, we obtain dE/dL in terms of ␻, the electron orbital angular frequency,
by using L3 ⫽ m ek2e4/␻ (see Problem 30). Thus,

dE
dL

⫽

m ek2e4

(m ek2e4/␻)

⫽ ␻

(4.39)

Now consider the emission of a photon of energy 
makes a transition from r 1 to r 2. Equation 4.39 becomes

dE ⫽ ប␻⬘

when the electron

or

dE ⫽ ␻ dL

ប␻⬘ ⫽ ␻ dL

(4.40)

where ␻⬘ is the photon angular frequency and ␻ is the electron orbital angular
frequency.  Ordinarily, ␻⬘ and ␻ are  not  simply  related.  However,  because  we
are  dealing  with  large  orbits  in  this  situation,  the  correspondence  principle
tells us that the quantum theory must predict the same frequency for the emit-
ted  light  as  Maxwell’s  law  of  radiation.  Because  Maxwell’s  classical  theory
requires the electron to radiate light of the same frequency as its orbital mo-
tion frequency, ␻⬘ ⫽ ␻, and Equation 4.40 becomes

or

ប␻ ⫽ ␻ dL

dL ⫽ ប

(4.41)

Equation  4.41  shows  that  the  change  in  electronic  angular  momentum  for  a
transition between adjacent, large electronic orbits is always
. This means that
the magnitude of total angular momentum of the electron in a speciﬁc orbit
may be taken to have a value equal to an integral multiple of 

, or

ប

ប

for n ⫽ large integers.

L ⫽ m evr ⫽ nប

(4.42)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

4.5

DIRECT CONFIRMATION OF ATOMIC ENERGY LEVELS: THE FRANCK – HERTZ EXPERIMENT

141

Bohr  realized  that  although  Equation  4.42  was  derived  for  the  case
of large  electron  orbits,  it  was  a  universal  quantum  principle  applicable  to
all systems and of wider applicability than Maxwell’s law of radiation. Such
a bold and far-seeing vision was characteristic of the man so aptly described
by  Einstein  in  the  following  quote:  “That  this  insecure  and  contradic-
tory foundation  [physics  from  1910  to  1920]  was  sufﬁcient  to  enable  a
man of  Bohr’s  unique  instinct  and  tact  to  discover  the  major  laws  of
the spectral lines and of the electron shells of the atoms together with their
signiﬁcance  for  chemistry  appeared  to  me  like  a  miracle — and  appears
to me  as  a  miracle  even  today.  This  is  the  highest  form  of  musicality  in
the sphere of thought.”

4.5 DIRECT CONFIRMATION OF ATOMIC ENERGY

LEVELS: THE FRANCK–HERTZ EXPERIMENT

In  the  preceding  sections  we  have  shown  the  involved  trail  of  reasoning
indirectly  proving  the  existence  of  quantized  energy  levels  in  atoms  from
observations  of  the  optical  line  spectra  emitted  by  different  elements.
Now we  turn  to  a  simpler  and  more  direct  experimental  proof  of  the
existence  of  discrete  energy  levels  in  atoms  involving  their  excitation  by
collision  with  low-energy  electrons.  The  ﬁrst  experiment  of  this  type  was
performed by German physicists James Franck and Gustav Hertz (a nephew
of Heinrich Hertz) in 1914 on mercury (Hg) atoms. It provided clear exper-
imental  proof  of  the  existence  of  quantized  energy  levels  in  atoms  and
showed  that  the  levels  deduced  from  electron  bombardment  agreed  with
those  deduced  from  optical  line  spectra.  Furthermore,  it  conﬁrmed  the
universality  of  energy  quantization  in  atoms,  because  the  quite  different
physical  processes  of  photon  emission  and  electron  bombardment  yielded
the same energy levels.

Figure 4.27 shows a schematic of a typical college laboratory device similar
to the Franck – Hertz apparatus. Electrons emitted by the ﬁlament are acceler-
ated  over  a  relatively  long  region  (⬇ 1 cm)  by  the  positive  potential  on  the

Filament

Accelerating grid

Collector

e –

Hg

Hg

V

–

+

0 – 40 V

Accelerating

voltage

+

–

6 V

Filament

supply

Electrometer

I

+

–

1.5 V

Retarding

voltage

Figure 4.27 Franck – Hertz apparatus. A drop of pure mercury is sealed into an evac-
uated  tube.  The  tube  is  heated  to  185°C  during  measurements  to  provide  a  high-
enough density of mercury to ensure many electron – atom collisions.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

142

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

grid, V. The electrons can reach the collector and be registered on the elec-
trometer (a sensitive ammeter) if they have sufﬁcient energy to overcome the
retarding  potential  of  about  1.5 V  set  up  over  the  short  distance  (⬇ 1 mm)
between grid and collector. At low electron energies or accelerating voltages,
perfectly elastic collisions occur between the electrons and Hg atoms in which
the sum of  the  kinetic  energies  of  both  electron  and  atom  are  conserved.
Because  the  Hg  atom  is  much  more  massive  than  the  electron,  the  electron
transfers very little kinetic energy to the atom in a collision (see Problem 38).
Even  after  multiple  collisions  the  electron  reaches  the  grid  with  a  kinetic
energy  of  approximately  e times V and  will  be  collected  if  the  accelerating
voltage V is greater than 1.5 V. When V is modestly increased, more electrons
reach the collector and the current, I, rises.

As  the  accelerating  voltage  is  increased  further,  a  threshold  voltage  is
reached  at  which  inelastic  collisions  occur  at  the  grid,  where  the  electrons
reach  an  energy  of  e times V.  In  these  inelastic  collisions,  electrons  can
transfer  almost  all  of  their  kinetic  energy  to  the  atom,  raising  it  to  its  ﬁrst
excited state (see Problem 39 and Question 9). Electrons that have collided
inelastically  are  unable  to  overcome  the  retarding  potential  and  conse-
quently I decreases  for  this  threshold  voltage.  Figure  4.28  shows  a  typical
plot  of  current  versus  accelerating  voltage,  with  the  ﬁrst  weak  current  dip
(A)  occurring  at  a  threshold  voltage  of  slightly  more  than  7 V.  When  the
voltage  is  increased  once  again,  the  inelastic  collision  region  moves  closer
to the ﬁlament and the electrons that were stopped by an inelastic collision
are  reaccelerated,  reaching  the  collector  and  causing  another  rise  in
current  (B ).  Another  dip  (C )  occurs  when  V is  increased  enough  for  an
electron  to  have  two  successive  inelastic  collisions:  An  electron  excites  an
atom  halfway  between  ﬁlament  and  grid,  loses  all  its  energy,  and  is  then
reaccelerated  to  excite  another  atom  at  the  grid,  ﬁnally  ending  up  with
insufﬁcient  energy  to  be  collected.  This  process  takes  place  periodically
with  increasing  grid  voltage,  giving  rise  to  equally  spaced  maxima  and
minima in the I – V curve, as shown in Figure 4.28.

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

t
n
e
r
r
u
c
 
r
e
t
e
m
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

)
A
7
–
0
1
 
f
o
 
s
t
i
n
u
n
i
(
 
I

 

B

C

A

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Accelerating voltage V (volts)

Figure  4.28 Current  as  a  function  of  voltage  in  the  Franck – Hertz  experiment.  To
obtain these data, the ﬁlament voltage was set at 6.0 V and the tube heated to 185⬚C.
(Data taken by Bob Rodick, Utica College, class of 1992)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

143

If the adjacent maxima and minima separations of Figure 4.28 are carefully
averaged, one ﬁnds an average of 4.9 ⫾ 0.1 V, or a ground to ﬁrst excited state
separation  of  4.9 ⫾ 0.1 eV.  Note,  however,  that  the  ﬁrst  minimum  does  not
occur  at  4.9 V  but  at  about  7.1 V.  The  extra  energy  (7.1 ⫺ 4.9 ⫽ 2.2 eV)  is
required because the ﬁlament and collector are made of different metals with
different work functions. (Recall that the work function is the energy needed
to  pull  an  electron  out  of  a  metal — see  Chapter  3.)  Although  the  ﬁlament,
like all good emitters, has a low work function, the collector has a high work
function,  and  this  work  function  energy  must  be  supplied  to  extract  an  elec-
tron from the collector so a current can ﬂow in the circuit.

As  we  have  seen  Franck  and  Hertz  used  simple  ammeter  and  voltmeter
measurements to show that atoms can only accept discrete amounts of energy
from  an  electron  beam.  In  addition,  they  showed  that  the  energy  levels
obtained  from  electron  bombardment  agreed  with  the  spectroscopic  results.
Reasoning  that  an  Hg  atom  actually  excited  to  an  energy  level  4.9 eV  above
its ground  state  could  return  to  its  ground  state  by  emitting  a  single
photon (as Bohr had just postulated), they calculated the wavelength of such a
photon to be

⌬E ⫽ hf ⫽

hc
␭

or

␭ ⫽

hc
⌬E

⫽

1240 eV ⭈nm

4.9 eV

⫽ 253 nm

(4.43)

Because glass is not transparent to such ultraviolet radiation, they constructed
a quartz apparatus and carefully measured the radiation emitted, ﬁnding radi-
ation of wavelength 254 nm to be emitted as soon as the accelerating voltage
exceeded  4.9 V.  For  this  direct  experimental  conﬁrmation  of  Bohr’s  basic
ideas  of  discrete  energy  levels  in  atoms  and  the  process  of  photon  emission,
Franck and Hertz were awarded the Nobel prize in 1925.

SUMMARY

The  determination  of  the  composition  of  atoms  relies  heavily  on  four  classic
experiments:

• Faraday’s law of electrolysis, which may be stated as

m ⫽

(q)(molar mass)

(96,500 C)(valence)

(4.1)

where m is  the  mass  liberated  at  an  electrode  and  q is  the  total  charge
passed  through  the  solution.  Faraday’s  law  shows  that  atoms  are  com-
posed  of  positive  and  negative  charges  and  that  atomic  charges  always
consist of multiples of some unit charge.

• J. J. Thomson’s determination of e/me and that the electron is a part of
all  atoms.  Thomson  measured  e/me of  electrons  from  a  variety  of  ele-
ments  by  measuring  the  deﬂection  of  an  electron  beam  by  an  electric
ﬁeld. He then applied a magnetic ﬁeld to just cancel the electric deﬂec-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

144

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

tion in order to determine the electron velocity. The charge-to-mass ratio
of the electron in the Thomson experiment is

e
m e

⫽

V␪
B2ᐉd

(4.7)

where V/d is the magnitude of the applied electric ﬁeld, ᐉ is the length of
the vertical deﬂecting plates, ␪ is the deﬂection produced by the electric
ﬁeld, and B is the applied magnetic ﬁeld.

• Millikan’s determination of the fundamental charge, e. By balancing
the  electric  and  gravitational  force  on  individual  oil  drops,  Millikan  was
able  to  determine  the  fundamental  electric  charge  and  to  show  that
charges  always  occur  in  multiples  of  e.  The  quantum  of  charge  may  be
determined from the relation

ne ⫽ 冢 mg

E 冣冢 v ⫹ v 1⬘

v

冣

(4.11)

where n is an integer, m is the mass of the drop, E is the magnitude of the
electric ﬁeld, v is the terminal speed of the drop with ﬁeld off (falling),
and v⬘1 is the terminal speed of the drop with ﬁeld on (rising).

• Rutherford’s  scattering  of  ␣ particles  from  gold  atoms, which  estab-
lished the nuclear model of the atom. By measuring the rate of scattering of
␣particles into an angle ␾, Rutherford was able to establish that most of the
mass and all of the positive charge of an atom, ⫹Ze, are concentrated in a
minute volume of the atom with a diameter of about 10⫺14 m.

The explanation of the motion of electrons within the atom and of the rich
and elaborate series of spectral lines emitted by the atom was given by Bohr.
Bohr’s theory was based partly on classical mechanics and partly on some star-
tling new quantum ideas. Bohr’s postulates were

• Electrons  move  about  the  nucleus  in  circular  orbits  determined  by

Coulomb’s and Newton’s laws. 

• Only certain orbits are stable. The electron does not radiate electromag-
netic  energy  in  these  special  orbits,  and  because  the  energy  is  constant
with time these are called stationary states.

• A spectral line of frequency f is emitted when an electron jumps from an

initial orbit of energy E i to a ﬁnal orbit of energy E f, where

• The  sizes  of  the  stable  electron  orbits  are  determined  by  requiring  the

hf ⫽ E i ⫺ E f

(4.23)

electron’s angular momentum to be an integral multiple of 

ប

m evr ⫽ nប    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

:

(4.24)

These postulates lead to quantized orbits and quantized energies for a single
electron orbiting a nucleus with charge ⫹Ze, given by

and

rn ⫽

n2a0
Z

En ⫽ ⫺

ke 2
2a0

Z 2
n2 ⫽ ⫺

13.6 Z 2

n2

 eV

(4.35)

(4.36)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QUESTIONS

145

where n is an integer and a0 ⫽ ( /meke 2 ⫽ 0.529 Å ⫽ 0.0529 nm is the Bohr
radius.

ប2

As a bridge between the familiar domain of classical physics and the more
uncertain domain of atomic systems and quantum theory, Bohr provided the
correspondence principle. This principle states that predictions of quantum
theory must correspond to the predictions of classical physics in the region of
sizes where classical theory is known to hold.

Direct experimental evidence of the quantized energy of atoms is provided by
the  Franck – Hertz  experiment.  This  experiment  shows  that  mercury  atoms  can
only accept discrete amounts of energy from a bombarding electron beam.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. G. Holton, Introduction to Concepts and Theories in Physical
Science,  Reading,  MA,  Addison-Wesley,  1952.  This  is  an
accurate,  humane,  and  eminently  readable  overview  of
the  history  and  progression  of  scientiﬁc  concepts  from
the Greeks to quantum theory.

2. J.  Perrin,  Atoms,  translated  by  D.  L.  Hammick,  New  York,
D.  Van  Nostrand  Co.,  1923.  This  is  a  superb  account  at
ﬁrst  hand  of  the  evidence  for  atoms  at  the  beginning  of
the 20th century.

3. G. Thomson, J. J. Thomson and the Cavendish Laboratory in
His Day, New York, Doubleday and Co., 1965. This book

offers  a  fascinating  account  by  Thomson’s  son  of  the
e/m experiment and other works.

4. R.  A.  Millikan,  Electrons (⫹  and ⫺), Protons, Neutrons,
Mesotrons,  and  Cosmic  Rays, Chicago,  University  of
Chicago  Press,  1947.  This  book  gives  detailed  accounts
of the determination of e.

5. Physics  Today,  October  1985,  Special  Issue:  Niels  Bohr
Centennial.  This  magazine  contains 
three  articles
dealing with Bohr’s scientiﬁc, social, and cultural contri-
butions to the physics community. Many interesting pho-
tos of the key players are included.

QUESTIONS

1. The Bohr theory of the hydrogen atom is based on sev-
eral  assumptions.  Discuss  these  assumptions  and  their
signiﬁcance.  Do  any  of  these  assumptions  contradict
classical physics?

2. Suppose that the electron in the hydrogen atom obeyed
classical  mechanics  rather  than  quantum  mechanics.
Why  should  such  a  hypothetical atom  emit  a  continuous
spectrum rather than the observed line spectrum?

3. Can  the  electron  in  the  ground  state  of  the  hydrogen
atom  absorb  a  photon  of  energy  (a)  less than  13.6 eV
and (b) greater than 13.6 eV?

4. Explain the concept of an atomic stationary state. Why
is this idea of central importance in explaining the sta-
bility of the Bohr atom?

5. Does  Bohr’s  correspondence  principle  apply  only  to
quantum theory? Can you give an example of the appli-
cation of this principle to relativity theory?

6. On  the  basis  of  Bohr’s  ideas,  explain  why  all  emission

lines are not seen in absorption.

7. The  results  of  classical  measurements  and  calculations
are  sometimes  called  classical  numbers.  Contrast  and
explain the differences between quantum numbers and
classical numbers.

8. What factor causes the ﬁnite width of the peaks in the

I – V curve of the Franck – Hertz experiment?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

9. An  electron  with  a  kinetic  energy  of  4.9 eV  (mass  ⫽
5.49 ⫻ 10⫺4 u)  collides  inelastically  with  a  stationary
mercury  atom  (mass ⫽ 201 u).  Explain  qualitatively
why  almost  100%  of  the  electron’s  energy  can  go  into
raising the atom to its ﬁrst excited state.

10. Why  don’t  other  current  dips  corresponding  to  exci-
tation  of  the  mercury  atom’s  second  excited  state,
third excited  state,  and  so  forth  show  up  in  the
Franck – Hertz  experiment?  (Hint: At  the  high  density
of mercury vapor used in the experiment, the probabil-
ity  of  a  4.9-eV  electron  experiencing  an  inelastic  colli-
sion is approximately 1.)

11. Four possible transitions for a hydrogen atom are listed

here.

(A) n i ⫽ 2; n f ⫽ 5

(B) n i ⫽ 5; n f ⫽ 3

(C) n i ⫽ 7; n f ⫽ 4

(D) n i ⫽ 4; n f ⫽ 7

(a)  Which  transition  emits  the  photons  having  the
shortest wavelength? (b) For which transition does the
atom gain the most energy? (c) For which transition(s)
does the atom lose energy?

146

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

PROBLEMS

4.2 The Composition of Atoms

1. Using  the  Faraday  (96,500 C)  and  Avogadro’s  number,
determine the electronic charge. Explain your reasoning.
2. Weighing a copper atom in an electrolysis experiment. A stan-
dard  experiment  involves  passing  a  current  of  several
amperes through a copper sulfate solution (CuSO4) for
a  period  of  time  and  determining  the  mass  of  copper
plated onto the cathode. If it is found that a current of
1.00  A  ﬂowing  for  3600 s  deposits  1.185 g  of  copper,
ﬁnd  (a)  the  number  of  copper  atoms  deposited,
(b) the  weight  of  a  copper  atom,  and  (c)  the  molar
mass of copper.

3. A mystery particle enters the region between the plates
of a Thomson apparatus as shown in Figure 4.6. The de-
ﬂection  angle ␪ is  measured  to  be  0.20  radians  (down-
wards)  for  this  particle  when  V ⫽ 2000 V,  ᐉ ⫽ 10.0 cm,
and d ⫽ 2.00 cm.  If  a  perpendicular  magnetic  ﬁeld  of
magnitude  4.57 ⫻ 10⫺2 T  is  applied  simultaneously
with  the  electric  ﬁeld,  the  particle  passes  through  the
plates without deﬂection. (a) Find q/m for this particle.
(b) Identify the particle. (c) Find the horizontal speed
with which the particle entered the plates. (d) Must we
use relativistic mechanics for this particle?

4. Figure  P4.4  shows  a  cathode  ray  tube  for  determining
e/m e without applying a magnetic ﬁeld. In this case vx
may  be  found  by  measuring  the  rise  in  temperature
when a known amount of charge is stopped in a target.
If V, ᐉ, d, D,  and  y are  measured,  e/m e may  be  found.
Show that

e
m e

⫽

yvx

2 d

Vᐉ[(ᐉ/2) ⫹ D]

the  magnetic  ﬁeld  B is  arranged  to  act  on  the  electron
over  its  entire  trajectory  from  source  to  detector.  The
combined  electric  and  magnetic  ﬁelds  act  as  a  velocity
selector,  only  passing  electrons  with  speed  v,  where
v ⫽ V/Bd (Equation  4.6),  while  in  the  region  where
there  is  only  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  the  electron  moves  in  a
circle  of  radius  r,  with  r given  by  p ⫽ Bre.  This  latter
region (E ⫽ 0, B ⫽ constant) acts as a momentum selector
because  electrons  with  larger  momenta  have  paths  with
larger  radii.  (a)  Show  that  the  radius  of  the  circle
described  by  the  electron  is  given  by  r ⫽ (l 2 ⫹ y 2)/2y.
(b)  Typical  values  for  the  Neumann  experiment  were
d ⫽ 2.51 ⫻ 10⫺4 m, B ⫽ 0.0177 T, and l ⫽ 0.0247 m. For
V ⫽ 1060 V, y, the most critical value, was measured to be
0.0024 ⫾ 0.0005 m. Show that these values disagree with
the y value calculated from p ⫽ mv but agree with the y
value  calculated  from  p ⫽ ␥mv within  experimental
error.  (Hint: Find v from  Equation  4.6,  use  mv ⫽ Bre or
␥mv ⫽ Bre to ﬁnd r, and use r to ﬁnd y.)

+

d

V

Radium
source

e –

B

E

ᐉ

B

r

Center of curvature

Figure P4.5 The Neumann apparatus.

Photo
plate

detector

y

Electron
impact
point

+ + + + + + + + +

V

d

–

vx

– – – – – – – – –

ᐉ

y

y2

y1

θ

D

Figure  P4.4 Deﬂection  of  a  charged  particle  by  an  elec-
tric ﬁeld.

5. A  Thomson-type  experiment  with  relativistic  electrons.  One  of
the  earliest  experiments  to  show  that  p ⫽ ␥mv (rather
than p ⫽ mv) was that of Neumann. [G. Neumann, Ann.
Physik 45:529  (1914)].  The  apparatus  shown  in  Figure
P4.5 is identical to Thomson’s except that the source of
high-speed  electrons  is  a  radioactive  radium  source  and

6. In a Millikan oil-drop experiment, the condenser plates
are  spaced  2.00 cm  apart,  the  potential  across  the
plates is 4000 V, the rise or fall distance is 4.00 mm, the
density  of  the  oil  droplets  is  0.800 g/cm3,  and  the vis-
cosity of the air is 1.81 ⫻ 10⫺5 kg ⭈ m⫺1s⫺1. The average
time of fall in the absence of an electric ﬁeld is 15.9 s.
The  following  different  rise  times  in  seconds  are  ob-
served  when  the  ﬁeld  is  turned  on:  36.0,  17.3,  24.0,
11.4,  7.54.  (a)  Find  the  radius  and  mass  of  the  drop
used  in  this  experiment.  (b)  Calculate  the  charge  on
each  drop,  and  show  that  charge  is  quantized  by
considering  both  the  size  of  each  charge  and  the
amount  of  charge  gained  (lost)  when  the  rise  time
changes.  (c)  Determine  the  electronic  charge  from
these data. You may assume that e lies between 1.5 and
2.0 ⫻ 10⫺19 C.

7. Actual  data  from  one  of  Millikan’s  early  experiments

are as follows:

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

a ⫽ 0.000276 cm
␳ ⫽ 0.9561 g/cm3
Average time of fall ⫽ 11.894 s
Rise or fall distance ⫽ 10.21 nm
Plate separation ⫽ 16.00 mm
Average potential difference between plates ⫽ 5085 V
Sequential rise times in seconds: 80.708, 22.336, 22.390,
22.368, 140.566, 79.600, 34.748, 34.762, 29.286, 29.236

Find the average value of e by requiring that the differ-
ence  in  charge  for  drops  with  different  rise  times  be
equal to an integral number of elementary charges.

8. A parallel beam of ␣ particles with ﬁxed kinetic energy
is normally incident on a piece of gold foil. (a) If 100 ␣
particles per minute are detected at 20⬚, how many will
be counted at 40⬚, 60⬚, 80⬚, and 100⬚? (b) If the kinetic
energy of the incident ␣ particles is doubled, how many
scattered ␣ particles will be observed at 20⬚? (c) If the
original ␣ particles  were  incident  on  a  copper  foil  of
the  same  thickness,  how  many  scattered  ␣ particles
would  be  detected  at  20⬚?  Note  that  ␳Cu ⫽ 8.9 g/cm3
and ␳Au ⫽ 19.3 g/cm3.

9. It  is  observed  that  ␣ particles  with  kinetic  energies  of
13.9 MeV and higher, incident on Cu foils, do not obey
Rutherford’s (sin ␾/2)⫺4 law. Estimate the nuclear size
of copper from this observation, assuming that the Cu
nucleus remains ﬁxed in a head-on collision with an ␣
particle.

10. A  typical  Rutherford  scattering  apparatus  consists
of an  evacuated  tube  containing  a  polonium-210  ␣
source  (5.2-MeV  ␣’s),  collimators,  a  gold  foil  target,
and a special alpha-detecting ﬁlm. The detecting ﬁlm
simultaneously measures all the alphas scattered over
a range from ␾ ⫽ 2.5⬚ to 12.5⬚. (See Fig. P4.10.) The
total  number  of  counts  measured  over  a  week’s  time
falling  in  a  speciﬁc  ring  (denoted  by  its  average
scattering  angle)  and  the  corresponding  ring  area
are given in Table 4.2. (a) Find the counts per area at
each  angle  and  correct  these  values  for  the  angle-
independent  background.  The  background  correc-
tion may be found from a seven-day count taken with
the  beam  blocked  with  a  metal  shutter  in  which
72 counts  were  measured  evenly  distributed  over  the
total  detector  area  of  8.50 cm2.  (b) Show  that  the
corrected  counts  per  unit  area  are  proportional  to
sin⫺4(␾/2)  or,  in  terms  of  the  Rutherford  formula,
Equation 4.16,

⌬n
A

⫽

C

sin4(␾/2)

Notes: If a plot of (⌬n/A) versus ␾ will not ﬁt on a sin-
gle sheet of graph paper, try plotting log(⌬n/A) versus
log[1/(sin ␾/2)4]. This plot should yield a straight line
with a slope of 1 and an intercept that gives C. Explain
why this technique works.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Gold foil

Po-210
α source

(a)

Undeflected
beam

PROBLEMS

147

Film detector 

end cap

Undeflected

beam

Evacuated tube

α

φ

14 cm

   =2° 3° 4° 5° 6° 7° 8°
φ

13°

(b)

Figure  P4.10 (a)  Side  view  of  Rutherford’s  scattering
apparatus: ␾ is  the  scattering  angle.  (b)  End  view  of  the
Rutherford  apparatus  showing  the  ﬁlm  detector  end  cap
with grid marking the angle ␾. The ␣ particles damage the
ﬁlm  emulsion  and  after  development  show  up  as  dots
within the rings.

Table 4.2 Data to Be Used in Problem 10

Angle

(degrees)

Counts/Ring

Ring Area

(cm2)

Counts/Area

2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5
10.5
11.5
12.5

605
631
520
405
301
201
122
78
65
66
44

0.257
0.360
0.463
0.566
0.669
0.772
0.875
0.987
1.08
1.18
1.29

4.3 The Bohr Atom
11. Calculate the wavelengths of the ﬁrst three lines in the

Balmer series for hydrogen.

148

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

 

12. Calculate the wavelengths of the ﬁrst three lines in the

Lyman series for hydrogen.

13. (a) What value of n is associated with the Lyman series
line  in  hydrogen  whose  wavelength  is  102.6 nm?
(b) Could  this  wavelength  be  associated  with  the
Paschen or Brackett series?

14. (a) Use Equation 4.35 to calculate the radii of the ﬁrst,
second,  and  third  Bohr  orbits  of  hydrogen.  (b)  Find
the  electron’s  speed  in  the  same  three  orbits.  (c)  Is  a
relativistic correction necessary? Explain.

15. (a)  Construct  an  energy-level  diagram  for  the  He⫹
ion, for which Z ⫽ 2. (b) What is the ionization energy
for He⫹?

16. Construct an energy level diagram for the Li2⫹ ion, for

which Z ⫽ 3.

17. What  is  the  radius  of  the  ﬁrst  Bohr  orbit  in  (a)  He⫹,

(b) Li2⫹, and (c) Be3⫹?

18. A  hydrogen  atom  initially  in  its  ground  state  (n ⫽ 1)
absorbs  a  photon  and  ends  up  in  the  state  for  which
n ⫽ 3. (a) What is the energy of the absorbed photon?
(b) If the atom returns to the ground state, what pho-
ton energies could the atom emit?

19. A photon is emitted from a hydrogen atom that under-
goes  an  electronic  transition  from  the  state  n ⫽ 3  to
the state n ⫽ 2. Calculate (a) the energy, (b) the wave-
length, and (c) the frequency of the emitted photon.

20. What  is  the  energy  of  the  photon  that  could  cause
(a) an electronic transition from the n ⫽ 4 state to the
n ⫽ 5  state  of  hydrogen  and  (b)  an  electronic  transi-
tion from the n ⫽ 5 state to the n ⫽ 6 state?

21. (a)  Calculate  the  longest  and  shortest  wavelengths  for
the Paschen series. (b) Determine the photon energies
corresponding to these wavelengths.

22. Find the potential energy and kinetic energy of an elec-

tron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom.

23. A  hydrogen  atom  is  in  its  ground  state  (n ⫽ 1).  Using
the Bohr theory of the atom, calculate (a) the radius of
the  orbit,  (b)  the  linear  momentum  of  the  electron,
(c) the  angular  momentum  of  the  electron,  (d)  the
kinetic energy, (e) the potential energy, and (f ) the total
energy.

24. A  hydrogen  atom  initially  at  rest  in  the  n ⫽ 3  state
decays to the ground state with the emission of a pho-
ton.  (a)  Calculate  the  wavelength  of  the  emitted  pho-
ton.  (b)  Estimate  the  recoil  momentum  of  the  atom
and  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  recoiling  atom.  Where
does this energy come from?

25. Calculate the frequency of the photon emitted by a hy-
drogen atom making a transition from the n ⫽ 4 to the
n ⫽ 3 state. Compare your result with the frequency of
revolution for the electron in these two Bohr orbits.

26. Calculate the longest and shortest wavelengths in the Ly-
man series for hydrogen, indicating the underlying elec-
tronic transition that gives rise to each. Are any of the Ly-
man spectral lines in the visible spectrum? Explain.

27. Show 

that  Balmer’s 

formula, 

reduces  to  the  Rydberg  formula, 

1
␭

n2

␭ ⫽ C 2 冢
⫽ R 冢 1

n2 ⫺ 22 冣
n2 冣
22 ⫺

1

,

,

provided that (22/C 2) ⫽ R. Check that (22/C 2) has the
same numerical value as R.

28. The  Auger  process.  An  electron  in  chromium  makes  a
transition from the n ⫽ 2 state to the n ⫽ 1 state with-
out  emitting  a  photon.  Instead,  the  excess  energy  is
transferred  to  an  outer  electron  (in  the  n ⫽ 4  state),
which  is  ejected  by  the  atom.  (This  is  called  an  Auger
process,  and  the  ejected  electron  is  referred  to  as  an
Auger electron.) Use the Bohr theory to ﬁnd the kinetic
energy of the Auger electron.

29. An electron initially in the n ⫽ 3 state of a one-electron
atom  of  mass  M at  rest  undergoes  a  transition  to  the
n ⫽ 1  ground  state.  (a)  Show  that  the  recoil  speed  of
the  atom  from  emission  of  a  photon  is  given  approxi-
mately by

v ⫽

8hR
9M

(b)  Calculate  the  percent  of  the  3 : 1  transition  en-
ergy that is carried off by the recoiling atom if the atom
is deuterium.

30. Apply  classical  mechanics  to  an  electron  in  a  stationary
state  of  hydrogen  to  show  that  L2 ⫽ meke 2r and
L3 ⫽ m ek 2e 4/␻. Here k is the Coulomb constant, L is the
magnitude  of  the  orbital  angular  momentum  of  the
electron, and m e, e, r, and ␻ are the mass, charge, orbit
radius,  and  orbital  angular  frequency  of  the  electron,
respectively.

31. (a) Find the frequency of the electron’s orbital motion,
fe, around a ﬁxed nucleus of charge ⫹Ze by using Equa-
tion 4.24 and fe ⫽ (v/2␲r) to obtain

fe ⫽

m ek2Z 2e4

2␲ប3

冢 1
n3 冣

(b)  Show  that  the  frequency  of  the  photon  emitted
when an electron jumps from an outer to an inner or-
bit can be written

fphoton ⫽

⫽

kZ 2e 2

2a0h 冢 1

2 冣
1
2 ⫺
n i
n f
冢 n i ⫹ n f
2 冣 (n i ⫺ n f)
m ek2e 4Z 2
2n f
2n i

2␲ប3

For  an  electronic  transition  between  adjacent  orbits,
ni ⫺ nf ⫽ 1 and

fphoton ⫽

m ek2Z 2e 4

2␲ប3

冢 n i ⫹ n f
2 冣
2n f
2n i

Now examine the factor

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

冢 n i ⫹ n f
2 冣
2n f
2n i
and use ni ⬎ nf to argue that 

1
3 ⬍
n i

n i ⫹ n f
2n f
2n i

2 ⬍

1
3
n f

(c) What do you conclude about the frequency of emit-
ted radiation compared with the frequencies of orbital
revolution in the initial and ﬁnal states? What happens
as n i : ⬁?

32. Wavelengths  of  spectral  lines  depend  to  some  extent
on the nuclear mass. This occurs because the nucleus is
not  an  inﬁnitely  heavy  stationary  mass  and  both  the
electron  and  nucleus  actually  revolve  around  their
common center of mass. It can be shown that a system
of this type is entirely equivalent to a single particle of
reduced  mass  ␮ that  revolves  around  the  position  of
the  heavier  particle  at  a  distance  equal  to  the
electron – nucleus  separation.  See  Figure  P4.32.  Here,
␮ ⫽ m eM/(m e ⫹ M),  where  m e is  the  electron  mass
and M is the nuclear mass. To take the moving nucleus
into account in the Bohr theory we replace me with ␮.
Thus Equation 4.30 becomes

En ⫽

⫺␮ke 2

2m ea0 冢 1
n2 冣

and Equation 4.33 becomes

1
␭

⫽

␮ke 2

2m ea0hc 冢 1

n f

2 ⫺

2 冣 ⫽ 冢 ␮
1
n i

m e 冣 R 冢 1

n f

2 ⫺

2 冣
1
n i

Determine  the  corrected  values  of  wavelength  for  the
ﬁrst  Balmer  line  (n ⫽ 3  to  n ⫽ 2  transition)  taking
nuclear  motion  into  account  for  (a)  hydrogen,  1H,
(b) deuterium,  2H,  and  (c)  tritium,  3H.  (Deuterium,
was  actually  discovered  in  1932  by  Harold  Urey,  who
measured the small wavelength difference between  1H
and 2H.)

(a)

ω

Nucleus

M

r

+
CM

ω

(b)

ω

r

Nucleus
(at rest)

electron, me

Moving particle 
of reduced mass µ

Figure P4.32 (a) Both the electron and the nucleus actu-
ally revolve around the center of mass. (b) To calculate the
effect of nuclear motion, the nucleus can be considered to
be at rest and me is replaced by the reduced mass ␮.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

149

33. A muon is  a  particle  with  a  charge  equal  to  that  of  an
electron and a mass equal to 207 times the mass of an
electron. Muonic lead is formed when 208Pb captures a
muon  to  replace  an  electron.  Assume  that  the  muon
moves  in  such  a  small  orbit  that  it  “sees”  a  nuclear
charge  of  Z ⫽ 82.  According  to  the  Bohr  theory,  what
are  the  radius  and  energy  of  the  ground  state  of
muonic  lead?  Use  the  concept  of  reduced  mass  intro-
duced in Problem 32.

34. A  muon  (Problem  33)  is  captured  by  a  deuteron  (an
2H  nucleus)  to  form  a  muonic  atom.  (a)  Find  the
energy  of  the  ground  state  and  the  ﬁrst  excited  state.
(b)  What  is  the  wavelength  of  the  photon  emitted
when the atom makes a transition from the ﬁrst excited
state  to  the  ground  state?  Use  the  concept  of  reduced
mass introduced in Problem 32.

35. Positronium is  a  hydrogen-like  atom  consisting  of  a
positron  (a  positively  charged  electron)  and  an  elec-
tron  revolving  around  each  other.  Using  the  Bohr
model, ﬁnd the allowed radii (relative to the center of
mass  of  the  two  particles)  and  the  allowed  energies  of
the  system.  Use  the  concept  of  reduced  mass  intro-
duced in Problem 32.

4.4 The Correspondence Principle
36. (a) Calculate the frequency of revolution and the orbit
radius of the electron in the Bohr model of hydrogen
for n ⫽ 100,  1000,  and  10,000.  (b)  Calculate  the  pho-
ton frequency for transitions from the n to n ⫺ 1 states
for  the  same  values  of  n as  in  part  (a)  and  compare
with  the  revolution  frequencies  found  in  part  (a).
(c) Explain how your results verify the correspondence
principle.

37. Use  Bohr’s  model  of  the  hydrogen  atom  to  show  that
when the atom makes a transition from the state n to the
state n ⫺ 1, the frequency of the emitted light is given by

f ⫽

2␲2m ek2e4

h3

冤

2n ⫺ 1

(n ⫺ 1)2n2冥

Show that as n : ⬁, the preceding expression varies as
1/n3 and reduces to the classical frequency one would
expect the atom to emit. (Hint: To calculate the classi-
cal  frequency,  note  that  the  frequency  of  revolution  is
v/2␲r,  where  r is  given  by  Equation  4.28.)  This  is  an
example  of  the  correspondence  principle,  which
requires  that  the  classical  and  quantum  models  agree
for large values of n.

4.5 The Franck–Hertz Experiment
38. An  electron  with  kinetic  energy  less  than  100 eV  col-
lides head-on in an elastic collision with a massive mer-
cury atom at rest. (a) If the electron reverses direction
in the collision (like a ball hitting a wall), show that the
electron  loses  only  a  tiny  fraction  of  its  initial  kinetic
energy, given by

150

CHAPTER 4

THE PARTICLE NATURE OF MATTER

⌬K
K

⫽

4M

m e(1 ⫹ M/m e)2

where me is  the  electron  mass  and  M is  the  mercury
atom  mass.  (b)  Using  the  accepted  values  for  me and
M, show that

⌬K
K

⬇

4m e
M

and calculate the numerical value of ⌬K/K.

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

39. An electron collides inelastically and head-on with a mer-
cury atom at rest. (a) If the separation of the ﬁrst excited
state and the ground state of the atom is exactly 4.9 eV,
what  is  the  minimum  initial  electron  kinetic  energy
needed to raise the atom to its ﬁrst excited state and also
conserve  momentum?  Assume  that  the  collision  is  com-
pletely inelastic. (b) What is the initial speed of the elec-
tron  in  this  case?  (c)  What  is  the  speed  of  the  electron
and  atom  after  the  collision?  (d)  What  is  the  kinetic
energy (in electron volts) of the electron after collision?
Is  the  approximation  that  the  electron  loses  all  of  its
kinetic energy in an inelastic collision justiﬁed?

40. If  the  Franck – Hertz  experiment  could  be  performed
with high-density monatomic hydrogen, at what voltage
separations  would  the  current  dips  appear?  Take  the
separation between ground state and ﬁrst excited state
to be exactly 10.2 eV and be sure to consider momen-
tum as well as energy in arriving at your answer.

41. Liquid oxygen has a bluish color, meaning that it pref-
erentially  absorbs  light  toward  the  red  end  of  the
visible  spectrum.  Although  the  oxygen  molecule  (O2)
does  not  strongly  absorb  visible  radiation,  it  does
absorb  strongly  at  1269 nm,  which  is  in  the  infrared
region  of  the  spectrum.  Research  has  shown  that  it  is
possible for two colliding O2 molecules to absorb a sin-
gle  photon,  sharing  its  energy  equally.  The  transition
that both molecules undergo is the same transition that
results  when  they  absorb  1269-nm  radiation.  What  is
the  wavelength  of  the  single  photon  that  causes  this
double transition? What is the color of this radiation?

42. Two  hydrogen  atoms  collide  head-on  and  end  up  with
zero  kinetic  energy.  Each  then  emits  a  photon  with  a

wavelength  of  121.6 nm  (n ⫽ 2  to  n ⫽ 1  transition).  At
what speed were the atoms moving before the collision?

43 Steven  Chu,  Claude  Cohen-Tannoudji,  and  William
Phillips received the 1997 Nobel prize in physics for “the
development  of  methods  to  cool  and  trap  atoms  with
laser  light.”  One  part  of  their  work  was  with  a  beam  of
atoms (mass ⬃10⫺25 kg) that move at a speed on the or-
der of 1 km/s, similar to the speed of molecules in air at
room temperature. An intense laser light beam tuned to
a  visible  atomic  transition  (assume  500 nm)  is  directed
straight into the atomic beam. That is, the atomic beam
and  light  beam  are  traveling  in  opposite  directions.  An
atom in the ground state immediately absorbs a photon.
Total  system  momentum  is  conserved  in  the  absorption
process.  After  a  lifetime  on  the  order  of  10⫺8 s,  the
excited atom radiates by spontaneous emission. It has an
equal probability of emitting a photon in any direction.
Thus, the average “recoil” of the atom is zero over many
absorption and emission cycles. (a) Estimate the average
deceleration of the atomic beam. (b) What is the order
of magnitude of the distance over which the atoms in the
beam will be brought to a halt?

44. In  a  hot  star,  a  multiply  ionized  atom  with  a  single
remaining electron produces a series of spectral lines
as  described  by  the  Bohr  model.  The  series  cor-
responds  to  electronic  transitions  that  terminate  in
the  same ﬁnal  state.  The  longest  and  shortest  wave-
lengths  of  the  series  are  63.3 nm  and  22.8 nm,
respectively.  (a)  What  is  the  ion?  (b)  Find  the  wave-
lengths of the next three spectral lines nearest to the
line of longest wavelength.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5
Matter Waves

Chapter Outline

5.1 The Pilot Waves of de Broglie

5.7 The Wave – Particle Duality

The Description of Electron Diffraction

in Terms of ⌿

A Thought Experiment: Measuring
Through Which Slit the Electron
Passes

5.8 A Final Note
Summary

De Broglie’s Explanation of

Quantization in the
Bohr Model

5.2 The Davisson – Germer Experiment

The Electron Microscope

5.3 Wave Groups and Dispersion

Matter Wave Packets

5.4 Fourier Integrals (Optional)

Constructing Moving Wave Packets

5.5 The Heisenberg Uncertainty

Principle
A Different View of the Uncertainty

Principle

5.6 If Electrons Are Waves, 

What’s Waving?

In the previous chapter we discussed some important discoveries and theo-
retical  concepts  concerning  the  particle  nature  of  matter.  We  now  point  out
some  of  the  shortcomings  of  these  theories  and  introduce  the  fascinating
and bizarre wave properties of particles. Especially notable are Count Louis de
Broglie’s  remarkable  ideas  about  how  to  represent  electrons  (and  other
particles)  as  waves  and  the  experimental  conﬁrmation  of  de  Broglie’s
hypothesis by the electron diffraction experiments of Davisson and Germer.
We shall  also  see  how  the  notion  of  representing  a  particle  as  a  localized
wave  or  wave  group  leads  naturally  to  limitations  on  simultaneously  mea-
suring  position  and  momentum  of  the  particle.  Finally,  we  discuss  the
passage  of  electrons  through  a  double  slit  as  a  way  of  “understanding”  the
wave – particle duality of matter.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

151

152

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

5.1 THE PILOT WAVES OF DE BROGLIE

By the early 1920s scientists recognized that the Bohr theory contained many
inadequacies:

• It failed to predict the observed intensities of spectral lines.
• It  had  only  limited  success  in  predicting  emission  and  absorption  wave-

lengths for multielectron atoms.

• It  failed  to  provide  an  equation  of  motion  governing  the  time  develop-

ment of atomic systems starting from some initial state.

• It  overemphasized  the  particle  nature  of  matter  and  could  not  explain

the newly discovered wave – particle duality of light.

• It did not supply a general scheme for “quantizing” other systems, espe-

cially those without periodic motion.

The ﬁrst bold step toward a new mechanics of atomic systems was taken by
Louis Victor de Broglie in 1923 (Fig. 5.1). In his doctoral dissertation he pos-
tulated that because photons have wave and particle characteristics, perhaps all forms
of  matter  have  wave  as  well  as  particle  properties. This  was  a  radical  idea  with  no
experimental  conﬁrmation  at  that  time.  According  to  de  Broglie,  electrons
had  a  dual  particle – wave  nature.  Accompanying  every  electron  was  a  wave
(not  an  electromagnetic  wave!),  which  guided,  or  “piloted,”  the  electron
through  space.  He  explained  the  source  of  this  assertion  in  his  1929  Nobel
prize acceptance speech:

On  the  one  hand  the  quantum  theory  of  light  cannot  be  considered  satisfactory
since it deﬁnes the energy of a light corpuscle by the equation E ⫽ hf containing the
frequency f.  Now  a  purely  corpuscular  theory  contains  nothing  that  enables  us  to
deﬁne a frequency; for this reason alone, therefore, we are compelled, in the case of
light, to introduce the idea of a corpuscle and that of periodicity simultaneously. On
the other hand, determination of the stable motion of electrons in the atom intro-
duces  integers,  and  up  to  this  point  the  only  phenomena  involving  integers  in
physics were those of interference and of normal modes of vibration. This fact sug-
gested to me the idea that electrons too could not be considered simply as corpus-
cles, but that periodicity must be assigned to them also.

Let  us  look  at  de  Broglie’s  ideas  in  more  detail.  He  concluded  that  the
wavelength and frequency of a matter  wave associated with any moving object
were given by

and

␭ ⫽

f ⫽

h
p

E
h

(5.1)

(5.2)

where h is Planck’s constant, p is the relativistic momentum, and E is the total rel-
ativistic energy of the object. Recall from Chapter 2 that p and E can be written as

and

p ⫽ ␥mv

E 2 ⫽ p 2c 2 ⫹ m2c4 ⫽ ␥2m2c4

(5.3)

(5.4)

Figure  5.1 Louis  de  Broglie
was  a  member  of  an  aristocratic
French  family  that  produced
marshals,  ambassadors,  foreign
ministers, and at least one duke,
his  older  brother  Maurice  de
Broglie.  Louis  de  Broglie  came
rather late to theoretical physics,
as  he  ﬁrst  studied  history.  Only
after  serving  as  a  radio  operator
in World War I did he follow the
lead  of  his  older  brother  and
begin  his  studies  of  physics.
Maurice  de  Broglie  was  an  out-
standing  experimental  physicist
in  his  own  right  and  conducted
experiments  in  the  palatial  fam-
ily mansion in Paris. (AIP Meggers
Gallery of Nobel Laureates)

De Broglie wavelength

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.1

THE PILOT WAVES OF DE BROGLIE

153

where ␥ ⫽ (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)⫺1/2 and v is the object’s speed. Equations 5.1 and 5.2
immediately  suggest  that  it  should  be  easy  to  calculate  the  speed  of  a  de
Broglie  wave  from  the  product ␭f.  However,  as  we  will  show  later,  this  is  not
the speed of the particle. Since the correct calculation is a bit complicated, we
postpone  it  to  Section  5.3.  Before  taking  up  the  question  of  the  speed  of
matter waves, we prefer ﬁrst to give some introductory examples of the use of
␭ ⫽ h/p and  a  brief  description  of  how  de  Broglie  waves  provide  a  physical
picture of the Bohr theory of atoms.

De Broglie’s Explanation of Quantization
in the Bohr Model
Bohr’s model of the atom had many shortcomings and problems. For exam-
ple,  as  the  electrons  revolve  around  the  nucleus,  how  can  one  understand
the fact that only certain electronic energies are allowed? Why do all atoms
of a given element have precisely the same physical properties regardless of
the  inﬁnite  variety  of  starting  velocities  and  positions  of  the  electrons  in
each atom?

De  Broglie’s  great  insight  was  to  recognize  that  although  these  are  deep
problems for particle theories, wave theories of matter handle these problems
neatly  by  means  of  interference.  For  example,  a  plucked  guitar  string,
although  initially  subjected  to  a  wide  range  of  wavelengths,  supports  only
standing wave patterns that have nodes at each end. Thus only a discrete set
of wavelengths  is  allowed  for  standing  waves,  while  other  wavelengths  not
included  in  this  discrete  set  rapidly  vanish  by  destructive  interference.  This
same  reasoning  can  be  applied  to  electron  matter  waves  bent  into  a  circle
around  the  nucleus.  Although  initially  a  continuous  distribution  of  wave-
lengths  may  be  present,  corresponding  to  a  distribution  of  initial  electron
velocities, most wavelengths and velocities rapidly die off. The residual stand-
ing wave patterns thus account for the identical nature of all atoms of a given
element and show that atoms are more like vibrating drum heads with discrete
modes  of  vibration  than  like  miniature  solar  systems.  This  point  of  view  is
emphasized  in  Figure  5.2,  which  shows  the  standing  wave  pattern  of  the
electron in the hydrogen atom corresponding to the n ⫽ 3 state of the Bohr
theory.

Another aspect of the Bohr theory that is also easier to visualize physically
by  using  de  Broglie’s  hypothesis  is  the  quantization  of  angular  momentum.
One  simply  assumes  that  the  allowed  Bohr  orbits  arise  because  the  elec-
tron  matter  waves  interfere  constructively  when  an  integral  number  of
wavelengths exactly ﬁts into the circumference of a circular orbit. Thus

n␭ ⫽ 2␲r

(5.5)

where r is the radius of the orbit. From Equation 5.1, we see that ␭ ⫽ h/mev.
Substituting this into Equation 5.5, and solving for mevr, the angular momen-
tum of the electron, gives

m evr ⫽ nប

(5.6)

Note that this is precisely the Bohr condition for the quantization of angular
momentum.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

r

λ

Figure  5.2 Standing  waves  ﬁt
to  a  circular  Bohr  orbit.  In  this
particular  diagram,  three  wave-
lengths  are  ﬁt  to  the  orbit,  cor-
responding to the n ⫽ 3 energy
state of the Bohr theory.

154

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

EXAMPLE 5.1 Why Don’t We See the Wave

Properties of a Baseball?

An object will appear “wavelike” if it exhibits interference
or diffraction, both of which require scattering objects or
apertures  of  about  the  same  size  as  the  wavelength.  A
baseball  of  mass  140 g  traveling  at  a  speed  of  60 mi/h
(27 m/s) has a de Broglie wavelength given by

␭ ⫽

h
p

⫽

h

√2mqV

(b)  Calculate  ␭ if  the  particle  is  an  electron  and

V ⫽ 50 V.

␭ ⫽

h
p

⫽

6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s
(0.14 kg)(27 m/s)

⫽ 1.7 ⫻ 10⫺34 m

Solution The  de  Broglie  wavelength  of  an  electron
accelerated through 50 V is

Even  a  nucleus  (whose  size  is  ⬇ 10⫺15 m)  is  much  too
large  to  diffract  this  incredibly  small  wavelength!  This
explains why all macroscopic objects appear particle-like.

EXAMPLE 5.2 What Size “Particles” Do 

Exhibit Diffraction?

␭ ⫽

h

√2m eqV

⫽

6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s

√2(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)(1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)(50 V)

⫽ 1.7 ⫻ 10⫺10 m ⫽ 1.7 Å

A  particle  of  charge  q and  mass  m is  accelerated  from
rest through  a  small  potential  difference  V.  (a)  Find  its
de Broglie wavelength, assuming that the particle is non-
relativistic.

This wavelength is of the order of atomic dimensions and
the  spacing  between  atoms  in  a  solid.  Such  low-energy
electrons are routinely used in electron diffraction exper-
iments to determine atomic positions on a surface.

Solution When a charge is accelerated from rest through
a  potential  difference  V,  its  gain  in  kinetic  energy,  mv 2,
must equal the loss in potential energy qV. That is,

1
2

Exercise 1 (a) Show that the de Broglie wavelength for
an  electron  accelerated  from  rest  through  a large poten-
tial difference, V, is

1
2 mv2 ⫽ qV

␭ ⫽

12.27

V 1/2 冢 Ve

2m ec2 ⫹ 1冣⫺1/2

(5.7)

Because p ⫽ mv, we can express this in the form

⫽ qV    or    p ⫽ √2mqV

p2
2m

Substituting this expression for p into the de Broglie rela-
tion ␭ ⫽ h/p gives

where ␭ is in angstroms (Å) and V is in volts. (b) Calcu-
late  the  percent  error  introduced  when ␭ ⫽ 12.27/V 1/2
is  used  instead  of  the  correct  relativistic  expression  for
10 MeV electrons.

Answer

(b) 230%.

5.2 THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

Direct  experimental  proof  that  electrons  possess  a  wavelength  ␭ ⫽ h/p was
furnished  by  the  diffraction  experiments  of  American  physicists  Clinton  J.
Davisson (1881 – 1958) and Lester H. Germer (1896 – 1971) at the Bell Labora-
tories in New York City in 1927 (Fig. 5.3).1 In fact, de Broglie had already sug-
gested  in  1924  that  a  stream  of  electrons  traversing  a  small  aperture  should
exhibit  diffraction  phenomena.  In  1925,  Einstein  was  led  to  the  necessity  of
postulating matter waves from an analysis of ﬂuctuations of a molecular gas. In
addition, he noted that a molecular beam should show small but measurable
diffraction effects. In the same year, Walter Elsasser pointed out that the slow

1C. J. Davisson and L. H. Germer, Phys. Rev. 30:705, 1927.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.2

THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

155

Figure 5.3 Clinton J. Davisson (left) and Lester H. Germer (center) at Bell Laborato-
ries in New York City. (Bell Laboratories, courtesy AIP Emilio Segrè Visual Archives)

electron  scattering  experiments  of  C.  J.  Davisson  and  C.  H.  Kunsman  at  the
Bell Labs could be explained by electron diffraction.

Clear-cut proof of the wave nature of electrons was obtained in 1927 by the
work  of  Davisson  and  Germer  in  the  United  States  and  George  P.  Thomson
(British  physicist,  1892 – 1975,  the  son  of  J.  J.  Thomson)  in  England.  Both
cases are intriguing not only for their physics but also for their human inter-
est.  The  ﬁrst  case  was  an  accidental  discovery,  and  the  second  involved  the
discovery of the particle properties of the electron by the father and the wave
properties by the son.

The  crucial  experiment  of  Davisson  and  Germer  was  an  offshoot  of  an  at-
tempt to understand the arrangement of atoms on the surface of a nickel sam-
ple  by  elastically  scattering  a  beam  of  low-speed  electrons  from  a  polycrys-
talline nickel target. A schematic drawing of their apparatus is shown in Figure
5.4. Their device allowed for the variation of three experimental parameters —
electron energy; nickel target orientation, ␣; and scattering angle, ␾. Before a
fortunate accident occurred, the results seemed quite pedestrian. For constant
electron energies of about 100 eV, the scattered intensity rapidly decreased as
␾ increased. But then someone dropped a ﬂask of liquid air on the glass vac-
uum system, rupturing the vacuum and oxidizing the nickel target, which had
been  at  high  temperature.  To  remove  the  oxide,  the  sample  was  reduced  by
heating  it  cautiously2 in  a  ﬂowing  stream  of  hydrogen.  When  the  apparatus
was  reassembled,  quite  different  results  were  found:  Strong  variations  in  the
intensity  of  scattered  electrons  with  angle  were  observed,  as  shown  in  Figure
5.5. The prolonged heating had evidently annealed the nickel target, causing
large single-crystal regions to develop in the polycrystalline sample. These crys-
talline regions furnished the extended regular lattice needed to observe elec-
tron  diffraction.  Once  Davisson  and  Germer  realized  that  it  was  the  elastic
scattering from single crystals that produced such unusual results (1925), they
initiated a thorough investigation of elastic scattering from large single crystals

2At  present  this  can  be  done  without  the  slightest  fear  of  “stinks  or  bangs,”  because  5%  hydro-
gen – 95% argon safety mixtures are commercially available.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

156

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Glass-vacuum

vessel

Moveable
electron
detector

V

Accelerating

voltage

Filament

–

+

Plate

α φ

Nickel target

Figure 5.4 A schematic diagram of the Davisson – Germer apparatus.

with predetermined crystallographic orientation. Even these experiments were
not conducted at ﬁrst as a test of de Broglie’s wave theory, however. Following
discussions  with  Richardson,  Born,  and  Franck,  the  experiments  and  their
analysis ﬁnally culminated in 1927 in the proof that electrons experience dif-
fraction with an electron wavelength that is given by ␭ ⫽ h/p.

0°

φ

40

30

20

10

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i
 

d
e
r
e
t
t
a
c
S

30°

φmax  =

50°

60°

Figure  5.5 A  polar  plot  of  scattered  intensity  versus  scattering  angle  for  54-eV  elec-
trons,  based  on  the  original  work  of  Davisson  and  Germer.  The  scattered  intensity  is
proportional to the distance of the point from the origin in this plot.

90°

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.2

THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

157

The idea that electrons behave like waves when interacting with the atoms
of  a  crystal  is  so  striking  that  Davisson  and  Germer’s  proof  deserves  closer
scrutiny.  In  effect,  they  calculated  the  wavelength  of  electrons  from  a
simple diffraction formula and compared this result with de Broglie’s formula
␭ ⫽ h/p. Although they tested this result over a wide range of target orienta-
tions and electron energies, we consider in detail only the simple case shown
in Figures 5.4 and 5.5 with ␣ ⫽ 90.0⬚, V ⫽ 54.0 V, and ␾ ⫽ 50.0⬚, correspond-
ing  to  the  n ⫽ 1  diffraction  maximum.  In  order  to  calculate  the  de  Broglie
wavelength  for  this  case,  we  ﬁrst  obtain  the  velocity  of  a  nonrelativistic  elec-
tron accelerated through a potential difference V from the energy relation

Substituting 

v ⫽ √2Ve/m e

into the de Broglie relation gives

1
2 mev 2 ⫽ eV

␭ ⫽

h

mev

⫽

h

√2Veme

(5.8)

Thus the wavelength of 54.0-V electrons is

␭ ⫽

6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s

√2(54.0 V)(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)

⫽ 1.67 ⫻ 10⫺10 m ⫽ 1.67 Å

The  experimental  wavelength  may  be  obtained  by  considering  the  nickel
atoms to be a reﬂection diffraction grating, as shown in Figure 5.6. Only the
surface  layer  of  atoms  is  considered  because  low-energy  electrons,  unlike 
x-rays, do not penetrate deeply into the crystal. Constructive interference oc-
curs when the path length difference between two adjacent rays is an integral
number of wavelengths or

As d was  known  to  be  2.15 Å  from  x-ray  diffraction  measurements,  Davisson
and Germer calculated ␭ to be

d sin ␾ ⫽ n␭

(5.9)

␭ ⫽ (2.15 Å)(sin 50.0⬚) ⫽ 1.65 Å

in excellent agreement with the de Broglie formula.

φ

A

B
φ

d

AB =  d sin     = nλ

φ

Figure 5.6 Constructive interference of electron matter waves scattered from a single
layer of atoms at an angle ␾.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

from 

Figure 5.7 Diffraction of 50-kV
electrons 
a  ﬁlm  of
Cu3Au.  The  alloy  ﬁlm  was
400 Å  thick.  (Courtesy  of  the  late
Dr. L. H. Germer)

158

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  while  the  diffraction  lines  from  low-energy
reflected  electrons  are  quite  broad  (see  Fig.  5.5),  the  lines  from  high-
energy  electrons  transmitted  through  metal  foils  are  quite  sharp  (see  Fig.
5.7).  This  effect  occurs  because  hundreds  of  atomic  planes  are  penetrated
by  high-energy  electrons,  and  consequently  Equation  5.9,  which  treats
diffraction  from  a  surface  layer,  no  longer  holds.  Instead,  the  Bragg  law,
2d sin ␪ ⫽ n␭, applies to high-energy electron diffraction. The maxima are
extremely  sharp  in  this  case  because  if  2d sin ␪ is  not  exactly  equal  to  n␭,
there  will  be  no  diffracted  wave.  This  occurs  because  there  are  scattering
contributions  from  so  many  atomic  planes  that  eventually  the  path  length
difference  between  the  wave  from  the  ﬁrst  plane  and  some  deeply  buried
plane  will  be  an  odd  multiple  of ␭/2,  resulting  in  complete  cancellation  of
these waves (see Problem 13).

If de Broglie’s postulate is true for all matter, then any object of mass m has
wavelike properties and a wavelength ␭ ⫽ h/p. In the years following Davisson
and  Germer’s  discovery,  experimentalists  tested  the  universal  character  of
de Broglie’s  postulate  by  searching  for  diffraction  of  other  “particle”  beams.
In subsequent  experiments,  diffraction  was  observed  for  helium  atoms
(Estermann  and  Stern  in  Germany)  and  hydrogen  atoms  ( Johnson  in  the
United  States).  Following  the  discovery  of  the  neutron  in  1932,  it  was  shown
that  neutron  beams  of  the  appropriate  energy  also  exhibit  diffraction  when
incident on a crystalline target (Fig. 5.8).

EXAMPLE 5.3 Thermal Neutrons

What  kinetic  energy  (in  electron  volts)  should  neutrons
have if they are to be diffracted from crystals?

Solution Appreciable  diffraction  will  occur  if  the  de
Broglie wavelength of the neutron is of the same order of
magnitude as the interatomic distance. Taking ␭ ⫽ 1.00 Å,
we ﬁnd

p ⫽

h
␭

⫽

6.63 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s
1.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 m

The kinetic energy is given by

⫽ 6.63 ⫻ 10⫺24 kg ⭈m/s

K ⫽

⫽

p 2
2m n

(6.63 ⫻ 10⫺24 J ⭈s)2
2(1.66 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg)
⫽ 1.32 ⫻ 10⫺20 J ⫽ 0.0825 eV

Note that these neutrons are nonrelativistic because K is
much  less  than  the  neutron  rest  energy  of  940 MeV,
and so  our  use  of  the  classical  expression  K ⫽ p2/2m n
is justiﬁed. Because the average thermal energy of a par-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ticle  in  thermal  equilibrium  is 
for  each  indepen-
dent direction of motion, neutrons at room temperature
(300 K) possess a kinetic energy of

1
2 k BT

K ⫽ 3

2 k BT ⫽ (1.50)(8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)(300 K)

⫽ 0.0388 eV

Thus “thermal neutrons,” or neutrons in thermal equilib-
rium with matter at room temperature, possess energies of
the right order of magnitude to diffract appreciably from
single crystals. Neutrons produced in a nuclear reactor are
far too energetic to produce diffraction from crystals and
must  be  slowed  down  in  a  graphite  column  as  they  leave
the reactor. In the graphite moderator, repeated collisions
with carbon atoms ultimately reduce the average neutron
energies  to  the  average  thermal  energy  of  the  carbon
atoms. When this occurs, these so-called thermalized neu-
trons possess a distribution of velocities and a correspond-
ing  distribution  of  de  Broglie  wavelengths  with  average
wavelengths comparable to crystal spacings.

 

5.2

THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

159

Exercise 2 Monochromatic Neutrons. A beam of neutrons
with a single wavelength may be produced by means of a
mechanical velocity selector of the type shown in Figure
5.9.  (a)  Calculate  the  speed  of  neutrons  with  a  wave-
length  of  1.00 Å.  (b)  What  rotational  speed  (in  rpm)
should  the  shaft  have  in  order  to  pass  neutrons  with
wavelength of 1.00 Å?

Answers

(a) 3.99 ⫻ 103 m/s. (b) 13,300 rev/min.

Neutrons with a
range of velocities

Figure 5.9 A neutron velocity selector. The slot in disk
B lags the slot in disk A by 10⬚.

Disk A

ω

0.5 m

Disk B

The Electron Microscope
The idea that electrons have a controllable wavelength that can be made much
shorter  than  visible  light  wavelengths  and,  accordingly,  possess  a  much  better
ability to resolve ﬁne details was only one of the factors that led to the develop-
ment  of  the  electron  microscope.  In  fact,  ideas  of  such  a  device  were  tossed
about in the cafés and bars of Paris and Berlin as early as 1928. What really made
the  difference  was  the  coming  together  of  several  lines  of  development — elec-
tron tubes and circuits, vacuum technology, and electron beam control — all pio-
neered in the development of the cathode ray tube (CRT). These factors led to
the construction of the ﬁrst transmission electron microscope (TEM) with mag-
netic lenses by electrical engineers Max Knoll and Ernst Ruska in Berlin in 1931.
The testament to the fortitude and brilliance of Knoll and Ruska in overcoming
the “cussedness of objects” and building and getting such a complicated experi-
mental device to work for the ﬁrst time is shown in Figure 5.10. It is remarkable
that although the overall performance of the TEM has been improved thousands
of  times  since  its  invention,  it  is  basically  the  same  in  principle  as  that  ﬁrst  de-
signed by Knoll and Ruska: a device that focuses electron beams with magnetic
lenses  and  creates  a  ﬂat-looking  two-dimensional  shadow  pattern  on  its  screen,
the result of varying degrees of electron transmission through the object. Figure
5.11a is a diagram showing this basic design and Figure 5.11b shows, for compari-
son, an optical projection microscope. The best optical microscopes using ultravi-
olet light have a magniﬁcation of about 2000 and can resolve two objects sepa-
rated  by  100 nm,  but  a  TEM  using  electrons  accelerated  through  100 kV  has  a
magniﬁcation of as much as 1,000,000 and a maximum resolution of 0.2 nm. In
practice, magniﬁcations of 10,000 to 100,000 are easier to use. Figure 5.12 shows
typical  TEM  micrographs  of  microbes,  Figure  5.12b  showing  a  microbe  and  its
DNA  strands  magniﬁed  40,000  times.  Although  it  would  seem  that  increasing
electron energy should lead to shorter electron wavelength and increased resolu-
tion, imperfections or aberrations in the magnetic lenses actually set the limit of
resolution at about 0.2 nm. Increasing electron energy above 100 keV does not

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Ernst Ruska played a major role
in the invention of the TEM. He
was  awarded  the  Nobel  prize  in
physics  for  this  work  in  1986.
(AIP Emilio  Segre  Visual  Archives,
W.  F.  Meggers  Gallery  of  Nobel
Laureates)

160

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Electron Source

Condenser lens

Object on ﬁne grid

Objective lens

Light Source

Condenser lens

Object

Objective lens

Intermediate image

Projector lens

Projector lens

Photographic plate

or

Fluorescent Screen
(a)

Screen

(b)

Figure 5.11 (a) Schematic drawing of a transmission electron microscope with mag-
netic lenses. (b) Schematic of a light-projection microscope.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.2

THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

161

(a)

(b)

Figure  5.12 (a)  A  false-color  TEM  micrograph  of  tuberculosis  bacteria.  (b)  A  TEM
micrograph  of  a  microbe  leaking  DNA  (⫻40,000).  (CNRI/Photo  Researchers,  Inc.,  Dr.
Gopal Murti/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

improve  resolution — it  only  permits  electrons  to  sample  regions  deeper  inside
an  object.  Figures  5.13a  and  5.13b  show,  respectively,  a  diagram  of  a  modern
TEM and a photo of the same instrument.

A second type of electron microscope with less resolution and magniﬁca-
tion  than  the  TEM,  but  capable  of  producing  striking  three-dimensional
images, is the scanning electron microscope (SEM). Figure 5.14 shows dra-
matic  three-dimensional  SEM  micrographs  made  possible  by  the  large
range of focus (depth of ﬁeld) of the SEM, which is several hundred times
better  than  that  of  a  light  microscope.  The  SEM  was  the  brainchild  of  the
same Max Knoll who helped invent the TEM. Knoll had recently moved to
the  television  department  at  Telefunken  when  he  conceived  of  the  idea  in
1935. The SEM produces a sort of giant television image by collecting elec-
trons  scattered  from  an  object,  rather  than  light.  The  ﬁrst  operating  scan-
ning microscope was built by M. von Ardenne in 1937, and it was extensively
developed  and  perfected  by  Vladimir  Zworykin  and  collaborators  at  RCA
Camden in the early 1940s.

Figure  5.15  shows  how  a  typical  SEM  works.  Such  a  device  might  be  oper-
ated with 20-keV electrons and have a resolution of about 10 nm and a magni-
ﬁcation  ranging  from  10  to  100,000.  As  shown  in  Figure  5.15,  an  electron
beam is sharply focused on a specimen by magnetic lenses and then scanned
(rastered)  across  a  tiny  region  on  the  surface  of  the  specimen.  The  high-
energy  primary  beam  scatters  lower-energy  secondary  electrons  out  of  the
object  depending  on  specimen  composition  and  surface  topography.  These
secondary  electrons  are  detected  by  a  plastic  scintillator  coupled  to  a  photo-
multiplier, ampliﬁed, and used to modulate the brightness of a simultaneously

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

162

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Electron gun

Cathode

Anode

Electromagnetic
lens

Electromagnetic
condenser
lens

Screen

Visual
transmission

(a)

Vacuum

Core

Coil

Electron
beam

Specimen
goes
here

Specimen
chamber
door

Projector
lens

Photo
chamber

(b)

Figure 5.13 (a) Diagram of a transmission electron microscope. (b) A photo of the
same TEM. (W. Ormerod/Visuals Unlimited)

rastered  display  CRT.  The  ratio  of  the  display  raster  size  to  the  microscope
electron  beam  raster  size  determines  the  magniﬁcation.  Modern  SEM’s  can
also  collect  x-rays  and  high-energy  electrons  from  the  specimen  to  detect
chemical elements at certain locations on the specimen’s surface, thus answer-
ing the bonus question, “Is the bitty bump on the bilayer boron or bismuth?”

(a)

(b)

Figure  5.14 (a) A SEM micrograph showing blood cells in a tiny artery. (b) A SEM
micrograph  of  a  single  neuron  (⫻4000).  (P. Motta  &  S.  Correr/Photo  Researchers,  Inc.,
David McCarthy/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.2

THE DAVISSON – GERMER EXPERIMENT

163

Electron gun

Electron beam

Scan
generator

CRT
display

Beam
scanning
coils

Magnetic
lenses

Current
varied to
change
focal
length

Fine e-beam
scans specimen

Specimen

Collector &
amplifier

Secondary
electrons

Figure 5.15 The working parts of a scanning electron microscope.

force  microscope  (AFM),  which  can 

The  newer,  higher-resolution  scanning  tunneling  microscope  (STM)
and atomic 
individual
atoms and molecules, are discussed in Chapter 7. These instruments are excit-
ing not  only  for  their  superb  pictures  of  surface  topography  and  indi-
vidual atoms (see Figure 5.16 for an AFM picture) but also for their potential
as  microscopic  machines  capable  of  detecting  and  moving  a  few atoms  at  a
time in proposed microchip terabit memories and mass spectrometers.

image 

Figure  5.16 World’s  smallest  electrical  wire.  An  AFM  image  of  a  carbon  nanotube
wire on platinum electrodes. The wire is 1.5 nm wide, a mere 10 atoms. The magniﬁca-
tion is 120,000. (Delft University of Technology/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

164

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

5.3 WAVE GROUPS AND DISPERSION

The  matter  wave  representing  a  moving  particle  must  reflect  the  fact  that
the particle has a large probability of being found in a small region of space
only  at  a  speciﬁc  time.  This  means  that  a  traveling  sinusoidal  matter  wave
of inﬁnite  extent  and  constant  amplitude  cannot  properly  represent  a
localized  moving  particle.  What  is  needed  is  a  pulse,  or  “wave  group,”  of
limited  spatial  extent.  Such  a  pulse  can  be  formed  by  adding  sinusoidal
waves  with  different  wavelengths.  The  resulting  wave  group  can  then
be shown to move with a speed vg (the group speed) identical to the classi-
cal  particle  speed.  This  argument  is  shown  schematically  in  Figure  5.17
and will  be  treated  in  detail  after  the  introduction  of  some  general  ideas
about wave groups.

Actually,  all  observed  waves  are  limited  to  deﬁnite  regions  of  space  and
are called pulses, wave groups, or wave packets in the case of matter waves. The
plane  wave  with  an  exact  wavelength  and  inﬁnite  extension  is  an  abstrac-
tion. Water waves from a stone dropped into a pond, light waves emerging
from  a  briefly  opened  shutter,  a  wave  generated  on  a  taut  rope  by  a  single
flip of one end, and a sound wave emitted by a discharging capacitor must
all be modeled by wave groups. A wave group consists of a superposition of
waves with different  wavelengths, with the amplitude and phase of each com-
ponent wave adjusted so that the waves interfere constructively over a small
region of space. Outside of this region the combination of waves produces a
net  amplitude  that  approaches  zero  rapidly  as  a  result  of  destructive  inter-
ference.  Perhaps  the  most  familiar  physical  example  in  which  wave  groups
arise  is  the  phenomenon  of  beats.  Beats  occur  when  two  sound  waves  of
slightly  different  wavelength  (and  hence  different  frequency)  are  com-
bined. The resultant sound wave has a frequency equal to the average of the
two combining waves and an amplitude that fluctuates, or “beats,” at a rate

(a)

m

v0

x

vg  = vo

(b)

Figure  5.17 Representing  a  particle  with  matter  waves:  (a)  particle  of  mass  m and
speed v0;  (b)  superposition  of  many  matter  waves  with  a  spread  of  wavelengths  cen-
tered on ␭0 ⫽ h/mv0 correctly represents a particle.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

y

y

(a)

(b)

Individual waves

180° out
of phase

In phase

5.3

WAVE GROUPS AND DISPERSION

165

t

t

Figure  5.18 Beats  are  formed  by  the  combination  of  two  waves  of  slightly  different
frequency traveling in the same direction. (a) The individual waves. (b) The combined
wave has an amplitude (broken line) that oscillates in time.

given  by  the  difference  of  the  two  original  frequencies.  This  case  is  illus-
trated in Figure 5.18.

Let  us  examine  this  situation  mathematically.  Consider  a  one-dimensional
wave propagating in the positive x direction with a phase speed vp. Note that vp
is the speed of a point of constant phase on the wave, such as a wave crest or
trough.  This  traveling  wave  with  wavelength ␭,  frequency  f,  and  amplitude  A
may be described by

y ⫽ A cos 冢 2␲x

␭

⫺ 2␲ft冣

where ␭ and f are related by

v p ⫽ ␭f

(5.10)

(5.11)

A more compact form for Equation 5.10 results if we take ␻ ⫽ 2␲f (where ␻ is
the  angular  frequency)  and  k ⫽ 2␲/␭ (where k is  the  wavenumber).  With  these
substitutions the inﬁnite wave becomes

y ⫽ A cos(kx ⫺ ␻t)

(5.12)

with

vp ⫽

␻

k

(5.13)

Phase velocity

Let us now form the superposition of two waves of equal amplitude both trav-
eling  in  the  positive  x direction  but  with  slightly  different  wavelengths,  fre-
quencies, and phase velocities. The resultant amplitude y is given by

y ⫽ y1 ⫹ y2 ⫽ A cos(k1x ⫺ ␻1t) ⫹ A cos(k2x ⫺ ␻2t)

Using the trigonometric identity

cos a ⫹ cos b ⫽ 2 cos 1

2 (a ⫺ b) ⭈ cos 1

2 (a ⫹ b)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

166

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

we ﬁnd

y ⫽ 2A cos 1

2 {(k 2 ⫺ k 1)x ⫺ (␻2 ⫺ ␻1)t } ⭈ cos 1

2 {(k 1 ⫹ k 2)x ⫺ (␻1 ⫹ ␻2)t }

(5.14)

For the case of two waves with slightly different values of k and ␻, we see that
⌬k ⫽ k2 ⫺ k1 and ⌬␻ ⫽ ␻2 ⫺ ␻1 are  small,  but  (k1 ⫹ k2)  and  (␻1 ⫹ ␻2)  are
large. Thus, Equation 5.14 may be interpreted as a broad sinusoidal envelope

2A cos 冢 ⌬k

2

x ⫺

⌬␻
2

t冣

limiting or modulating a high-frequency wave within the envelope

cos[ 1

2 (k 1 ⫹ k 2)x ⫺ 1

2 (␻1 ⫹ ␻2)t ]

This superposition of two waves is shown in Figure 5.19.

Although our model is primitive and does not represent a pulse limited to a
small  region  of  space,  it  shows  several  interesting  features  common  to  more
complicated  models.  For  example,  the  envelope  and  the  wave  within  the
envelope  move  at  different  speeds.  The  speed  of  either  the  high-frequency
wave or the envelope is given by dividing the coefﬁcient of the t term by the
coefﬁcient of the x term as was done in Equations 5.12 and 5.13. For the wave
within the envelope,

vp ⫽

(␻1 ⫹ ␻2)/2
(k 1 ⫹ k 2)/2

⬇

␻1
k 1

⫽ v1

Thus,  the  high-frequency  wave  moves  at  the  phase  velocity  v1 of  one  of
the waves  or  at  v2 because v1 ⬇ v2.  The  envelope  or  group  described  by
2A cos[(⌬k/2)x ⫺ (⌬␻/2)t]  moves  with  a  different  velocity  however,  the
group velocity given by

vg ⫽

(␻2 ⫺ ␻1)/2
(k 2 ⫺ k 1)/2

⫽

⌬␻
⌬k

(5.15)

y

High-frequency wave

cos

k1 + k2
(
––––––

2

)

x

Broad

envelope

2A cos

∆k–––
(
x
2

)

x

Figure 5.19 Superposition of two waves of slightly different wavelengths resulting in
primitive wave groups; t has been set equal to zero in Equation 5.14.

∆x

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.3

WAVE GROUPS AND DISPERSION

167

Another general characteristic of wave groups for waves of any type is both
a  limited  duration  in  time,  ⌬t,  and  a  limited  extent  in  space,  ⌬x.  It  is  found
that the smaller the spatial width of the pulse, ⌬x, the larger the range of wave-
lengths  or  wavenumbers,  ⌬k,  needed  to  form  the  pulse.  This  may  be  stated
mathematically as

⌬x ⌬k ⬇ 1

(5.16)

Likewise,  if  the  time  duration,  ⌬t,  of  the  pulse  is  small,  we  require  a  wide
spread of frequencies, ⌬␻, to form the group. That is,

⌬t ⌬␻ ⬇ 1

(5.17)

In pulse electronics, this condition is known as the “response time – bandwidth
formula.”3 In this situation Equation 5.17 shows that in order to amplify a volt-
age  pulse  of  time  width  ⌬t without  distortion,  a  pulse  ampliﬁer  must  equally
amplify all frequencies in a frequency band of width ⌬␻.

Equations 5.16 and 5.17 are important because they constitute “uncertainty
relations,” or “reciprocity relations,” for pulses of any kind — electromagnetic,
sound,  or  even  matter  waves.  In  particular,  Equation  5.16  shows  that  ⌬x,  the
uncertainty  in  spatial  extent  of  a  pulse,  is  inversely  proportional  to  ⌬k,  the
range of wavenumbers making up the pulse: both ⌬x and ⌬k cannot become
arbitrarily small, but as one decreases the other must increase.

It is interesting that our simple two-wave model also shows the general prin-
ciples given by Equations 5.16 and 5.17. If we call (rather artiﬁcially) the spa-
tial extent of our group the distance between adjacent minima (labeled ⌬x in
Figure  5.12),  we  ﬁnd  from  the  envelope  term 
the  condition
1
2 ⌬k ⌬x ⫽ ␲

2A cos(1

or

2 ⌬kx)

⌬k ⌬x ⫽ 2␲

(5.18)

Here, ⌬k ⫽ k 2 ⫺ k1 is  the  range  of  wavenumbers  present.  Likewise,  if  x is
held constant  and  t is  allowed  to  vary  in  the  envelope  portion  of  Equation
5.14, the result is  (␻2 ⫺ ␻1) ⌬t ⫽ ␲, or

1
2

⌬␻ ⌬t ⫽ 2␲

(5.19)

Therefore, Equations 5.18 and 5.19 agree with the general principles, respec-
tively, of ⌬k ⌬x ⬇ 1 and ⌬␻ ⌬t ⬇ 1.

The  addition  of  only  two  waves  with  discrete  frequencies  is  instructive  but
produces  an  inﬁnite  wave  instead  of  a  true  pulse.  In  the  general  case,  many
waves having a continuous distribution of wavelengths must be added to form
a packet that is ﬁnite over a limited range and really zero everywhere else. In
this case Equation 5.15 for the group velocity, vg becomes

vg ⫽

d␻

dk 兩 k 0

(5.20)

Group velocity

3It should be emphasized that Equations 5.16 and 5.17 are true in general and that the quantities
⌬x, ⌬k, ⌬t, and ⌬␻ represent the spread in values present in an arbitrary pulse formed from the
superposition of two or more waves.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

168

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

where  the  derivative  is  to  be  evaluated  at  k 0,  the  central  wavenumber  of  the
many waves present. The connection between the group velocity and the phase
velocity of the composite waves is easily obtained. Because ␻ ⫽ kvp, we ﬁnd

vg ⫽

d␻

dk 兩 k 0

⫽ vp兩 k 0

⫹ k

dvp

dk 兩 k 0

(5.21)

where vp is the phase velocity and is, in general, a function of k or ␭. Materi-
als  in  which  the  phase  velocity  varies  with  wavelength  are  said  to  exhibit
dispersion. An example of a dispersive medium is glass, in which the index
of refraction  varies  with  wavelength  and  different  colors  of  light  travel  at
different  speeds.  Media  in  which  the  phase  velocity  does  not  vary  with
wavelength (such as vacuum for electromagnetic waves) are termed nondis-
persive.  The  term  dispersion arises  from  the  fact  that  the  individual  har-
monic waves that form a pulse travel at different phase velocities and cause
an  originally  sharp  pulse  to  change  shape  and  become  spread  out,  or
dispersed.  As  an  example,  dispersion  of  a  laser  pulse  after  traveling  1 km
along  an  optical  ﬁber  is  shown  in  Figure  5.20.  In  a  nondispersive  medium
where  all  waves  have  the  same  velocity,  the  group  velocity  is  equal  to
the phase  velocity.  In  a  dispersive  medium  the  group  velocity  can  be  less
than or greater than the phase velocity, depending on the sign of dvp/dk, as
shown by Equation 5.21.

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
e
s
l
u
P

0

10

20

30

40

t (ns)

Figure  5.20 Dispersion  in  a
1-ns  laser  pulse.  A  pulse  that
starts  with  the  width  shown  by
the vertical lines has a time width
of approximately 30 ns after trav-
eling 1 km along an optical ﬁber.

vp ⫽√ g␭

2␲

where g is  the  acceleration  of  gravity  and  where  the
minor contribution of surface tension has been ignored.
Show  that  in  this  case  the  velocity  of  a  group  of  these
waves is one-half of the phase velocity of the central wave-
length.

Solution Because k ⫽ 2␲/␭, we can write vp as

vp ⫽ 冢 g

k 冣1/2

Therefore, we ﬁnd

⫹ k

vg ⫽ vp兩 k 0
2冢 g
k 0 冣1/2

⫽ 1

⫽ 冢 g

k 0 冣1/2

⫺ 1

2冢 g
k 0 冣1/2

dvp

dk 兩 k 0
2 vp兩 k 0

⬅ 1

EXAMPLE 5.4 Group Velocity in a
Dispersive Medium

In  a  particular  substance  the  phase  velocity  of  waves
doubles  when  the  wavelength  is  halved.  Show  that
wave groups in this system move at twice the central phase
velocity.

Solution From the given information, the dependence
of phase velocity on wavelength must be

vp ⫽

A⬘
␭

⫽ Ak

for some constants A⬘ and A. From Equation 5.21 we ob-
tain

vg ⫽ vp兩 k0

⫹ k

dvp

dk 兩 k0

⫽ Ak 0 ⫹ Ak 0 ⫽ 2Ak 0

Thus,

vg ⫽ 2vp兩 k0

EXAMPLE 5.5 Group Velocity in Deep

Water Waves

Newton  showed  that  the  phase  velocity  of  deep  water
waves having wavelength ␭ is given by

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.3

WAVE GROUPS AND DISPERSION

169

Matter Wave Packets
We are  now  in  a  position  to  apply  our  general  theory  of  wave  groups  to
electrons. We shall show both the dispersion of de Broglie waves and the satis-
fying  result  that  the  wave  packet  and  the  particle  move  at  the  same  velocity.
According  to  de  Broglie,  individual matter  waves  have  a  frequency  f and  a
wavelength ␭ given by

f ⫽

E
h

    and    ␭ ⫽

h
p

where E and p are  the  relativistic  energy  and  momentum  of  the  particle,
respectively. The phase speed of these matter waves is given by

vp ⫽ f␭ ⫽

E
p

(5.22)

The phase speed can be expressed as a function of p or k alone by substituting
E ⫽ (p 2c 2 ⫹ m2c 4)1/2 into Equation 5.22:

v p ⫽ c√1 ⫹ 冢 mc
p 冣2

(5.23)

The dispersion relation for de Broglie waves can be obtained as a function of k
by substituting p ⫽ h/␭ ⫽ បk into Equation 5.23. This gives

v p ⫽ c√1 ⫹ 冢 mc
បk 冣2

(5.24)

Phase velocity of matter
waves

Equation 5.24 shows that individual de Broglie waves representing a particle of
mass m show dispersion even in empty space and always travel at a speed that is
greater  than or  at  least  equal  to  c.  Because  these  component  waves  travel  at
different  speeds,  the  width  of  the  wave  packet,  ⌬x,  spreads  or  disperses  as
time progresses,  as  will  be  seen  in  detail  in  Chapter  6.  To  obtain  the  group
speed, we use

vg ⫽ 冤vp ⫹ k

dvp

dk 冥k0

and Equation 5.24. After some algebra, we ﬁnd

vg ⫽

c

冤1 ⫹ 冢 mc

បk 0 冣2冥1/2

⫽

c2

vp兩 k0

(5.25)

Solving for the phase speed from Equation 5.22, we ﬁnd

vp ⫽

E
p

⫽

␥mc 2
␥mv

⫽

c 2
v

where v is  the  particle’s  speed.  Finally,  substituting  vp ⫽ c 2/v into  Equation
5.25 for vg shows that the group velocity of the matter wave packet is the same
as the particle speed. This agrees with our intuition that the matter wave enve-
lope should move at the same speed as the particle.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

170

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

O P T I O N A L

5.4 FOURIER INTEGRALS

In  this  section  we  show  in  detail  how  to  construct  wave  groups,  or  pulses,  that  are
truly localized in space or time and also show that very general reciprocity relations
of the type ⌬k⌬x ⬇ 1 and ⌬␻⌬t ⬇ 1 hold for these pulses.

To form a true pulse that is zero everywhere outside of a ﬁnite spatial range ⌬x
requires  adding  together  an  inﬁnite  number  of  harmonic  waves  with  continuously
varying wavelengths and amplitudes. This addition can be done with a Fourier inte-
gral, which is deﬁned as follows:

f (x) ⫽

1

√2␲ 冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)eikxdk

(5.26)

Here f(x) is a spatially localized wave group, a(k) gives the amount or amplitude of
the  wave  with  wavenumber  k ⫽ (2␲/␭)  to  be  added,  and  e ikx ⫽ cos kx ⫹ i sin kx is
Euler’s compact expression for a harmonic wave. The amplitude distribution func-
tion a(k) can be obtained if f (x) is known by using the symmetric formula

a(k) ⫽

1

√2␲ 冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

f (x)e⫺ikxdk

(5.27)

Equations  5.26  and  5.27  apply  to  the  case  of  a  spatial  pulse  at  ﬁxed  time,  but  it  is
important to note that they are mathematically identical to the case of a time pulse
passing a ﬁxed position. This case is common in electrical engineering and involves
adding together a continuously varying set of frequencies:

V(t ) ⫽

g (␻) ⫽

1

1

⫺⬁

√2␲ 冕⫹⬁
√2␲ 冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

g (␻)ei␻td␻

V(t )e⫺i␻tdt

(5.28)

(5.29)

where V(t) is the strength of a signal as a function of time, and g(␻) is the spectral
content of  the  signal  and  gives  the  amount  of  the  harmonic  wave  with  frequency ␻
that is present.

Let  us  now  consider  several  examples  of  how  to  use  Equations  5.26  through
5.29 and  how  they  lead  to  uncertainty  relationships  of  the  type  ⌬␻ ⌬t ⬇ 1
and ⌬k ⌬x ⬇ 1.

EXAMPLE 5.6

This  example  compares  the  spectral  contents  of  inﬁnite  and  truncated  sinusoidal
waves.  A  truncated  sinusoidal  wave  is  a  wave  cut  off  or  truncated  by  a  shutter,
as shown  in  Figure  5.21.  (a)  What  is  the  spectral  content  of  an  inﬁnite  sinusoidal
ei␻0t
wave 
? (b) Find and sketch the spectral content of a truncated sinusoidal wave
given by

V(t ) ⫽ ei␻0t    ⫺ T ⬍ t ⬍ ⫹T
V(t ) ⫽ 0   

otherwise

(c) Show that for this truncated sinusoid ⌬t ⌬␻ ⫽ ␲, where ⌬t and ⌬␻ are the half-
widths of v(t) and g(␻), respectively.

Solution (a)  The  spectral  content  consists  of  a  single  strong  contribution  at  the
frequency ␻0.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

V (t )

5.4

FOURIER INTEGRALS

171

O

–T

t

+T

Figure 5.21 (Example 5.6) The real part of a truncated sinusoidal wave.

(b)

g(␻) ⫽

⫽

1

⫺⬁

√2␲ 冕⫹⬁
√2␲ 冕⫹T

⫺T

1

V (t )e⫺i␻tdt ⫽

1

√2␲ 冕⫹T

⫺T

ei(␻0⫺␻)t dt

[cos(␻0 ⫺ ␻)t ⫹ i sin(␻0 ⫺ ␻)t] dt

Because  the  sine  term  is  an  odd  function  and  the  cosine  is  even,  the  integral
reduces to

cos(␻0 ⫺ ␻)t dt ⫽√ 2

␲

sin(␻0 ⫺ ␻)T

(␻0 ⫺ ␻)

⫽√ 2

␲

(T )

sin(␻0 ⫺ ␻)T

(␻0 ⫺ ␻)T

g(␻) ⫽

2

√2␲ 冕T

0

A sketch of g(␻) (Figure 5.22) shows a typical sin Z/Z proﬁle centered on ␻0. Note
that both positive and negative amounts of different frequencies must be added to
produce the truncated sinusoid. Furthermore, the strongest frequency contribution
comes from the frequency region near ␻ ⫽ ␻0, as expected.
(c) ⌬t clearly equals T and ⌬␻ may be taken to be half the width of the main lobe of
g(␻), ⌬␻ ⫽ ␲/T. Thus, we get

⌬␻ ⌬t ⫽

␲

T

⫻ T ⫽ ␲

ω
)

g (

2–π√ T

+

O
–

2∆

ω

ω
0

ω
0

+

 π
—
T

0ω
–

 —
 π
T

ω

Figure 5.22 (Example 5.6) The Fourier transform of a truncated sinusoidal wave.
The curve shows the amount of a given frequency that must be added to produce
the truncated wave.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

172

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

We see that the product of the spread in frequency, ⌬␻, and the spread in time, ⌬t,
is a constant independent of T.

EXAMPLE 5.7 A Matter Wave Packet

(a) Show that the matter wave packet whose amplitude distribution a(k) is a rec-
tangular  pulse  of  height  unity,  width  ⌬k ,  and  centered  at  k 0 (Fig.  5.23)  has  the
form

f (x) ⫽

⌬k
√2␲

sin(⌬k ⭈ x/2)

(⌬k ⭈ x/2)

eik0x

Solution

f (x) ⫽

1

√2␲冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)eikx dk ⫽

冕k0⫹(⌬k/2)

k0⫺(⌬k/2) eikx dk ⫽

1
√2␲

1
√2␲

eik0x
x

 2 sin(⌬k ⭈ x/2)

⫽

⌬k
√2␲

sin(⌬k ⭈ x/2)

(⌬k ⭈ x/2)

eik0x

(b)  Observe  that  this  wave  packet  is  a  complex  function.  Later  in  this  chapter  we
shall see how the deﬁnition of probability density results in a real function, but for
the time being consider only the real part of f (x) and make a sketch of its behavior,
showing its envelope and the cosine function within. Determine ⌬x, and show that
an uncertainty relation of the form ⌬x ⌬k ⬇ 1 holds.

Solution The  real  part  of  the  wave  packet  is  shown  in  Figure  5.24  where  the
full width  of  the  main  lobe  is  ⌬x ⫽ 4␲/⌬k.  This  immediately  gives  the  uncertainty
relation ⌬x ⌬k ⫽ 4␲.  Note  that  the  constant  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  uncer-
tainty relation depends on the shape chosen for a(k) and the precise deﬁnition of
⌬x and ⌬k.

Exercise 3 Assume that a narrow triangular voltage pulse V(t ) arises in some type
of radar  system  (see  Fig.  5.25).  (a)  Find  and  sketch  the  spectral  content  g(␻).
(b) Show that a relation of the type ⌬␻ ⌬t ⬇ 1 holds. (c) If the width of the pulse is

a(k)

1

O

k0 –

∆k—
2

k0

k0

+

∆k—
2

k

Figure 5.23 (Example 5.7) A simple amplitude distribution specifying a uniform
contribution  of  all  wavenumbers  from  k 0 ⫺ ⌬k/2  to  k 0 ⫹ ⌬k/2.  Although  we  have
used only positive k’s here, both positive and negative k values are allowed, in gen-
eral corresponding to waves traveling to the right (k ⬎ 0) or left (k ⬍ 0).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.5

THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

173

f (x)

∆k––
π
2

)

sin (

∆k–– x
2
————
∆k–– x
2

x

–

π
2
––∆k

π
2
––∆k

cos (k0x)

Figure  5.24 (Example  5.7)  The  real  part  of  the  wave  packet  formed  by  the
uniform amplitude distribution shown in Figure 5.23.

V(t)

1

2␶ ⫽ 10⫺9 s,  what  range  of  frequencies  must  this  system  pass  if  the  pulse  is  to  be
undistorted? Take ⌬t ⫽ ␶ and deﬁne ⌬␻ similarly.

(a) 
Answer
4.00 ⫻ 109 Hz.

g (␻) ⫽ (√2/␲)(1/␻2␶)(1 ⫺ cos ␻␶).

(b)  ⌬␻ ⌬t ⫽ 2␲.  (c)  2⌬f ⫽

–τ

0

τ
+

t

Figure 5.25 (Exercise 3).

Constructing Moving Wave Packets
Figure 5.24 represents a snapshot of the wave packet at t ⫽ 0. To construct a moving
wave  packet  representing  a  moving  particle,  we  replace  kx in  Equation  5.26  with
(kx ⫺ ␻t). Thus, the representation of the moving wave packet becomes

f (x, t ) ⫽

1

√2␲ 冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)ei(kx⫺␻t) dk

(5.30)

It is important to realize that here ␻ ⫽ ␻(k), that is, ␻ is a function of k and therefore
depends on the type of wave and the medium traversed. In general, it is difﬁcult to
solve this integral analytically. For matter waves, the QMTools software available from
our companion Web site (http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e) produces the same re-
sult by solving numerically a certain differential equation that governs the behavior of
such waves. This approach will be explored further in the next chapter.

5.5 THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

In  the  period  1924 – 25,  Werner  Heisenberg,  the  son  of  a  professor  of  Greek
and  Latin  at  the  University  of  Munich,  invented  a  complete  theory  of
quantum  mechanics  called  matrix  mechanics.  This  theory  overcame  some  of
the problems with the Bohr theory of the atom, such as the postulate of “un-
observable” electron orbits. Heisenberg’s formulation was based primarily on
measurable quantities such as the transition probabilities for electronic jumps
between quantum states. Because transition probabilities depend on the initial
and  ﬁnal  states,  Heisenberg’s  mechanics  used  variables  labeled  by  two  sub-
scripts. Although at ﬁrst Heisenberg presented his theory in the form of non-
commuting algebra, Max Born quickly realized that this theory could be more

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

174

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

elegantly described by matrices. Consequently, Born, Heisenberg, and Pascual
Jordan  soon  worked  out  a comprehensive  theory  of  matrix  mechanics.  Al-
though  the  matrix  formulation  was  quite  elegant,  it  attracted  little  attention
outside of a small group of gifted physicists because it was difﬁcult to apply in
speciﬁc  cases, involved  mathematics  unfamiliar  to  most  physicists,  and  was
based on rather vague physical concepts.

Although  we  will  investigate  this  remarkable  form  of  quantum  mechanics
no  further,  we  shall  discuss  another  of  Heisenberg’s  discoveries,  the  uncer-
tainty principle, elucidated in a famous paper in 1927. In this paper Heisen-
berg  introduced  the  notion  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine  simultane-
ously with unlimited precision the position and momentum of a particle.
In words we may state the uncertainty principle as follows:

If a measurement of position is made with precision ⌬x and a simultane-
ous  measurement  of  momentum  in  the  x direction  is  made  with  preci-
sion ⌬px, then the product of the two uncertainties can never be smaller
than បⲐ2. That is,

Momentum – position
uncertainty principle

⌬px ⌬x ⱖ

ប
2

(5.31)

In  his  paper  of  1927,  Heisenberg  was  careful  to  point  out  that  the
inescapable  uncertainties  ⌬px and ⌬x do  not  arise  from  imperfections  in
practical  measuring  instruments.  Rather,  they  arise  from  the  need  to  use
a large range of wavenumbers, ⌬k, to represent a matter wave packet local-
ized  in  a  small  region,  ⌬x.  The  uncertainty  principle  represents  a  sharp
break  with  the  ideas  of  classical  physics,  in  which  it  is  assumed  that,
with enough  skill  and  ingenuity,  it  is  possible  to  simultaneously  measure  a
particle’s  position  and  momentum  to  any  desired  degree  of  precision.  As
shown  in  Example  5.8,  however,  there  is  no  contradiction  between  the
uncertainty principle and classical laws for macroscopic systems because of
the small value of ប.

One  can  show  that  ⌬px ⌬x ⱖ ប/2  comes  from  the  uncertainty  relation
governing  any  type  of  wave  pulse  formed  by  the  superposition  of  waves  with
different wavelengths. In Section 5.3 we found that to construct a wave group
localized in a small region ⌬x, we had to add up a large range of wavenumbers
⌬k, where ⌬k ⌬x ⬇ 1 (Eq. 5.16). The precise value of the number on the right-
hand side of Equation 5.16 depends on the functional form f (x) of the wave
group as well as on the speciﬁc deﬁnition of ⌬x and ⌬k. A different choice of
f(x) or a different rule for deﬁning ⌬x and ⌬k (or both) will give a slightly dif-
ferent  number.  With  ⌬x and ⌬k deﬁned  as  standard  deviations,  it  can  be
shown that the smallest number,  , is obtained for a Gaussian wavefunction.4
In this minimum uncertainty case we have

1
2

⌬x ⌬k ⫽ 1
2

4See Section 6.7 for a deﬁnition of the standard deviation and Problem 6.34 for a complete math-
ematical proof of this statement.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.5

THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

175

This  photograph  of  Werner

Heisenberg  was  taken  around
1924. Heisenberg obtained his
Ph.D. in 1923 at the University of Mu-
nich  where  he  studied  under  Arnold
Sommerfeld and became an enthusi-
astic  mountain  climber  and  skier.
Later,  he  worked  as  an  assistant  to
Max  Born  at  Göttingen  and  Niels
Bohr  in  Copenhagen.  While  physi-
cists 
such  as  de  Broglie  and
Schrödinger tried to develop visualiz-
able models of the atom, Heisenberg,
with the help of Born and Pascual Jor-
dan,  developed  an  abstract  mathe-
matical model called matrix mechan-
ics  to  explain  the  wavelengths  of
spectral  lines.  The  more  successful
wave  mechanics  of  Schrödinger  an-

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

WERNER HEISENBERG

(1901 – 1976)

nounced  a  few  months  later  was
shown  to  be  equivalent  to  Heisen-
berg’s  approach.  Heisenberg  made
many  other  signiﬁcant  contributions
to  physics,  including  his  famous  un-
certainty  principle,  for  which  he  re-
ceived  the  Nobel  prize  in  1932,  the
prediction of two forms of molecular
hydrogen,  and  theoretical  models  of
the nucleus. During World War II he
was  director  of  the  Max  Planck  Insti-
tute at Berlin where he was in charge
of  German  research  on  atomic
weapons.  Following 
the  war,  he
moved to West Germany and became
director  of  the  Max  Planck  Institute
for Physics at Göttingen.

For any other choice of f (x),

and using ⌬px ⫽ ប⌬k, 

⌬x ⌬k ⱖ 1
2

immediately becomes

⌬x ⌬k ⱖ 1
2

⌬px ⌬x ⱖ

ប
2

(5.32)

(5.33)

The  basic  meaning  of  ⌬p ⌬x ⱖ ប/2  is  that  as  one  uncertainty  increases  the
other  decreases.  In  the  extreme  case  as  one  uncertainty  approaches  ⬁,
the other must approach zero. This extreme case is illustrated by a plane wave
eik0x
that  has  a  precise  momentum  បk0 and  an  inﬁnite  extent — that  is,  the
wavefunction is not concentrated in any segment of the x axis.

⌬␻⌬t ⱖ 1
2

Another  important  uncertainty  relation  involves  the  uncertainty  in  energy
of a wave packet, ⌬E, and the time, ⌬t, taken to measure that energy. Starting
with 
as the minimum form of the time – frequency uncertainty prin-
ciple, and using the de Broglie relation for the connection between the matter
wave  energy  and  frequency,  E ⫽ ប␻,  we  immediately  ﬁnd  the  energy – time
uncertainty principle

⌬E ⌬t ⱖ

ប
2

(5.34)

Energy – time uncertainty
principle

Equation  5.34  states  that  the  precision  with  which  we  can  know  the  energy  of
some system is limited by the time available for measuring the energy. A common
application of the energy – time uncertainty is in calculating the lifetimes of very
short-lived subatomic particles whose lifetimes cannot be measured directly, but
whose uncertainty in energy or mass can be measured. (See Problem 26.)

A Different View of the Uncertainty Principle
Although we have indicated that ⌬px ⌬x ⱖ ប/2 arises from the theory of forming
pulses or wave groups, there is a more physical way to view the origin of the un-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

176

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Before
collision

Incident
photon

Electron

(a)

After

collision

Scattered
photon

Recoiling
electron

(b)

Figure 5.26 A thought experi-
ment  for  viewing  an  electron
with  a  powerful  microscope.
(a) The  electron  is  shown  be-
fore  colliding  with  the  photon.
(b)  The  electron  recoils  (is  dis-
turbed)  as  a  result  of  the  colli-
sion with the photon.

certainty principle. We consider certain idealized experiments (called thought ex-
periments)  and  show  that  it  is  impossible  to  carry  out  an  experiment  that  allows
the position and momentum of a particle to be simultaneously measured with an
accuracy that violates the uncertainty principle. The most famous thought experi-
ment  along  these  lines  was  introduced  by  Heisenberg  himself  and  involves  the
measurement  of  an  electron’s  position  by  means  of  a  microscope  (Fig.  5.26),
which forms an image of the electron on a screen or the retina of the eye.

Because  light  can  scatter  from  and  perturb  the  electron,  let  us  minimize
this effect by considering the scattering of only a single light quantum from an
electron  initially  at  rest  (Fig.  5.27).  To  be  collected  by  the  lens,  the
photon must  be  scattered  through  an  angle  ranging  from  ⫺␪ to ⫹␪,  which
consequently  imparts  to  the  electron  an  x momentum  value  ranging  from
⫹(h sin ␪)/␭ to ⫺(h sin␪)/␭. Thus the uncertainty in the electron’s momen-
tum  is  ⌬px ⫽ (2h sin␪)/␭.  After  passing  through  the  lens,  the  photon  lands
somewhere on the screen, but the image and consequently the position of the
electron  is  “fuzzy”  because  the  photon  is  diffracted  on  passing  through  the
lens aperture. According to physical optics, the resolution of a microscope or
the uncertainty in the image of the electron, ⌬x, is given by ⌬x ⫽ ␭/(2 sin ␪).
Here 2␪ is the angle subtended by the objective lens, as shown in Figure 5.27.5
Multiplying the expressions for ⌬px and ⌬x, we ﬁnd for the electron

∆x

Screen

Lens

α

θ

∆x

Incident photon

λ
p0  = h/ 0

Scattered
 photon
p  = h/λ

e – initially

at rest

y

x

Figure 5.27 The Heisenberg microscope.

5The resolving power of the microscope is treated clearly in F. A. Jenkins and H. E. White, Funda-
mentals of Optics, 4th ed., New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1976, pp. 332 – 334.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.5

THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

177

⌬px ⌬x ⬇ 冢 2h

␭

  sin ␪冣冢 ␭

2 sin ␪冣 ⫽ h

in agreement with the uncertainty relation. Note also that this principle is in-
escapable and relentless! If ⌬x is reduced by increasing ␪ or the lens size, there
is an equivalent increase in the uncertainty of the electron’s momentum.

Examination  of  this  simple  experiment  shows  several  key  physical  proper-

ties that lead to the uncertainty principle:

• The indivisible nature of light particles or quanta (nothing less than a sin-

gle photon can be used!).

• The wave property of light as shown in diffraction.
• The impossibility of predicting or measuring the precise classical path of
a single scattered photon and hence of knowing the precise momentum
transferred to the electron.6

We conclude  this  section  with  some  examples  of  the  types  of  calculations
that  can  be  done  with  the  uncertainty  principle.  In  the  spirit  of  Fermi  or
Heisenberg,  these  “back-of-the-envelope  calculations”  are  surprising  for  their
simplicity  and  essential  description  of  quantum  systems  of  which  the  details
are unknown.

EXAMPLE 5.8 The Uncertainty Principle

Changes Nothing for
Macroscopic Objects

(a)  Show  that  the  spread  of  velocities  caused  by  the  un-
certainty  principle  does  not  have  measurable  conse-
quences  for  macroscopic  objects  (objects  that  are  large
compared with atoms) by considering a 100-g racquetball
conﬁned  to  a  room  15 m  on  a  side.  Assume  the  ball  is
moving at 2.0 m/s along the x axis.

Solution

⌬px ⱖ

ប

2 ⌬x

⫽

1.05 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s

2 ⫻ 15 m

⫽ 3.5 ⫻ 10⫺36 kg ⭈m/s

Thus the minimum spread in velocity is given by

⌬vx ⫽

⌬px
m

⫽

3.05 ⫻ 10⫺36 kg ⭈m/s

0.100 kg

⫽ 3.5 ⫻ 10⫺35 m/s

This gives a relative uncertainty of

⌬vx
v x

⫽

3.5 ⫻ 10⫺35

2.0

⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺35

which is certainly not measurable.

(b)  If  the  ball  were  to  suddenly  move  along  the  y axis
perpendicular to its well-deﬁned classical trajectory along
x,  how  far  would  it  move  in  1  s?  Assume  that  the  ball
moves in the y direction with the top speed in the spread
⌬vy produced by the uncertainty principle.

Solution It is important to realize that uncertainty rela-
tions  hold  in  the  y and z directions  as  well  as  in  the  x
direction.  This  means  that  ⌬px ⌬x ⱖ ប/2, ⌬py ⌬y ⱖ ប/2,
and ⌬pz ⌬z ⱖ ប/2 and because all the position uncertain-
ties are equal, all of the velocity spreads are equal. Conse-
quently,  we  have  ⌬vy ⫽ 3.5 ⫻ 10⫺35 m/s  and  the  ball
moves  3.5 ⫻ 10⫺35 m  in  the  y direction  in  1 s.  This  dis-
tance  is  again  an  immeasurably  small  quantity,  being
10⫺20 times the size of a nucleus!

Exercise  4 How  long  would  it  take  the  ball  to
move 50 cm  in  the  y direction?  (The  age  of  the
universe is thought to be 15 billion years, give or take a
few billion).

6Attempts to measure the photon’s position by scattering electrons from it in a Compton process
only serve to make its path to the lens more uncertain.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

178

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

EXAMPLE 5.9 Do Electrons Exist Within

the Nucleus?

Estimate  the  kinetic  energy  of  an  electron  conﬁned
within  a  nucleus  of  size  1.0 ⫻ 10⫺14 m  by  using  the  un-
certainty principle.

Solution Taking ⌬x to be the half-width of the conﬁne-

ment length in the equation 

⌬px ⱖ

, we have

ប

2 ⌬x

⌬px ⱖ

6.58 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈s

1.0 ⫻ 10⫺14 m

⫻

3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s

c

or

⌬px ⱖ 2.0 ⫻ 107 eV
c

This  means  that  measurements  of  the  component  of
momentum  of  electrons  trapped 
inside  a  nucleus
would range  from  less  than  ⫺20 MeV/c to  greater  than
⫹20 MeV/c and that some electrons would have momen-
tum at least as large as 20 MeV/c. Because this appears to
be  a  large  momentum,  to  be  safe  we  calculate  the  elec-
tron’s energy relativistically.

E 2 ⫽ p 2c 2 ⫹ (mec 2)2

⫽ (20 MeV/c)2c 2 ⫹ (0.511 MeV)2
⫽ 400(MeV)2

or

a particular  excited  state.  (a)  If  ␶ ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 10⫺8 s  (a
typical  value),  use  the  uncertainty  principle  to  compute
the  line  width  ⌬f of  light  emitted  by  the  decay  of  this
excited state.

Solution We  use ⌬E ⌬t ⬇ ប/2,  where  ⌬E is  the  uncer-
tainty in energy of the excited state, and ⌬t ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 10⫺8 s
is  the  average  time  available  to  measure  the  excited  state.
Thus,

⌬E ⬇ បⲐ2 ⌬t ⫽ បⲐ(2.0 ⫻ 10⫺8 s)

Since ⌬E is  also  the  uncertainty  in  energy  of  a  photon
emitted when the excited state decays, and ⌬E ⫽ h⌬f for
a photon,

h ⌬f ⫽ បⲐ(2.0 ⫻ 10⫺8 s)

or

⌬f ⫽

1

4␲ ⫻ 10⫺8 s

⫽ 8.0 ⫻ 106 Hz

(b) If the wavelength of the spectral line involved in this
process is 500 nm, ﬁnd the fractional broadening ⌬f/f.

Solution First, we ﬁnd the center frequency of this line
as follows:

f0 ⫽

c
␭

⫽

3.0 ⫻ 108 m/s
500 ⫻ 10⫺9 m

⫽ 6.0 ⫻ 1014 Hz

Finally, the kinetic energy of an intranuclear electron is

E ⱖ 20 MeV

Hence,

K ⫽ E ⫺ mec 2 ⱖ 19.5 MeV

Since electrons emitted in radioactive decay of the nucleus
(beta  decay)  have  energies  much  less  than  19.5 MeV
(about 1 MeV or less) and it is known that no other mech-
anism  could  carry  off  an  intranuclear  electron’s  energy
during  the  decay  process,  we  conclude  that  electrons  ob-
served in beta decay do not come from within the nucleus
but are actually created at the instant of decay.

EXAMPLE 5.10 The Width of Spectral Lines

Although  an  excited  atom  can  radiate  at  any  time  from
t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ ⬁, the average time after excitation at which
a  group  of  atoms  radiates  is  called  the  lifetime, ␶,  of

⌬f
f0

⫽

8.0 ⫻ 106 Hz
6.0 ⫻ 1014 Hz

⫽ 1.3 ⫻ 10⫺8

This  narrow  natural  line  width  can  be  seen  with  a  sen-
sitive 
interferometer.  Usually,  however,  temperature
and pressure  effects  overshadow  the  natural  line  width
and  broaden  the  line  through  mechanisms  associated
with the Doppler effect and atomic collisions.

Exercise  5 Using  the  nonrelativistic  Doppler  formula,
calculate the Doppler broadening of a 500-nm line emit-
ted by a hydrogen atom at 1000 K. Do this by considering
the  atom  to  be  moving  either  directly toward  or  away
from an observer with an energy of  kBT.
Answer 0.0083 nm, or 0.083 Å.

3
2

5.6 IF ELECTRONS ARE WAVES, WHAT’S WAVING?

Although we have discussed in some detail the notion of de Broglie matter waves,
we have not discussed the precise nature of the ﬁeld ⌿(x, y, z, t) or wavefunc-
tion that represents the matter waves. We have delayed this discussion because ⌿

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.7

THE WAVE – PARTICLE DUALITY

179

(Greek letter psi) is rather abstract. ⌿ is deﬁnitely not a measurable disturbance
requiring a medium for propagation like a water wave or a sound wave. Instead,
the stuff that is waving requires no medium. Furthermore, ⌿ is in general repre-
sented by a complex number and is used to calculate the probability of ﬁnding
the particle at a given time in a small volume of space. If any of this seems confus-
ing, you should not lose heart, as the nature of the wavefunction has been con-
fusing  people  since  its  invention.  It  even  confused  its  inventor,  Erwin
Schrödinger,  who  incorrectly  interpreted  ⌿*⌿ as  the  electric  charge  density.7
The great philosopher of the quantum theory, Bohr, immediately objected to this
interpretation. Subsequently, Max Born offered the currently accepted statistical
view  of  ⌿*⌿ in  late  1926.  The  confused  state  of  affairs  surrounding  ⌿ at  that
time was nicely described in a poem by Walter Huckel:

Erwin with his psi can do
Calculations quite a few.
But one thing has not been seen
Just what does psi really mean?
(English translation by Felix Bloch)

The  currently  held  view  is  that  a  particle  is  described  by  a  function
⌿(x, y, z, t) called the wavefunction. The quantity ⌿*⌿ ⫽ 兩⌿兩2 represents the
probability per unit volume of ﬁnding the particle at a time t in a small volume
of  space  centered  on  (x, y, z).  We  will  treat  methods  of  ﬁnding  ⌿ in  much
more  detail  in  Chapter  6,  but  for  now  all  we  require  is  the  idea  that  the
probability of ﬁnding a particle is directly proportional to 兩⌿兩2.

5.7 THE WAVE – PARTICLE DUALITY

The Description of Electron Diffraction in Terms of ⌿
In this chapter and previous chapters we have seen evidence for both the wave
properties and the particle properties of electrons. Historically, the particle prop-
erties  were  ﬁrst  known  and  connected  with  a  deﬁnite  mass,  a  discrete  charge,
and detection or localization of the electron in a small region of space. Following
these discoveries came the conﬁrmation of the wave nature of electrons in scat-
tering at low energy from metal crystals. In view of these results and because of
the everyday experience of seeing the world in terms of either grains of sand or dif-
fuse water waves, it is no wonder that we are tempted to simplify the issue and
ask, “Well, is the electron a wave or a particle?” The answer is that electrons are
very  delicate  and  rather  plastic — they  behave  like  either  particles  or
waves, depending  on  the  kind  of  experiment  performed  on  them.  In  any
case,  it  is  impossible  to  measure  both  the  wave  and  particle  properties
simultaneously.8 The view of Bohr was expressed in an idea known as comple-
mentarity. As different as they are, both wave and particle views are needed and
they  complement  each  other  to  fully  describe  the  electron.  The  view  of

7⌿* represents the complex conjugate of ⌿. Thus, if ⌿ ⫽ a ⫹ ib, then ⌿* ⫽ a ⫺ ib. In exponential
form, if ⌿ ⫽ Ae i␪, then ⌿* ⫽ Ae⫺i␪. Note that ⌿*⌿ ⫽ 兩⌿兩2; a, b, A, and ␪are all real quantities.
8Many feel that the elder Bragg’s remark, originally made about light, is a more satisfying answer:
Electrons  behave  like  waves  on  Mondays,  Wednesdays,  and  Fridays,  like  particles  on  Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Saturdays, and like nothing at all on Sundays.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Complementarity

180

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Feynman9 was  that  both  electrons  and  photons  behave  in  their  own  inimitable
way. This is like nothing we have seen before, because we do not live at the very
tiny scale of atoms, electrons, and photons.

Perhaps the best way to crystallize our ideas about the wave – particle du-
ality  is  to  consider  a  “simple”  double-slit  electron  diffraction  experiment.
This experiment highlights much of the mystery of the wave – particle para-
dox, shows the impossibility of measuring simultaneously both wave and par-
ticle properties, and illustrates the use of the wavefunction, ⌿, in determin-
ing interference effects. A schematic of the experiment with monoenergetic
(single-wavelength)  electrons  is  shown  in  Figure  5.28.  A  parallel  beam  of
electrons falls on a double slit, which has individual openings much smaller
than D so that single-slit diffraction effects are negligible. At a distance from
the  slits  much  greater  than  D is  an  electron  detector  capable  of  detecting
individual  electrons.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  detector  always  regis-
ters discrete particles localized in space and time. In a real experiment this
can be achieved if the electron source is weak enough (see Fig. 5.29): In all
cases if the detector collects electrons at different positions for a long
enough  time,  a  typical  wave  interference  pattern  for  the  counts  per
minute or probability of arrival of electrons is found (see Fig. 5.28). If
one  imagines  a  single  electron  to  produce  in-phase  “wavelets”  at  the  slits,
standard  wave  theory  can  be  used  to  ﬁnd  the  angular  separation, ␪,  of  the

Electrons

A

B

D

θ

y

x

θ

Electron
detector

Figure  5.28 Electron  diffraction.  D is  much  greater  than  the  individual  slit  widths
and much less than the distance between the slits and the detector.

9R. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1982.

counts

min

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.7

THE WAVE – PARTICLE DUALITY

181

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

central  probability  maximum  from  its  neighboring  minimum.  The  mini-
mum  occurs  when  the  path  length  difference  between  A and B in  Figure
5.28 is half a wavelength, or

As the electron’s wavelength is given by ␭ ⫽ h/px, we see that

D sin ␪ ⫽ ␭/2

sin␪ ⬇ ␪ ⫽

h

2px D

(5.35)

for  small  ␪.  Thus  we  can  see  that  the  dual  nature  of  the  electron  is  clearly
shown in this experiment: although the electrons are detected as particles
at  a  localized  spot  at  some  instant  of  time,  the  probability  of  arrival
at that  spot  is  determined  by  ﬁnding  the  intensity  of  two  interfering
matter waves.

But there is more. What happens if one slit is covered during the experi-
ment? In this case one obtains a symmetric curve peaked around the center
of  the  open  slit,  much  like  the  pattern  formed  by  bullets  shot  through  a
hole in armor plate. Plots of the counts per minute or probability of arrival
of  electrons  with  the  lower  or  upper  slit  closed are  shown  in  Figure  5.30.
These are expressed as the appropriate square of the absolute value of some
wavefunction, 兩⌿1兩2 ⫽ ⌿1*⌿1 or 兩⌿2兩2 ⫽ ⌿2*⌿2,  where  ⌿1 and ⌿2 repre-
sent the cases of the electron passing through slit 1 and slit 2, respectively.
If  an  experiment  is  now  performed  with  slit  1  open  and  slit  2  blocked  for
time T and then slit 1 blocked and slit 2 open for time T, the accumulated
pattern  of  counts  per  minute  is  completely  different  from  the  case  with

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

182

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

2

1

2

1

  22Ψ

counts/min

  12Ψ

Figure 5.30 The probability of ﬁnding electrons at the screen with either the lower
or upper slit closed.

both  slits  open.  Note  in  Figure  5.31  that  there  is  no  longer  a  maximum
probability  of  arrival  of  an  electron  at  ␪ ⫽ 0.  In  fact, the  interference
pattern has been lost and the accumulated result is simply the sum of
the  individual  results. The  results  shown  by  the  black  curves  in  Figure
5.31 are easier to understand and more reasonable than the interference ef-
fects seen with both slits open (blue curve). When only one slit is open at a
time,  we  know  the  electron  has  the  same  localizability  and  indivisibility  at
the  slits  as  we  measure  at  the  detector,  because  the  electron  clearly  goes
through slit 1 or slit 2. Thus, the total must be analyzed as the sum of those
electrons that come through slit 1, 兩⌿1兩2, and those that come through slit
2, 兩⌿2兩2. When both slits are open, it is tempting to assume that the electron
goes through either slit 1 or slit 2 and that the counts per minute are again
given  by  兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2.  We know,  however,  that  the  experimental  results
contradict this. Thus, our assumption that the electron is localized and goes
through  only  one slit when  both  slits  are  open  must  be  wrong  (a  painful
conclusion!). Somehow the electron must be simultaneously present at both
slits in order to exhibit interference.

To ﬁnd the probability of detecting the electron at a particular point on the
screen  with  both  slits  open,  we  may  say  that  the  electron  is  in  a  superposition
state given by

⌿ ⫽ ⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

5.7

THE WAVE – PARTICLE DUALITY

183

Ψ
  22

2

1

D

Ψ
  12

Ψ
  12 +   22

Ψ

Individual
counts/min

Accumulated
counts/min

Figure  5.31 Accumulated  results  from  the  two-slit  electron  diffraction  experiment
with each slit closed half the time. For comparison, the results with both slits open are
shown in color.

Thus, the probability of detecting the electron at the screen is equal to the
quantity 兩⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2兩2 and not 兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2. Because matter waves that start
out  in  phase  at  the  slits  in  general  travel  different  distances  to  the  screen
(see  Fig.  5.28),  ⌿1 and ⌿2 will  possess  a  relative  phase  difference ␾ at  the
screen. Using a phasor diagram (Fig. 5.32) to ﬁnd 兩⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2兩2 immediately
yields

兩⌿兩2 ⫽ 兩⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2兩2 ⫽ 兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2 ⫹ 2兩⌿1兩兩⌿2兩 cos␾

Note  that  the  term  2兩⌿1兩兩⌿2兩  cos ␾ is  an  interference  term  that  predicts  the
interference pattern actually observed in this case. For ease of comparison, a
summary of the results found in both cases is given in Table 5.1.

Ψ1 + Ψ2

Ψ1

Ψ2

φ

Figure 5.32 Phasor diagram to represent the addition of two complex wavefunctions,
⌿1 and ⌿2, differing in phase by ␾.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

184

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

Table 5.1

Case

Wavefunction

Counts/Minute at Screen

Electron is measured to pass
through slit 1 or slit 2
No measurements made on 
electron at slits

⌿1 or ⌿2

⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2

兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2

兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2 ⫹ 2兩⌿1兩兩⌿2兩 cos ␾

A Thought Experiment: Measuring Through
Which Slit the Electron Passes
Another way to view the electron double-slit experiment is to say that the elec-
tron  passes  through  the  upper  or  lower  slit  only  when  one  measures the  elec-
tron  to  do  so.  Once  one  measures  unambiguously  which  slit  the  electron
passes  through  (yes,  you  guessed  it  . . .  here  comes  the  uncertainty  principle
again  . . .),  the  act  of  measurement  disturbs  the  electron’s  path  enough  to
destroy the delicate interference pattern.

Let us look again at our two-slit experiment to see in detail how the inter-
ference  pattern  is  destroyed.10 To determine  which  slit  the  electron  goes
through, imagine that a group of particles is placed right behind the slits, as
shown  in  Figure  5.33.  If  we  use  the  recoil  of  a  small  particle  to  determine

Detecting
particles

Scattered
electron

∆py

∆py

D

Unscattered

electron

θ

px

py

Figure 5.33 A thought experiment to determine through which slit the electron passes.

Screen

10Although we shall use the uncertainty principle in its standard form, it is worth noting that an al-
ternative statement of the uncertainty principle involves this pivotal double-slit experiment: It is
impossible to design any device to determine through which slit the electron passes that will not at the same
time disturb the electron and destroy the interference pattern.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

5.7

THE WAVE – PARTICLE DUALITY

185

 

which slit the electron goes through, we must have the uncertainty in the de-
tecting  particle’s  position,  ⌬y Ⰶ D.  Also,  during  the  collision  the  detecting
particle suffers a change in momentum, ⌬py, equal and opposite to the change
in  momentum  experienced  by  the  electron,  as  shown  in  Figure  5.33.  An
undeviated electron landing at the ﬁrst minimum and producing an interference
pattern has

tan␪ ⬇ ␪ ⫽

py
px

⫽

h

2px D

from Equation 5.35. Thus, we require that an electron scattered by a detecting
particle have

or

⌬py
px

Ⰶ ␪ ⫽

h

2px D

⌬py Ⰶ

h
2D

if the interference pattern is not to be distorted. Because the change in mo-
mentum  of  the  scattered  electron  is  equal  to  the  change  in  momentum  of
the  detecting  particle,  ⌬py Ⰶ h/ 2D also  applies  to  the  detecting  particle.
Thus, we have for the detecting particle

or

⌬py ⌬y Ⰶ

h
2D

⭈ D

⌬py ⌬y Ⰶ

h
2

This  is  a  clear  violation  of  the  uncertainty  principle.  Hence  we  see  that
the small  uncertainties  needed,  both  to  observe  interference  and  to
know which slit the electron goes through, are impossible, because they
violate the uncertainty principle. If ⌬y is small enough to determine which
slit  the  electron  goes  through,  ⌬py is  so  large  that  electrons  heading  for  the
ﬁrst  minimum  are  scattered  into  adjacent  maxima  and  the  interference
pattern is destroyed.

Exercise 6 In a real experiment it is likely that some electrons would miss the detect-
ing particles. Thus, we would really have two categories of electrons arriving at the de-
tector:  those  measured  to  pass  through  a  deﬁnite  slit  and  those  not  observed,  or  just
missed, at the slits. In this case what kind of pattern of counts per minute would be ac-
cumulated by the detector?
Answer A mixture of an interference pattern 兩⌿1 ⫹ ⌿2兩2 (those not measured) and
兩⌿1兩2 ⫹ 兩⌿2兩2 (those measured) would result.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

186

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

5.8 A FINAL NOTE

Scientists once viewed the world as being made up of distinct and unchanging
parts that interact according to strictly deterministic laws of cause and effect. In
the  classical  limit  this  is  fundamentally  correct  because  classical  processes  in-
volve so many quanta that deviations from the average are imperceptible. At the
atomic  level,  however,  we  have  seen  that  a  given  piece  of  matter  (an  electron,
say)  is  not  a  distinct  and  unchanging  part  of  the  universe  obeying  completely
deterministic laws. Such a particle exhibits wave properties when it interacts with
a metal crystal and particle properties a short while later when it registers on a
Geiger counter. Thus, rather than viewing the electron as a distinct and separate
part of the universe with an intrinsic particle nature, we are led to the view that
the  electron  and  indeed  all  particles  are  amorphous  entities  possessing  the
potential  to  cycle  endlessly  between  wave  and  particle  behavior.  We  also  ﬁnd
that it is much more difﬁcult to separate the object measured from the measur-
ing  instrument  at  the  atomic  level,  because  the  type  of  measuring  instrument
determines whether wave properties or particle properties are observed.

SUMMARY

Every lump of matter of mass m and momentum p has wavelike properties with
wavelength given by the de Broglie relation

␭ ⫽

h
p

(5.1)

By  applying  this  wave  theory  of  matter  to  electrons  in  atoms,  de  Broglie  was
able to explain the appearance of integers in certain Bohr orbits as a natural
consequence  of  electron  wave  interference.  In  1927,  Davisson  and  Germer
demonstrated directly the wave nature of electrons by showing that low-energy
electrons  were  diffracted  by  single  crystals  of  nickel.  In  addition,  they  con-
ﬁrmed Equation 5.1.

Although  the  wavelength  of  matter  waves  can  be  experimentally  deter-
mined, it is important to understand that they are not just like other waves be-
cause their frequency and phase velocity cannot be directly measured. In par-
ticular,  the  phase  velocity  of  an  individual  matter  wave  is  greater  than  the
velocity of light and varies with wavelength or wavenumber as

vp ⫽ f ␭ ⫽ 冢 E

h 冣冢 h

p 冣 ⫽ c 冤1 ⫹ 冢 mc

បk 冣2冥1/2

(5.24)

To represent a particle properly, a superposition of matter waves with different
wavelengths,  amplitudes,  and  phases  must  be  chosen  to  interfere  construc-
tively over a limited region of space. The resulting wave packet or group can
then be shown to travel with the same speed as the classical particle. In addi-
tion, a wave packet localized in a region ⌬x contains a range of wavenumbers
⌬k, where ⌬x ⌬k ⱖ . Because px ⫽ បk, this implies that there is an uncertainty
principle for position and momentum:

1
2

⌬px ⌬x ⱖ

ប
2

(5.31)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QUESTIONS

187

In a similar fashion one can show that an energy – time uncertainty relation

exists, given by

⌬E ⌬t ⱖ

ប
2

(5.34)

In  quantum  mechanics  matter  waves  are  represented  by  a  wavefunction
⌿(x, y, z, t).  The  probability  of  ﬁnding  a  particle  represented  by  ⌿ in  a
small volume  centered  at  (x, y, z)  at  time  t is  proportional  to&⌿&2.  The
wave – particle duality of electrons may be seen by considering the passage of
electrons  through  two  narrow  slits  and  their  arrival  at  a  viewing  screen.  We
ﬁnd that although the electrons are detected as particles at a localized spot on
the screen, the probability of arrival at that spot is determined by ﬁnding the
intensity of two interfering matter waves.

Although we have seen the importance of matter waves or wavefunctions in
this chapter, we have provided no method of ﬁnding ⌿ for a given physical sys-
tem. In the next chapter we introduce the Schrödinger wave equation. The so-
lutions  to  this  important  differential  equation  will  provide  us  with  the  wave-
functions for a given system.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. D.  Bohm,  Quantum  Theory,  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ,
Prentice-Hall, 1951. Chapters 3 and 6 in this book give
an  excellent  account  of  wave  packets  and 
the
wave – particle  duality  of  matter  at  a  more  advanced
level.

2. R.  Feynman,  The  Character  of  Physical  Law,  Cambridge,
MA, The MIT Press, 1982, Chapter 6. This monograph is

an  incredibly  lively  and  readable  treatment  of  the 
double-slit  experiment  presented  in  Feynman’s  inim-
itable fashion.

3. B. Hoffman, The Strange Story of the Quantum, New York,
Dover  Publications,  1959.  This  short  book  presents  a
beautifully  written  nonmathematical  discussion  of  the
history of quantum mechanics.

QUESTIONS

1. Is light a wave or a particle? Support your answer by cit-

ing speciﬁc experimental evidence.

2. Is an electron a particle or a wave? Support your answer

by citing some experimental results.

3. An  electron  and  a  proton  are  accelerated  from  rest
through  the  same  potential  difference.  Which  particle
has the longer wavelength?

4. If matter has a wave nature, why is this wavelike charac-

ter not observable in our daily experiences?

5. In what ways does Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom

violate the uncertainty principle?

6. Why is it impossible to measure the position and speed

of a particle simultaneously with inﬁnite precision?

7. Suppose  that  a  beam  of  electrons  is  incident  on  three
or  more  slits.  How  would  this  inﬂuence  the  interfer-
ence  pattern?  Would  the  state  of  an  electron  depend
on the number of slits? Explain.

8. In  describing  the  passage  of  electrons  through  a  slit
and  arriving  at  a  screen,  Feynman  said  that  “electrons
arrive in lumps, like particles, but the probability of ar-
rival  of  these  lumps  is  determined  as  the  intensity  of
the waves would be. It is in this sense that the electron
behaves sometimes like a particle and sometimes like a
wave.” Elaborate on this point in your own words. (For
a further discussion of this point, see R. Feynman, The
Character  of  Physical  Law,  Cambridge,  MA,  MIT  Press,
1982, Chapter 6.)

9. Do you think that most major experimental discoveries
are  made  by  careful  planning  or  by  accident?  Cite
examples.

10. In  the  case  of  accidental  discoveries,  what  traits  must
the experimenter possess to capitalize on the discovery?
11. Are particles even things? An extreme view of the plastic-
ity of electrons and other particles is expressed in this fa-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

188

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

 

mous  quote  of  Heisenberg:  “The  invisible  elementary
particle of modern physics does not have the property of
occupying  space  any  more  than  it  has  properties  like
color or solidity. Fundamentally, it is not a material struc-
ture in space and time but only a symbol that allows the
laws of nature to be expressed in especially simple form.”

Are  you  satisﬁed  with  viewing  science  as  a  set  of
predictive rules or do you prefer to see science as a de-
scription  of  an  objective  world  of  things — in  the  case
of particle physics, tiny, scaled-down things? What prob-
lems are associated with each point of view?

PROBLEMS

5.1 The Pilot Waves of de Broglie

1. Calculate the de Broglie wavelength for a proton mov-

ing with a speed of 106 m/s.

2. Calculate  the  de  Broglie  wavelength  for  an  electron

with kinetic energy (a) 50 eV and (b) 50 keV.

3. Calculate  the  de  Broglie  wavelength  of  a  74-kg  person

who is running at a speed of 5.0 m/s.

4. The “seeing” ability, or resolution, of radiation is deter-
mined by its wavelength. If the size of an atom is of the
order  of  0.1 nm,  how  fast  must  an  electron  travel  to
have a wavelength small enough to “see” an atom?

5. To  “observe”  small  objects,  one  measures  the  diffrac-
tion of particles whose de Broglie wavelength is approx-
imately  equal  to  the  object’s  size.  Find  the  kinetic  en-
ergy  (in  electron  volts)  required  for  electrons  to
resolve  (a)  a  large  organic  molecule  of  size  10 nm,
(b) atomic features of size 0.10 nm, and (c) a nucleus
of  size  10 fm.  Repeat  these  calculations  using  alpha
particles in place of electrons.

6. An  electron  and  a  photon  each  have  kinetic  energy
equal to 50 keV. What are their de Broglie wavelengths?
7. Calculate the de Broglie wavelength of a proton that is

accelerated through a potential difference of 10 MV.

8. Show that the de Broglie wavelength of an electron ac-
celerated  from  rest  through  a  small  potential  differ-
ence V is  given  by 
,  where  ␭ is  in
nanometers and V is in volts.

␭ ⫽ 1.226/√V

9. Find the de Broglie wavelength of a ball of mass 0.20 kg
just  before  it  strikes  the  Earth  after  being  dropped
from a building 50 m tall.

10. An  electron  has  a  de  Broglie  wavelength  equal  to  the
diameter of the hydrogen atom. What is the kinetic en-
ergy  of  the  electron?  How  does  this  energy  compare
with the ground-state energy of the hydrogen atom?

11. For  an  electron  to  be  conﬁned  to  a  nucleus,  its  de
Broglie wavelength would have to be less than 10⫺14 m.
(a) What would be the kinetic energy of an electron con-
ﬁned to this region? (b) On the basis of this result, would
you expect to ﬁnd an electron in a nucleus? Explain.

12. Through  what  potential  difference  would  an  electron
have  to  be  accelerated  to  give  it  a  de  Broglie  wave-
length of 1.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 m?

5.2 The Davisson – Germer Experiment
13. Figure  P5.13  shows  the  top  three  planes  of  a  crystal
with  planar  spacing  d.  If  2d sin ␪ ⫽ 1.01␭ for  the  two
waves  shown,  and  high-energy  electrons  of  wavelength
␭ penetrate  many  planes  deep  into  the  crystal,  which
atomic  plane  produces  a  wave  that  cancels  the  sur-
face reﬂection?  This  is  an  example  of  how  extremely
narrow maxima in high-energy electron diffraction are
formed — that  is,  there  are  no  diffracted  beams  unless
2d sin ␪ is equal to an integral number of wavelengths.

θ

θ

d

0.505λ

d

Figure P5.13

14. (a)  Show  that  the  formula  for  low-energy  electron  dif-
fraction  (LEED),  when  electrons  are  incident  perpen-
dicular to a crystal surface, may be written as

sin ␾ ⫽

nhc

d(2m ec 2K )1/2

where n is the order of the maximum,  d is the atomic
spacing, me is the electron mass, K is the electron’s ki-
netic  energy,  and ␾ is  the  angle  between  the  incident
and diffracted beams. (b) Calculate the atomic spacing

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

in  a  crystal  that  has  consecutive  diffraction  maxima  at
␾ ⫽ 24.1° and ␾ ⫽ 54.9° for 100-eV electrons.

5.3 Wave Groups and Dispersion
15. Show  that  the  group  velocity  for  a  nonrelativistic  free
electron  is  also  given  by  vg ⫽ p/m e ⫽ v0,  where  v0 is
the electron’s velocity.

16. When  a  pebble  is  tossed  into  a  pond,  a  circular  wave
pulse  propagates  outward  from  the  disturbance.  If  you
are alert (and it’s not a sleepy afternoon in late August),
you  will  see  a  ﬁne  structure  in  the  pulse  consisting  of
surface  ripples  moving  inward  through  the circular
disturbance.  Explain  this  effect  in  terms  of group
and phase velocity if the phase velocity of ripples is given

vp ⫽ √2␲S/␭␳,

by 
is the density of the liquid.

where S is the surface tension and ␳

17. The  dispersion  relation  for  free  relativistic  electron

waves is

␻(k) ⫽ √c2k2 ⫹ (m ec2/ប)2

Obtain expressions for the phase velocity vp and group
velocity vg of these waves and show that their product is
a  constant,  independent  of  k.  From  your  result,  what
can you conclude about vg if vp ⬎ c?

5.5 The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
18. A ball of mass 50 g moves with a speed of 30 m/s. If its
speed  is  measured  to  an  accuracy  of  0.1%,  what  is  the
minimum uncertainty in its position?

19. A proton has a kinetic energy of 1.0 MeV. If its momen-
tum  is  measured  with  an  uncertainty  of  5.0%,  what  is
the minimum uncertainty in its position?

20. We wish to measure simultaneously the wavelength and
position of a photon. Assume that the wavelength mea-
surement  gives  ␭ ⫽ 6000 Å  with  an  accuracy  of  one
part  in  a  million,  that  is,  ⌬␭/␭ ⫽ 10⫺6.  What  is  the
minimum uncertainty in the position of the photon?

21. A woman on a ladder drops small pellets toward a spot
on  the  ﬂoor.  (a)  Show  that,  according  to  the  uncer-
tainty principle, the miss distance must be at least

⌬x ⫽ 冢 ប

2m 冣1/2冢 H

2g 冣1/4

where H is  the  initial  height  of  each  pellet  above  the
ﬂoor and m is the mass of each pellet. (b) If H ⫽ 2.0 m
and m ⫽ 0.50 g, what is ⌬x?

22. A  beam  of  electrons  is  incident  on  a  slit  of  variable
width. If it is possible to resolve a 1% difference in mo-
mentum,  what  slit  width  would  be  necessary  to
resolve the interference pattern of the electrons if their
kinetic  energy  is  (a)  0.010  MeV,  (b)  1.0  MeV,  and
(c) 100 MeV?

23. Suppose  Fuzzy,  a  quantum-mechanical  duck,  lives  in  a
world  in  which  h ⫽ 2␲ J ⭈ s.  Fuzzy  has  a  mass  of  2.0  kg
and is initially known to be within a region 1.0 m wide.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

189

(a)  What  is  the  minimum  uncertainty  in  his  speed?
(b) Assuming  this  uncertainty  in  speed  to  prevail  for
5.0  s,  determine  the  uncertainty  in  position  after  this
time.

24. An  electron  of  momentum  p is  at  a  distance  r from  a
stationary  proton.  The  system  has  a  kinetic  energy
K ⫽ p2/2me and potential energy U ⫽ ⫺ke 2/r. Its total
energy  is  E ⫽ K ⫹ U.  If  the  electron  is  bound  to  the
proton to form a hydrogen atom, its average position is
at  the  proton  but  the  uncertainty  in  its  position  is  ap-
proximately equal to the radius, r, of its orbit. The elec-
tron’s  average  momentum  will  be  zero,  but  the  uncer-
tainty in its momentum will be given by the uncertainty
principle.  Treat  the  atom  as  a  one-dimensional  system
in  the  following:  (a)  Estimate  the  uncertainty  in  the
electron’s  momentum  in  terms  of  r.  (b)  Estimate  the
electron’s kinetic, potential, and total energies in terms
of r. (c) The actual value of r is the one that minimizes
the  total  energy,  resulting  in  a  stable  atom.  Find  that
value of r and the resulting total energy. Compare your
answer with the predictions of the Bohr theory.

25. An  excited  nucleus  with  a  lifetime  of  0.100  ns  emits  a
␥ ray of energy 2.00 MeV. Can the energy width (uncer-
tainty  in  energy,  ⌬E )  of  this  2.00-MeV ␥ emission  line
be  directly  measured  if  the  best  gamma  detectors  can
measure energies to ⫾5 eV?

26. Typical measurements of the mass of a subatomic delta
particle (m ⬇ 1230 MeV/c2) are shown in Figure P5.26.
Although the lifetime of the delta is much too short to
measure  directly, 
it  can  be  calculated  from  the
energy – time  uncertainty  principle.  Estimate  the  life-
time  from  the  full  width  at  half-maximum  of  the  mass
measurement distribution shown.

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

 
s
s
a
m

 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

 

i

n
b
h
c
a
e
 
n

i

Each bin
has a width
of 25 MeV/c 2

30

20

10

0

1000

1100

1200

1300

1400

1500

Mass of the delta particle  (MeV/c 2)

Figure  P5.26 Histogram  of  mass  measurements  of  the
delta particle.

5.7 The Wave–Particle Duality
27. A  monoenergetic  beam  of  electrons  is  incident  on  a
single  slit  of  width  0.50  nm.  A  diffraction  pattern  is

190

CHAPTER 5

MATTER WAVES

formed on a screen 20 cm from the slit. If the distance
between successive minima of the diffraction pattern is
2.1 cm, what is the energy of the incident electrons?

28. A neutron beam with a selected speed of 0.40 m/s is di-
rected through a double slit with a 1.0-mm separation.
An  array  of  detectors  is  placed  10  m  from  the  slit.
(a) What is the de Broglie wavelength of the neutrons?
(b)  How  far  off  axis  is  the  ﬁrst  zero-intensity  point  on
the detector array? (c) Can we say which slit any partic-
ular neutron passed through? Explain.

29. A two-slit electron diffraction experiment is done with
slits  of  unequal widths.  When  only  slit  1  is  open,  the
number of electrons reaching the screen per second is
25  times  the  number  of  electrons  reaching  the  screen
per second when only slit 2 is open. When both slits are
open,  an  interference  pattern  results  in  which  the  de-
structive interference is not complete. Find the ratio of
the  probability  of  an  electron  arriving  at  an  interfer-
ence maximum to the probability of an electron arriv-
ing  at  an  adjacent  interference  minimum.  (Hint: Use
the superposition principle).

Additional Problems
30. Robert Hofstadter won the 1961 Nobel prize in physics
for his pioneering work in scattering 20-GeV electrons
from nuclei. (a) What is the ␥ factor for a 20-GeV elec-
tron, where ␥ ⫽ (1 ⫺ v 2/c 2)⫺1/2? What is the momen-
tum  of  the  electron  in  kg ⭈ m/s?  (b)  What  is  the  wave-
length  of  a  20-GeV  electron  and  how  does  it  compare
with the size of a nucleus?

31. An  air  riﬂe  is  used  to  shoot  1.0-g  particles  at  100 m/s
through  a  hole  of  diameter  2.0  mm.  How  far  from
the riﬂe  must  an  observer  be  to  see  the  beam  spread
by 1.0 cm  because  of  the  uncertainty  principle?  Com-
pare this  answer  with  the  diameter  of  the  Universe 
(2 ⫻ 1026 m).

32. An  atom  in  an  excited  state  1.8  eV  above  the  ground
state remains in that excited state 2.0 ␮s before moving
to the ground state. Find (a) the frequency of the emit-
ted photon, (b) its wavelength, and (c) its approximate
uncertainty in energy.

33. A ␲0 meson  is  an  unstable  particle  produced  in  high-
energy particle collisions. It has a mass – energy equiva-
lent of about 135 MeV, and it exists for an average life-
time  of  only  8.7 ⫻ 10⫺17 s  before  decaying  into  two
␥ rays.  Using  the  uncertainty  principle,  estimate  the
fractional uncertainty ⌬m/m in its mass determination.
34. (a)  Find  and  sketch  the  spectral  content  of  the  rec-
tangular  pulse  of  width  2␶ shown  in  Figure  P5.34.
(b) Show that a reciprocity relation ⌬␻ ⌬t ⬇ ␲ holds

V(t )

V0

–τ

+

τ

t

Figure P5.34

in  this  case.  Take  ⌬t ⫽ ␶ and  deﬁne  ⌬␻ similarly.
(c) What  range  of  frequencies 
is  required  to
compose a pulse of width 2␶ ⫽ 1 ␮s? A pulse of width
2␶ ⫽ 1 ns?

35. A matter wave packet. (a) Find and sketch the real part of
the matter wave pulse shape f (x) for a Gaussian ampli-
tude distribution a(k), where

a(k) ⫽ Ae ⫺␣2(k--k 0)2

Note  that  a(k)  is  peaked  at  k0 and  has  a  width  that
decreases  with  increasing  ␣.  (Hint: In  order  to  put

f (x) ⫽ (2␲)⫺1/2冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

冕⫹⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)e ikx dk

into 

the 

standard

form

e⫺az2 dz

,  complete  the  square  in  k.)  (b)  By 

comparing  the  result  for  the  real  part  of  f (x)  to  the
standard  form  of  a  Gaussian  function  with  width  ⌬x,
f (x) ⬀ Ae ⫺(x/2⌬x)2
,  show  that  the  width  of  the  matter
wave pulse is ⌬x ⫽ ␣. (c) Find the width ⌬k of a(k) by
writing a(k)  in  standard  Gaussian  form  and  show  that
⌬x ⌬k ⫽ , independent of ␣.

1
2

36. Consider a freely moving quantum particle with mass m
and  speed  v. Its  energy  is  E ⫽ K ⫹ U ⫽ mv 2 ⫹ 0.  De-
termine  the  phase  speed  of  the  quantum  wave  repre-
senting  the  particle  and  show  that  it  is  different  from
the  speed  at  which  the  particle  transports  mass  and
energy.

1
2

37. In  a  vacuum  tube,  electrons  are  boiled  out  of  a  hot
cathode at a slow, steady rate and accelerated from rest
through  a  potential  difference  of  45.0 V.  Then  they
travel altogether 28.0 cm as they go through an array of
slits  and  fall  on  a  screen  to  produce  an  interference
pattern. Only one electron at a time will be in ﬂight in
the  tube,  provided  the  beam  current  is  below  what
value? In this situation the interference pattern still ap-
pears, showing that each individual electron can inter-
fere with itself.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6
Quantum Mechanics
in One Dimension

Chapter Outline

6.1 The Born Interpretation
6.2 Wavefunction for a 

Free Particle

6.3 Wavefunctions in the 

Presence of Forces

6.4 The Particle in a Box

6.5 The Finite Square Well (Optional)
6.6 The Quantum Oscillator
6.7 Expectation Values
6.8 Observables and Operators
Quantum Uncertainty and the

Eigenvalue Property (Optional)

Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs)

Summary

We  have  seen  that  associated  with  any  particle  is  a  matter  wave  called  the
wavefunction. How this wavefunction affects our description of a particle and
its  behavior  is  the  subject  of  quantum  mechanics, or  wave  mechanics.  This
scheme,  developed  from  1925  to  1926  by  Schrödinger,  Heisenberg,  and  oth-
ers,  makes  it  possible  to  understand  a  host  of  phenomena  involving  elemen-
tary  particles,  atoms,  molecules,  and  solids.  In  this  and  subsequent  chapters,
we  shall  describe  the  basic  features  of  wave  mechanics  and  its  application  to
simple systems. The relevant concepts for particles conﬁned to motion along a
straight line (the x-axis) are developed in the present chapter.

6.1 THE BORN INTERPRETATION

The wavefunction ⌿ contains within it all the information that can be known
about the particle. That basic premise forms the cornerstone of our investiga-
tion:  One  of  our  objectives  will  be  to  discover  how  information  may  be  ex-
tracted from the wavefunction; the other, to learn how to obtain this wavefunc-
tion for a given system.

The  currently  held  view  connects  the  wavefunction  ⌿ with probabilities in

the manner ﬁrst proposed by Max Born in 1925:

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

191

192

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

contributions 

the  doctorate 

Max Born was a German theo-

retical  physicist  who  made
major 
in
many areas of physics, including rela-
tivity,  atomic  and  solid-state  physics,
matrix  mechanics,  the  quantum  me-
chanical treatment of particle scatter-
ing  (“Born  approximation”), 
the
foundations  of  quantum  mechanics
(Born  interpretation  of  ⌿),  optics,
and  the  kinetic  theory  of  liquids.
Born  received 
in
physics from the University of Göttin-
gen  in  1907,  and  he  acquired  an  ex-
tensive  knowledge  of  mathematics  as
the  private  assistant  to  the  great
German  mathematician  David  Hil-
bert.  This  strong  mathematical  back-
ground proved a great asset when he
was  quickly  able 
to  reformulate
Heisenberg’s  quantum  theory  in  a
more consistent way with matrices.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

MAX BORN
(1882 – 1970)

In 1921, Born was offered a post at
the University of Göttingen, where he
helped  build  one  of  the  strongest
physics  centers  of  the  20th  century.
This  group  consisted,  at  one  time

or another,  of  the  mathematicians
Hilbert,  Courant,  Klein,  and  Runge
and 
the  physicists  Born,  Jordan,
Heisenberg,  Franck,  Pohl,  Heitler,
Herzberg,  Nordheim,  and  Wigner,

In  1926, 

among  others. 
shortly
after Schrödinger’s  publication  of
wave  mechanics,  Born 
applied
Schrödinger’s  methods 
to  atomic
scattering  and  developed  the  Born
approximation  method  for  carrying
out  calculations  of  the  probability  of
scattering  of  a  particle  into  a  given
solid  angle.  This  work  furnished  the
basis for Born’s startling (in 1926) in-
terpretation of 兩⌿兩2 as the probability
density. For this so-called statistical in-
terpretation  of  兩⌿兩2 he  was  awarded
the Nobel prize in 1954.

Fired  by  the  Nazis,  Born  left
Germany  in  1933  for  Cambridge
and  eventually  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  where  he  again  became
the  leader  of  a  large  group  investi-
gating  the  statistical  mechanics  of
condensed matter. In his later years,
Born  campaigned  against  atomic
weapons,  wrote  an  autobiography,
and  translated  German  humorists
into English.

Born interpretation of ⌿

The probability that a particle will be found in the inﬁnitesimal interval
dx about the point x, denoted by P(x) dx, is

P(x)dx ⫽ 兩 ⌿(x,t ) 兩2 dx

(6.1)

Therefore,  although  it  is  not  possible  to  specify  with  certainty  the  location
of a particle, it is possible to assign probabilities for observing it at any given
position.  The  quantity  兩⌿兩2,  the  square  of  the  absolute  value  of  ⌿,  repre-
sents the intensity of the matter wave and is computed as the product of ⌿
with its complex conjugate, that is, 兩⌿兩2 ⫽ ⌿*⌿. Notice that ⌿ itself is not a
measurable quantity; however, 兩⌿兩2 is measurable and is just the probability
per unit length, or probability density P(x), for ﬁnding the particle at the
point x at  time  t.  For  example,  the  intensity  distribution  in  a  light  diffrac-
tion pattern is a measure of the probability that a photon will strike a given
point  within  the  pattern.  Because  of  its  relation  to  probabilities,  we  insist
that ⌿(x, t) be a single-valued and continuous function of x and t so that no am-
biguities can arise concerning the predictions of the theory. The wavefunc-
tion ⌿ also should be smooth, a condition that will be elaborated later as it is
needed.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Because the particle must be somewhere along the x-axis, the probabilities

summed over all values of x must add to 1:

冕⬁

⫺⬁

兩 ⌿(x, t ) 兩2 dx ⫽ 1

(6.2)

Ψ
    2

6.1

THE BORN INTERPRETATION

193

Any  wavefunction  satisfying  Equation  6.2  is  said  to  be  normalized. Nor-
malization  is  simply  a  statement  that  the  particle  can  be  found  somewhere
with  certainty.  The  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  particle  in  any  ﬁnite  interval
a ⱕ x ⱕ b is

P ⫽冕b

a

兩 ⌿(x, t)兩 2 dx

(6.3)

That is, the probability is just the area included under the curve of probability
density between the points x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b (Fig. 6.1).

a

x

b

Figure  6.1 The  probability  for
a  particle  to  be  in  the  interval
a ⱕ x ⱕ b is  the  area  under  the
curve from a to b of the probabil-
ity density function 兩⌿(x, t)兩2.

EXAMPLE 6.1 Normalizing the Wavefunction

The initial wavefunction of a particle is given as ⌿(x, 0) ⫽
C exp(⫺兩x 兩/x 0), where C and x 0 are constants. Sketch this
function. Find C in terms of  x 0 such that  ⌿(x, 0) is nor-
malized.

Solution The  given  wavefunction  is  symmetric,  decay-
ing  exponentially  from  the  origin  in  either  direction,  as
shown in Figure 6.2. The decay length x 0 represents the

Ψ

(x, 0)

C

–3x0

–2x0

–x0

x0

 2x0

 3x0

x

Figure  6.2 (Example  6.1)  The  symmetric  wavefunction
⌿(x, 0) ⫽ C exp(⫺兩x 兩/x0). At x ⫽ ⫾x0 the wave amplitude
is down by the factor 1/e from its peak value ⌿(0, 0) ⫽ C.
C is  a  normalizing  constant  whose  proper  value  is
C ⫽ 1/√x 0
.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

distance over which the wave amplitude is diminished by
the factor 1/e from its maximum value ⌿(0, 0) ⫽ C.

The normalization requirement is

1 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

兩 ⌿(x, 0) 兩2 dx ⫽ C 2冕⬁

⫺⬁

e⫺2 兩x 兩/x0 dx

Because the integrand is unchanged when x changes sign
(it is an even function), we may evaluate the integral over
the  whole  axis  as  twice  that  over  the  half-axis  x ⬎ 0,
where 兩x兩 ⫽ x. Then,

1 ⫽ 2C 2冕⬁

0

e⫺2x/x0 dx ⫽ 2C 2 冢 x 0
C ⫽ 1/√x 0

2 冣 ⫽ C 2x 0

Thus, we must take 

for normalization.

EXAMPLE 6.2 Calculating Probabilities

Calculate the probability that the particle in the preced-
ing example will be found in the interval ⫺x 0 ⱕ x ⱕ x 0.

Solution The probability is the area under the curve of
兩⌿(x, 0)兩2 from ⫺x 0 to ⫹x0 and is obtained by integrating
the probability density over the speciﬁed interval:

P ⫽冕x0

⫺x 0

兩 ⌿(x, 0) 兩2 dx ⫽ 2冕x0

0

兩 ⌿(x, 0) 兩2 dx

where  the  second  step  follows  because  the  integrand  is
an even function, as discussed in Example 6.1. Thus,

P ⫽ 2C 2冕x0

0

e⫺2x/x0 dx ⫽ 2C 2(x 0/2)(1 ⫺ e⫺2)

C ⫽ 1/√x 0

Substituting 
into this expression gives for the
probability P ⫽ 1 ⫺ e⫺2 ⫽ 0.8647,  or  about  86.5%,  inde-
pendent of x 0.

194

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

The  fundamental  problem  of  quantum  mechanics  is  this:  Given  the
wavefunction at some initial instant, say t ⴝ 0, ﬁnd the wavefunction at
any subsequent time t. The wavefunction ⌿(x, 0) represents the initial infor-
mation  that  must  be  speciﬁed;  once  this  is  known,  however,  the  wave  propa-
gates according to prescribed laws of nature.

Because it describes how a given system evolves, quantum mechanics is a dy-
namical theory much like Newtonian mechanics. There are, of course, impor-
tant differences. In Newton’s mechanics, the state of a particle at t ⫽ 0 is speci-
ﬁed  by  giving  its  initial  position  x(0)  and  velocity  v(0)— just  two  numbers;
quantum mechanics demands an entire wavefunction ⌿(x, 0)— an inﬁnite set
of  numbers  corresponding  to  the  wavefunction  value  at  every  point  x.  But
both theories describe how this state changes with time when the forces acting
on the particle are known. In Newton’s mechanics x(t) and v(t) are calculated
from Newton’s second law; in quantum mechanics ⌿(x, t) must be calculated
from another law — Schrödinger’s equation.

6.2 WAVEFUNCTION FOR A FREE PARTICLE

A free particle is one subject to no force. This special case can be studied us-
ing prior assumptions without recourse to the Schrödinger equation. The de-
velopment underscores the role of the initial conditions in quantum physics.

The wavenumber k and frequency ␻ of free particle matter waves are given

by the de Broglie relations

k ⫽

p

ប     and    ␻ ⫽

E
ប

For nonrelativistic particles ␻ is related to k as
បk2
2m

␻(k) ⫽

(6.4)

(6.5)

which follows from the classical connection E ⫽ p2/2m between the energy E
and momentum p for a free particle.1

For the wavefunction itself, we should take

⌿k(x, t) ⫽ Aei(kx⫺␻t) ⫽ A{cos(kx ⫺ ␻t) ⫹ i  sin(kx ⫺ ␻t)}

(6.6)

i ⫽ √⫺1

is the imaginary unit. This is an oscillation with wavenumber k,
where 
frequency ␻, and amplitude A. Because the variables x and t occur only in the
combination kx ⫺ ␻t, the oscillation is a traveling wave, as beﬁts a free particle
in  motion.  Further,  the  particular  combination  expressed  by  Equation  6.6  is
that of a plane wave,2 for which the probability density 兩⌿兩2 (⫽ A2) is uniform.
That  is,  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  this  particle  in  any  interval  of  the  x-axis  is
the  same  as  that  for  any  other  interval  of  equal  length  and  does  not  change
with  time.  The  plane  wave  is  the  simplest  traveling  waveform  with  this  prop-

1The  functional  form  for  ␻(k)  was  discussed  in  Section  5.3  for  relativistic  particles,  where
E ⫽ √(cp)2 ⫹ (mc 2)2
. In the nonrelativistic case (v ⬍⬍ c), this reduces to E ⫽ p2/2m ⫹ mc 2. The
rest energy E 0 ⫽ mc 2 can be disregarded in this case if we agree to make E 0 our energy reference.
By measuring all energies from this level, we are in effect setting E 0 equal to zero.
2For a plane wave, the wave fronts (points of constant phase) constitute planes perpendicular to
the direction of wave propagation. In the present case the constant phase requirement kx ⫺ ␻t ⫽
constant demands only that x be ﬁxed, so the wave fronts occupy the y – z planes.

Plane wave representation
for a free particle

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Ψ

(x, 0)

Ψ

(x, t )

a(k )

6.2

WAVEFUNCTION FOR A FREE PARTICLE

195

x

x0

∆x

x

x0 + (

ω
)t
d—-
dk

k

∆k

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure  6.3 (a)  A  wave  packet  ⌿(x,  0)  formed  from  a  superposition  of  plane  waves. 
(b)  The  same  wave  packet  some  time  t later  (real  part  only).  Because  vp ⫽ ␻/k ⫽
បk/2m,  the  plane  waves  with  smaller  wavenumber  move  at  slower  speeds,  and  the
packet  becomes  distorted.  The  body  of  the  packet  propagates  with  the  group  speed
d␻/dk of the plane waves. (c) The amplitude distribution function a(k) for this packet,
indicating  the  amplitude  of  each  plane  wave  in  the  superposition.  A  narrow  wave
packet requires a broad spectral content, and vice versa. That is, the widths ⌬x and ⌬k
are inversely related as ⌬x ⌬k ⬇ 1.

erty — it expresses the reasonable notion that there are no special places for a
free  particle  to  be  found.  The  particle’s  location  is  completely  unknown  at 
t ⫽ 0  and  remains  so  for  all  time;  however,  its  momentum  and  energy  are
known precisely as p ⫽ បk and E ⫽ ប␻, respectively.

But not all free particles are described by Equation 6.6. For instance, we may
establish (by measurement) that our particle initially is in some range ⌬x about
x0. In that case, ⌿(x, 0) must be a wave packet concentrated in this interval, as
shown in Figure 6.3a. The plane wave description is inappropriate now because
the initial wave shape is not given correctly by ⌿k(x, 0) ⫽ eikx. Instead, a sum of
plane waves with different wavenumbers must be used to represent the packet.
Because k is unrestricted, the sum actually is an integral here and we write

⌿(x, 0) ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)eikx dk

(6.7)

Representing a particle with
a wave group

The coefﬁcients a(k) specify the amplitude of the plane wave with wavenumber
k in  the  mixture  and  are  chosen  to  reproduce  the  initial  wave  shape.  For  a
given ⌿(x, 0), the required a(k) can be found from the theory of Fourier inte-
grals. We shall not be concerned with the details of this analysis here; the essen-
tial point is that it can be done for a packet of any shape (see optional Section
5.4). If each plane wave constituting the packet is assumed to propagate inde-
pendently of the others according to Equation 6.6, the packet at any time t is

⌿(x, t) ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)ei {kx⫺␻(k)t } dk

(6.8)

Notice that the initial data are used only to establish the amplitudes a(k); subse-
quently,  the  packet  develops  according  to  the  evolution  of  its  plane  wave  con-
stituents.  Because  each  of  these  constituents  moves  with  a  different  velocity 
vp ⫽ ␻/k (the  phase  velocity),  the  wave  packet  undergoes  dispersion  (see  Sec-
tion 5.3) and the packet changes its shape as it propagates (Fig. 6.3b). The
speed of propagation of the wave packet as a whole is given by the group velocity
d␻/dk of the plane waves forming the packet. Equation 6.8 no longer describes a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

196

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

particle with precise values of momentum and energy. To construct a wave packet
(that  is,  localize  the  particle),  a  mixture  of  wavenumbers  (hence,  particle  mo-
menta) is necessary, as indicated by the different a(k). The amplitudes a(k) fur-
nish  the  so-called  spectral  content of  the  packet,  which  might  look  like  that
sketched in Figure 6.3c. The narrower the desired packet ⌿(x, 0), the broader is
the function a(k) representing that packet. If ⌬x denotes the packet width and
⌬k the extent of the corresponding a(k), one ﬁnds that the product always is a
number of order unity, that is, ⌬x ⌬k ⬇ 1. Together with p ⫽ បk, this implies an
uncertainty principle:

⌬x ⌬p ⬃ ប

(6.9)

EXAMPLE 6.3 Constructing a Wave Packet

Find  the  wavefunction  ⌿(x,  0)  that  results  from  taking
the  function 
,  where  C and
␣ are constants. Estimate the product ⌬x ⌬k for this case.

a(k) ⫽ (C␣/√␲)exp(⫺␣2k 2)

Solution The function ⌿(x, 0) is given by the integral
of Equation 6.7 or

⌿(x, 0) ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

a(k)eikx dk ⫽

e(ikx⫺␣2k2) dk

C␣

√␲ 冕⬁

⫺⬁

To evaluate the integral, we ﬁrst complete the square in
the exponent as

ikx ⫺ ␣2k2 ⫽ ⫺冢␣k ⫺

ix

2␣冣2

⫺

x2
4␣2

The second term on the right is constant for the integra-
tion over k; to integrate the ﬁrst term we change variables
with the substitution z ⫽ ␣k ⫺ ix/2␣, obtaining

⌿(x, 0) ⫽

e⫺x2/4␣2冕⬁

⫺⬁

C
√␲

e⫺z2

dz

The integral now is a standard one whose value is known
to be 

. Then,

√␲

⌿(x, 0) ⫽ Ce⫺x2/4␣2

⫽ Ce⫺(x/2␣)2

This function ⌿(x, 0), called a Gaussian function, has
a single maximum at x ⫽ 0 and decays smoothly to zero
on either side of this point (Fig. 6.4a). The width of this
Gaussian  packet  becomes  larger  with  increasing  ␣.  Ac-
cordingly, it is reasonable to identify ␣ with ⌬x, the initial
degree  of  localization.  By  the  same  token,  a(k)  also  is  a
Gaussian function, but with amplitude 
and width
1/2␣ (since ␣2k2 ⫽ (k/2[1/2␣])2). Thus, ⌬k ⫽ 1/2␣ and
⌬x⌬k ⫽ 1/2, independent of ␣. The multiplier C is a scale
factor chosen to normalize ⌿.

C␣/√␲

Because our Gaussian packet is made up of many indi-
vidual  waves  all  moving  with  different  speeds,  the  shape
of the packet changes over time. In Problem 4 it is shown
that  the  packet  disperses, its  width  growing  ever  larger
with the passage of time as

⌬x(t) ⫽√[⌬x(0)]2 ⫹ 冤

បt

2m⌬x(0)冥2

Similarly, the peak amplitude diminishes steadily in order
to  keep  the  waveform  normalized  for  all  times  (Fig.
6.4b). The wave as a whole does not propagate, because
for every wavenumber k present in the wave group there
is an equal admixture of the plane wave with the oppos-
ing wavenumber ⫺k.

Ψ

(0, 0) = C

Ψ

(x, 0)

Ψ

(x, t )

Ψ

(0, t ) = C

α
   /∆x(t )
√

C/e

x

0

– 2

α

+ 2

α

α
4
(a)

Ψ

(0, t )/e

x

0

4∆x(t )

(b)

Figure  6.4 (Example  6.3)  (a)  The  Gaussian  wavefunction  ⌿(x,  0) ⫽
C exp{⫺(x/2␣)2},  representing  a  particle  initially  localized  around  x ⫽ 0. C is
the amplitude. At x ⫽ ⫾2␣, the amplitude is down from its maximum value by
the factor 1/e; accordingly, ␣ is identiﬁed as the width of the Gaussian, ␣ ⫽ ⌬x.
(b) The Gaussian wavefunction of Figure 6.4a at time t (apart from a phase fac-
⌬x (t) ⫽ √␣2 ⫹ (បt/2m␣)2
tor). The width has increased to 
and the amplitude
√␣/⌬x (t)
.
is reduced by the factor 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.3

WAVEFUNCTIONS IN THE PRESENCE OF FORCES

197

EXAMPLE 6.4 Dispersion of Matter Waves

An  atomic  electron  initially  is  localized  to  a  region  of
space  0.10 nm  wide  (atomic  size).  How  much  time
elapses  before  this  localization  is  destroyed  by  disper-
sion? Repeat the calculation for a 1.0-g marble initially lo-
calized to 0.10 mm.

Solution Taking  for  the  initial  state  a  Gaussian  wave
shape, we may use the results of the previous example. In
particular, the extent of the matter wave after a time t has
elapsed is

⌬x(t) ⫽√[⌬x(0)]2 ⫹ 冤

បt

2m⌬x(0)冥2

where ⌬x(0) is its initial width. The packet has effectively
dispersed  when  ⌬x(t)  becomes  appreciable  compared 
to ⌬x(0),  say,  ⌬x(t) ⫽ 10 ⌬x(0).  This  happens  when
បt/2m ⫽ √99 [⌬x(0)]2
is 

to  0.10 nm 
(⫽ 10⫺10 m), and its mass is m e ⫽ 9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg. Thus,
the electron wave packet disperses after a time

The  electron 

localized 

, or 

t ⫽ √99 (2m/ប)[⌬x(0)]2

.

initially 

t ⫽ √99 冦 (2)(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)

1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s 冧 (1.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 m)2

⫽ 1.7 ⫻ 10⫺15 s

The  same  calculation  for  a  1.0-g  marble  localized  to
0.10 mm ⫽ 10⫺4 m gives

t ⫽ √99 冦

(2)(10⫺3 kg)

1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s冧 (10⫺4 m)2

⫽ 1.9 ⫻ 1024 s

or  about  6.0 ⫻ 1016 years!  This  is  nearly  10  million 
times  the  currently  accepted  value  for  the  age  of  the
Universe. With its much larger mass, the marble does not
show  the  quantum  effects  of  dispersion  on  any  measur-
able time scale and will, for all practical purposes, remain
localized  “forever.”  By  contrast,  the  localization  of  an
atomic  electron  is  destroyed  in  a  time  that  is  very  short,
on a par with the time it takes the electron to complete
one Bohr orbit.

In closing this section, we note that in principle Equations 6.7 and
6.8 solve the fundamental problem of quantum mechanics for free particles
subject to any initial condition ⌿(x, 0). Because of its mathematical simplic-
ity, the Gaussian wave packet is commonly used to represent the initial sys-
tem state, as in the previous examples. However, the Gaussian form is often
only  an  approximation  to  reality.  Yet  even  in  this  simplest  of  cases,  the
mathematical challenge of obtaining ⌿(x, t) from ⌿(x, 0) tends to obscure
the important results. Numerical simulation affords a convenient alternative
to  analytical  calculation  that  also  aids  in  visualizing  the  important  phe-
nomena  of  wave  packet  propagation  and  dispersion.  To  “see”  quantum
waveforms  in  action  and  further  explore  their  time  evolution,  go  to  our
companion  Web  site  http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e,  select  QMTools
Simulations :  Evolution  of  Free  Particle  Wave  Packets  (Tutorial),  and  fol-
low the on-site instructions.

6.3 WAVEFUNCTIONS IN THE PRESENCE OF FORCES

For  a  particle  acted  on  by  a  force  F, ⌿(x,
Schrödinger’s equation:

t)  must  be  found  from

⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2⌿
⭸x2 ⫹ U(x)⌿ ⫽ i ប

⭸⌿
⭸t

(6.10)

The Schrödinger wave
equation

Again,  we  assume  knowledge  of  the  initial  wavefunction  ⌿(x,  0).  In  this
expression, U(x)  is  the  potential  energy  function  for  the  force  F;  that  is,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

198

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

F ⫽ ⫺dU/dx.  Schrödinger’s  equation  is  not  derivable  from  any  more  basic
principle,  but  is  one  of  the  laws  of  quantum  physics.  As  with  any  law,  its
“truth” must be gauged ultimately by its ability to make predictions that agree
with experiment.

Erwin  Schrödinger  was  an  Aus-

trian  theoretical  physicist  best
known  as  the  creator  of  wave
mechanics. As a young man he was a
good  student  who  liked  mathematics
and physics, but also Latin and Greek
for  their  logical  grammar.  He  re-
ceived a doctorate in physics from the
University  of  Vienna.  Although  his
work  in  physics  was  interrupted  by
World  War  I,  Schrödinger  had  by
1920  produced  important  papers  on
statistical mechanics, color vision, and
general  relativity,  which  he  at  ﬁrst
found  quite  difﬁcult  to  understand.
Expressing his feelings about a scien-
tiﬁc  theory  in  the  remarkably  open
and  outspoken  way  he  maintained
throughout  his 
life,  Schrödinger
found  general  relativity  initially  “de-
pressing”  and  “unnecessarily  compli-
cated.” Other Schrödinger remarks in
this  vein,  with  which  some  readers
will  enthusiastically  agree,  are  as  fol-
lows:  The  Bohr – Sommerfeld  quan-
tum  theory  was  “unsatisfactory,  even
disagreeable.” “I . . . feel intimidated,
not  to  say  repelled,  by  what  seem  to
me the very difﬁcult methods [of ma-
trix  mechanics]  and  by  the  lack  of
clarity.”

Shortly  after  de  Broglie  intro-
duced  the  concept  of  matter  waves
in  1924,  Schrödinger  began  to  de-
velop  a  new  relativistic  atomic  the-
ory  based  on  de  Broglie’s  ideas,  but
his  failure  to  include  electron  spin
led  to  the  failure  of  this  theory  for
hydrogen.  By  January  of  1926,  how-
ever,  by  treating  the  electron  as  a
nonrelativistic  particle,  Schrödinger
had  introduced  his  famous  wave
equation  and  successfully obtained
the energy values and wavefunctions
for  hydrogen.  As  Schrödinger  him-
self pointed out, an outstanding fea-

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER

(1887 – 1961)

ture of his approach was that the dis-
crete  energy  values  emerged  from
his  wave  equation  in  a  natural  way
(as in the case of standing waves on
a  string),  and  in  a  way  superior  to
the  artiﬁcial  postulate  approach  of
Bohr.  Another  outstanding  feature
of Schrödinger’s wave mechanics was
that it was easier to apply to physical
problems  than  Heisenberg’s  matrix
mechanics,  because  it  involved  a
partial  differential  equation  very
similar  to  the  classical  wave  equa-
tion.  Intrigued  by  the  remarkable
differences in conception and math-
ematical method of wave and matrix
mechanics,  Schrödinger  did  much
to  hasten  the  universal  acceptance
of all of quantum theory by demon-
strating  the  mathematical  equiva-
lence of the two theories in 1926.

Although Schrödinger’s wave the-
ory  was  generally  based  on  clear

physical  ideas,  one  of  its  major
problems  in  1926  was  the  physical
interpretation  of  the  wavefunction
⌿. Schrödinger felt that the electron
was  ultimately  a  wave,  ⌿ was  the  vi-
bration  amplitude  of  this  wave,  and
⌿*⌿ was the electric charge density.
As  mentioned  in  Chapter  4,  Born,
Bohr,  Heisenberg, 
and  others
pointed  out  the  problems  with  this
interpretation  and  presented  the
currently accepted view that  ⌿*⌿ is
a probability and that the electron is
ultimately  no  more  a  wave  than
a particle.  Schrödinger  never  ac-
cepted  this  view,  but  registered  his
“concern  and  disappointment”  that
this  “transcendental,  almost  psychi-
cal interpretation” had become “uni-
versally accepted dogma.”

In 1927, Schrödinger, at the invita-
tion  of  Max  Planck,  accepted  the
chair  of 
theoretical  physics  at
the University  of  Berlin,  where  he
formed a close friendship with Planck
and  experienced  six  stable  and  pro-
ductive years. In 1933, disgusted with
the  Nazis  like  so  many  of  his  col-
leagues,  he  left  Germany.  After  sev-
eral moves reﬂecting the political in-
stability  of  Europe,  he  eventually
settled at the Dublin Institute for Ad-
vanced  Studies.  Here  he  spent  17
happy,  creative  years  working  on
problems  in  general  relativity,  cos-
mology, and the application of quan-
tum physics to biology. This last effort
resulted  in  a  fascinating  short  book,
What  is  Life?,  which  induced  many
young physicists to investigate biologi-
cal processes with chemical and phys-
ical  methods.  In  1956,  he  returned
home to his beloved Tyrolean moun-
tains. He died there in 1961.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.3

WAVEFUNCTIONS IN THE PRESENCE OF FORCES

199

The Schrödinger equation propagates the initial wave forward in time. To
see how this works, suppose  ⌿(x, 0) has been given. Then the left-hand side
(LHS)  of  Schrödinger’s  equation  can  be  evaluated  and  Equation  6.10  gives
⭸⌿/⭸t at t ⫽ 0,  the  initial  rate  of  change  of  the  wavefunction.  From  this  we
compute  the  wavefunction  a  short  time,  ␦t,  later  as  ⌿(x, ␦t) ⫽ ⌿(x,  0) ⫹
[⭸⌿/⭸t]0␦t.  This  allows  the  LHS  to  be  re-evaluated,  now  at  t ⫽ ␦t.  With  each
such repetition, ⌿ is advanced another step ␦t into the future. Continuing the
process  generates  ⌿ at  any  later  time  t.  Such  repetitious  calculations  are
ideally suited to computers, and the method just outlined may be used to solve
the Schrödinger equation numerically.3

But  how  can  we  obtain  an  explicit  mathematical  expression  for  ⌿(x, t)?
Returning  to  the  free  particle  case,  we  see  that  the  plane  waves ⌿k(x, t)  of
Equation 6.6 serve a dual purpose: On the one hand, they represent parti-
cles  whose  momentum  (hence,  energy)  is  known  precisely;  on  the  other,
they  become  the  building  blocks  for  constructing  wavefunctions  satisfying
any  initial  condition.  From  this  perspective,  the  question  naturally  arises:
Do analogous functions exist when forces are present? The answer is yes! To
obtain  them  we  look  for  solutions  to  the  Schrödinger  equation  having  the
separable form4

⌿(x, t) ⫽ ␺(x)␾(t)

(6.11)

where ␺(x)  is  a  function  of  x only  and  ␾(t)  is  a  function  of  t only.  (Note
that the  plane  waves  have  just  this  form,  with  ␺(x) ⫽ e ikx and ␾(t) ⫽ e⫺i␻t.)
Substituting  Equation  6.11  into  Equation  6.10  and  dividing  through  by
␺(x)␾(t) gives

⫺

ប2
2m

␺⬙(x)
␺(x)

⫹ U (x) ⫽ i ប

␾⬘(t)
␾(t)

where  primes  denote  differentiation  with  respect  to  the  arguments.  Now
the LHS of this equation is a function of x only,5 and the RHS is a function
of t only. Since we can assign any value of x independently of t, the two sides
of  the  equation  can  be  equal  only  if  each  is  equal  to  the  same
constant, which  we  call  E .6 This  yields  two  equations  determining  the
unknown  functions  ␺(x)  and  ␾(t).  The  resulting  equation  for  the  time-

3This  straightforward  approach  suffers  from  numerical  instabilities  and  does  not,  for  example,
conserve probability. In practice, a more sophisticated discretization scheme is usually employed,
such as that provided by the Crank – Nicholson method. See, for example, section 17.2 of Numeri-
cal  Recipes by  W.  H.  Press,  B.  P.  Flannery,  S.  A.  Teukolsky,  W.  T.  Vetterling,  Cambridge,  U.K.,
Cambridge University Press, 1986.
4Obtaining solutions to partial differential equations in separable form is called separation of vari-
ables. On separating variables, a partial differential equation in, say, N variables is reduced to N
ordinary differential equations, each involving only a single variable. The technique is a general
one  which  may  be  applied  to  many  (but  not  all!)  of  the  partial  differential  equations  encoun-
tered in science and engineering applications.
5Implicitly we have assumed that the potential energy U(x) is a function of x only. For potentials
that also depend on t (for example, those arising from a time-varying electric ﬁeld), solutions to
the Schrödinger equation in separable form generally do not exist.
6More explicitly, changing t cannot affect the LHS because this depends only on x. Since the two
sides of the equation are equal, we conclude that changing t cannot affect the RHS either. It fol-
lows that the RHS must reduce to a constant. The same argument with x replacing t shows the
LHS also must reduce to this same constant.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

200

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

dependent function ␾(t) is

i ប

d␾
dt

⫽ E␾(t)

(6.12)

This  can  be  integrated  immediately  to  give ␾(t) ⫽ e⫺i␻t with ␻ ⫽ E/ប.  Thus,
the time dependence is the same as that obtained for free particles! The equa-
tion for the space function ␺(x) is

Wave equation for matter
waves in separable form

⫺

ប2
2m

d 2␺
dx2 ⫹ U(x)␺(x) ⫽ E␺(x)

(6.13)

Equation  6.13  is  called  the  time-independent  Schrödinger  equation. Ex-
plicit solutions to this equation cannot be written for an arbitrary potential en-
ergy function U(x). But whatever its form, ␺(x) must be well behaved because
of its connection with probabilities. In particular, ␺(x) must be everywhere ﬁ-
nite, single-valued, and continuous. Furthermore, ␺(x) must be “smooth,” that
is, the slope of the wave d␺/dx also must be continuous wherever U(x) has a ﬁ-
nite value.7

For free particles we take U(x) ⫽ 0 in Equation 6.13 (to give F ⫽ ⫺dU/dx ⫽
0) and ﬁnd that ␺(x) ⫽ e ikx is a solution with E ⫽ ប2k2/2m. Thus, for free par-
ticles the separation constant E becomes the total particle energy; this identiﬁ-
cation continues to be valid when forces are present. The wavefunction ␺(x)
will change, however, with the introduction of forces, because particle momen-
tum (hence, k) is no longer constant.

The  separable  solutions  to  Schrödinger’s  equation  describe  conditions  of
particular physical interest. One feature shared by all such wavefunctions is es-
pecially noteworthy: Because 兩e⫺i␻t兩2 ⫽ e⫹i␻te⫺i␻t ⫽ e0 ⫽ 1, we have

兩 ⌿(x, t)兩2 ⫽ 兩␺(x)兩2

(6.14)

This  equality  expresses  the  time  independence  of  all  probabilities  calculated
from ⌿(x, t). For this reason, solutions in separable form are called station-
ary states. Thus, for stationary states all probabilities are static and can
be calculated from the time-independent wavefunction ␺(x).

6.4 THE PARTICLE IN A BOX

Of  the  problems  involving  forces,  the  simplest  is  that  of  particle  conﬁne-
ment. Consider a particle moving along the x-axis between the points x ⫽ 0
and x ⫽ L, where L is the length of the “box.” Inside the box the particle is
free;  at  the  endpoints,  however,  it  experiences  strong  forces  that  serve  to

7On rearrangement, the Schrödinger equation speciﬁes the second derivative of the wavefunction
d 2␺/dx2 at any point as

d 2␺
dx2 ⫽

2m
ប2 [U(x) ⫺ E ]␺(x)

It follows that if U(x) is ﬁnite at x, the second derivative also is ﬁnite here and the slope d␺/dx
will be continuous.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.4

THE PARTICLE IN A BOX

201

m

v

x

Figure  6.5 A  particle  of  mass
m and  speed  v bouncing  elasti-
cally  between  two  impenetrable
walls.

contain  it.  A  simple  example  is  a  ball  bouncing  elastically  between  two  im-
penetrable  walls  (Fig.  6.5).  A  more  sophisticated  one  is  a  charged  particle
moving along the axis of aligned metallic tubes held at different potentials,
as shown in Figure 6.6a. The central tube is grounded, so a test charge in-
side this tube has zero electric potential energy and experiences no electric
force. When both outer tubes are held at a high electric potential V, there
are  no  electric  ﬁelds  within  them,  but  strong  repulsive  ﬁelds  arise  in  the
gaps at 0 and L. The potential energy U(x) for this situation is sketched in
Figure 6.6b. As V is increased without limit and the gaps are simultaneously
reduced  to  zero,  we  approach  the  idealization  known  as  the  inﬁnite  square
well, or “box” potential (Fig. 6.6c).

From a classical viewpoint, our particle simply bounces back and forth be-
tween the conﬁning walls of the box. Its speed remains constant, as does its ki-
netic energy. Furthermore, classical physics places no restrictions on the values
of its momentum and energy. The quantum description is quite different and
leads to the interesting phenomenon of energy quantization.

We are interested in the time-independent wavefunction ␺(x) of our parti-
cle. Because it is conﬁned to the box, the particle can never be found outside,
which requires ␺ to be zero in the exterior regions x ⬍ 0 and x ⬎ L. Inside the
box, U(x) ⫽ 0 and Equation 6.13 for ␺(x) becomes, after rearrangement,

d 2␺

dx2 ⫽ ⫺k2␺(x)    with    k2 ⫽

2mE
ប2

Independent  solutions  to  this  equation  are  sin  kx and  cos  kx,  indicating  that
k is  the  wavenumber  of  oscillation.  The  most  general  solution  is  a  linear

V

V

+  +  +  +  +  +  +  +

+  +  +  +  +  +  +  +

q

+  +  +  +  +  +  +  +

+  +  +  +  +  +  +  +

(a)

U = qV

U

E

0

L

x
(b)

∞

∞

0

L

x

(c)

Figure 6.6 (a) Aligned metallic cylinders serve to conﬁne a charged particle. The in-
ner cylinder is grounded, while the outer ones are held at some high electric potential
V.  A  charge  q moves  freely  within  the  cylinders,  but  encounters  electric  forces  in  the
gaps separating them. (b) The electric potential energy seen by this charge. A charge
whose total energy is less than qV is conﬁned to the central cylinder by the strong re-
pulsive  forces  in  the  gaps  at  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L.  (c)  As  V is  increased  and  the  gaps  be-
tween  cylinders  are  narrowed,  the  potential  energy  approaches  that  of  the  inﬁnite
square well.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

202

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

n

4

3

2

1

y
g
r
e
n
E

E4 = 16E1

E3 = 9E1

E2 = 4E1

E1
E = 0

Zero-point energy > 0

Figure  6.7 Energy-level  dia-
gram  for  a  particle  conﬁned  to
a one-dimensional box of width
L.  The  lowest  allowed  energy  is
E1, with value ␲2ប2/2mL2.

Allowed energies for a
particle in a box

combination of these two,

␺(x) ⫽ A sin kx ⫹ B cos kx

for 0 ⬍ x ⬍ L

(6.15)

This interior wave must match the exterior wave at the walls of the box for
␺(x) to be continuous everywhere.8 Thus, we require the interior wave to van-
ish at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L:

␺(0) ⫽ B ⫽ 0
␺(L) ⫽ A sin kL ⫽ 0

(continuity at x ⫽ 0)
(continuity at x ⫽ L)

(6.16)

The  last  condition  requires  that  kL ⫽ n␲,  where  n is  any  positive  integer.9
Because k ⫽ 2␲/␭,  this  is  equivalent  to  ﬁtting  an  integral  number  of  half-
wavelengths into the box (see Fig. 6.9a). Using k ⫽ n␲/L, we ﬁnd that the par-
ticle energies are quantized, being restricted to the values

En ⫽

ប2k2
2m

⫽

n2␲2 ប2
2mL2

n ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

(6.17)

The  lowest  allowed  energy  is  given  by  n ⫽ 1  and  is  E1 ⫽ ␲2ប2/2mL2.  This  is
the ground state. Because En ⫽ n2E1, the excited states for which n ⫽ 2, 3,
4,  . . .  have  energies  4E1,  9E1,  16E1, . . .  An  energy-level  diagram  is  given  in
Figure 6.7. Notice that E ⫽ 0 is not allowed; that is, the particle can never be at
rest. The least energy the particle can have, E1, is called the zero-point energy.
This result clearly contradicts the classical prediction, for which E ⫽ 0 is an ac-
ceptable  energy,  as  are  all  positive  values  of  E.  The  following  example  illus-
trates how this contradiction is reconciled with our everyday experience.

EXAMPLE 6.5 Energy Quantization for a

Macroscopic Object

A  small  object  of  mass  1.00 mg  is  conﬁned  to  move  be-
tween two rigid walls separated by 1.00 cm. (a) Calculate
the minimum speed of the object. (b) If the speed of the
object is 3.00 cm/s, ﬁnd the corresponding value of n.

Solution Treating this as a particle in a box, the energy
of  the  particle  can  only  be  one  of  the  values  given  by
Equation 6.17, or

En ⫽

n2␲2ប2
2mL2 ⫽

n2h2
8mL2

The  minimum  energy  results  from  taking  n ⫽ 1.  For
m ⫽ 1.00 mg and L ⫽ 1.00 cm, we calculate

E1 ⫽

(6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)2
8.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 kg ⭈m2 ⫽ 5.49 ⫻ 10⫺58 J

Because  the  energy  is  all  kinetic,  E1 ⫽ mv 1
minimum speed v1 of the particle is

2/2  and  the

v1 ⫽ √2(5.49 ⫻ 10⫺58 J)/(1.00 ⫻ 10⫺6 kg)

⫽ 3.31 ⫻ 10⫺26 m/s

This  speed  is  immeasurably  small,  so  that  for  practical
purposes  the  object  can  be  considered  to  be  at  rest.
Indeed,  the  time  required  for  an  object  with  this  speed
to move  the  1.00 cm  separating  the  walls  is  about

8Although ␺(x) must be continuous everywhere, the slope of d␺/dx is not continuous at the walls
of the box, where U(x) becomes inﬁnite (cf. footnote 7).
9For n ⫽ 0  (E ⫽ 0),  Schrödinger’s  equation  requires  d 2␺/dx 2 ⫽ 0,  whose  solution  is  given  by 
␺(x) ⫽ Ax ⫹ B for  some  choice  of  constants  A and B.  For  this  wavefunction  to  vanish  at 
x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L, both A and B must be zero, leaving ␺(x) ⫽ 0 everywhere. In such a case the par-
ticle is nowhere to be found; that is, no description is possible when E ⫽ 0. Also, the inclusion of
negative integers n ⬍ 0 produces no new states, because changing the sign of n merely changes
the sign of the wavefunction, leading to the same probabilities as for positive integers.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.4

THE PARTICLE IN A BOX

203

3 ⫻ 1023 s,  or  about  1  million  times  the  present  age  of
the Universe! It is reassuring to verify that quantum me-
chanics  applied  to  macroscopic  objects  does  not  contra-
dict our everyday experiences.

If, instead, the speed of the particle is v ⫽ 3.00 cm/s,

then its energy is

E ⫽

mv2
2

⫽

(1.00 ⫻ 10⫺6 kg)(3.00 ⫻ 10⫺2 m/s)2

2

⫽ 4.50 ⫻ 10⫺10 J

This,  too,  must  be  one  of  the  special  values  En.  To  ﬁnd
which one, we solve for the quantum number n, obtaining

n ⫽

√8mL2E

h

⫽

√(8.00 ⫻ 10⫺10 kg ⭈m2)(4.50 ⫻ 10⫺10 J)

6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s

⫽ 9.05 ⫻ 1023

Notice  that  the  quantum  number  representing  a  typical
speed  for  this  ordinary-size  object  is  enormous.  In  fact,
the value of n is so large that we would never be able to
distinguish  the  quantized  nature  of  the  energy  levels.
That is, the difference in energy between two consecutive
states with quantum numbers n1 ⫽ 9.05 ⫻ 1023 and n2 ⫽
9.05 ⫻ 1023 ⫹ 1 is only about 10⫺33 J, much too small to
be detected experimentally. This is another example that
illustrates  the  working  of  Bohr’s  correspondence  princi-
ple,  which  asserts  that  quantum  predictions  must  agree
with classical results for large masses and lengths.

U(r )

0

r

En

E 3

E 2

E 1

Figure  6.8 (Example  6.6)  Model  of  the  potential  en-
ergy versus r for the one-electron atom.

E1 ⫽

␲2ប2
2m eL2

⫽

␲2(197.3 eV ⭈nm/c)2

2(511 ⫻ 103 eV/c2)(0.200 nm)2

⫽ 9.40 eV

and

E2 ⫽ (2)2E1 ⫽ 4(9.40 eV) ⫽ 37.6 eV

Therefore, the energy that must be supplied to the elec-
tron is

EXAMPLE 6.6 Model of an Atom

⌬E ⫽ E2 ⫺ E1 ⫽ 37.6 eV ⫺ 9.40 eV ⫽ 28.2 eV

An atom can be viewed as a number of electrons moving
around a positively charged nucleus, where the electrons
are subject mainly to the Coulombic attraction of the nu-
cleus  (which  actually  is  partially  “screened”  by  the  inter-
vening  electrons).  The  potential  well  that  each  electron
“sees” is sketched in Figure 6.8. Use the model of a parti-
cle  in  a  box  to  estimate  the  energy  (in  eV)  required  to
raise an atomic electron from the state n ⫽ 1 to the state
n ⫽ 2, assuming the atom has a radius of 0.100 nm.

Solution Taking the length L of the box to be 0.200 nm
(the  diameter  of  the  atom),  m e ⫽ 511 keV/c 2,  and  បc ⫽
197.3 eV ⭈ nm for the electron, we calculate

We could also calculate the wavelength of the photon
that would cause this transition by identifying ⌬E with the
photon energy hc/␭, or

␭ ⫽ hc/⌬E ⫽ (1.24 ⫻ 103 eV ⭈ nm)/(28.2 eV) ⫽ 44.0 nm

This  wavelength  is  in  the  far  ultraviolet  region,  and  it  is
interesting  to  note  that  the  result  is  roughly  correct.  Al-
though  this  oversimpliﬁed  model  gives  a  good  estimate
for  transitions  between  lowest-lying  levels  of  the  atom,
the  estimate  gets  progressively  worse  for  higher-energy
transitions.

Exercise 1 Calculate the minimum speed of an atomic electron modeled as a particle
in a box with walls that are 0.200 nm apart.
Answer 1.82 ⫻ 106 m/s.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

204

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

Returning  to  the  wavefunctions,  we  have  from  Equation  6.15  (with

k ⫽ n␲/L and B ⫽ 0)

Stationary states for a
particle in a box

␺n(x) ⫽ A sin 冢 n␲x
L 冣

for 0 ⬍ x ⬍ L and n ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

(6.18)

For each value of the quantum number n there is a speciﬁc wavefunc-
tion ␺n(x) describing the state of the particle with energy En. Figure 6.9
shows  plots  of  ␺n versus x and  of  the  probability  density  兩␺n兩2 versus x for
n ⫽ 1, 2,  and  3,  corresponding  to  the  three  lowest  allowed  energies  for  the
particle.  For  n ⫽ 1,  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  particle  is  largest  at 
x ⫽ L/2 — this is the most probable position for a particle in this state. For n ⫽ 2,
兩␺兩2 is a maximum at x ⫽ L/4 and again at x ⫽ 3L/4: Both points are equally
likely places for a particle in this state to be found.

There are also points within the box where it is impossible to ﬁnd the parti-
cle.  Again  for  n ⫽ 2, 兩␺兩2 is  zero  at  the  midpoint,  x ⫽ L/2;  for  n ⫽ 3, 兩␺兩2 is
zero at x ⫽ L/3 and at x ⫽ 2L/3, and so on. But this raises an interesting ques-
tion:  How  does  our  particle  get  from  one  place  to  another  when  there  is  no
probability for its ever being at points in between? It is as if there were no path
at  all, and  not  just  that  the  probabilities  兩␺兩2 express  our  ignorance  about  a
world  somehow  hidden  from  view.  Indeed,  what  is  at  stake  here  is  the  very
essence of a particle as something that gets from one place to another by occu-
pying all intervening positions. The objects of quantum mechanics are not par-
ticles, but more complicated things having both particle and wave attributes.

Actual probabilities can be computed only after ␺n is normalized, that is, we

must be sure that all probabilities sum to unity:

 sin2冢 n␲x

L 冣 dx

1 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

兩 ␺n(x) 兩2 dx ⫽ A2冕L

0

␺

∞

0

∞

∞

␺2␺

L

0

x
(a)

x
(b)

∞

n = 3

n = 2

n = 1

L

Figure  6.9 The ﬁrst three allowed stationary states for a particle conﬁned to a one-
dimensional box. (a) The wavefunctions for n ⫽ 1, 2, and 3. (b) The probability distri-
butions for n ⫽ 1, 2, and 3.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.4

THE PARTICLE IN A BOX

205

The integral is evaluated with the help of the trigonometric identity 2 sin2␪ ⫽
1 ⫺ cos 2␪:

冕L

0

sin2 冢 n␲x

L 冣 dx ⫽

1

2 冕L

0

 [1 ⫺ cos(2n␲x/L)] dx

Only the ﬁrst term contributes to the integral, because the cosine integrates to
sin(2n␲x/L),  which  vanishes  at  the  limits  0  and  L.  Thus,  normalization  re-
quires 1 ⫽ A2L/2, or

A ⫽√ 2

L

(6.19)

EXAMPLE 6.7 Probabilities for a Particle

in a Box

A  particle  is  known  to  be  in  the  ground  state  of  an  inﬁ-
nite  square  well  with  length  L.  Calculate  the  probability
that this particle will be found in the middle half of the
well, that is, between x ⫽ L/4 and x ⫽ 3L/4.

Solution The  probability  density  is  given  by  兩␺n兩2 with
n ⫽ 1 for the ground state. Thus, the probability is

P ⫽冕3L/4
⫽ 冢 1

L/4

L 冣冕3L/4

L/4

兩 ␺1 兩2 dx ⫽ 冢 2

L 冣冕3L/4

L/4

 sin2(␲x/L) dx

 [1 ⫺ cos(2␲x/L)] dx

⫽ 冢 1

⫽

1
2

2

L 冣冤 L
⫺ 冢 1

L/4 冥
2␲冣 sin(2␲x/L) 兩3L/4

⫺ 冢 L
2␲冣 [⫺1 ⫺ 1] ⫽ 0.818

Notice  that  this  is  considerably  larger  than 
,  which
would  be  expected  for  a  classical  particle  that  spends
equal time in all parts of the well.

1
2

Exercise 2 Repeat the calculation of Example 6.7 for a particle in the nth state of the
inﬁnite  square  well,  and  show  that  the  result  approaches  the  classical  value 
in  the
limit n : ⬁.

1
2

Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs)
Potential  wells  are  essential  to  the  operation  of  many  modern  electronic  de-
vices, though rarely is the well shape so simple that it can be accurately mod-
eled by the inﬁnite square well discussed in this section. The charge-coupled
device, or CCD, uses potential wells to trap electrons and create a faithful elec-
tronic reproduction of light intensity across the active surface.

For more than two decades now, CCDs have been helping astronomers see
amazing  detail  in  distant  galaxies  using  much  shorter  exposure  times  than
with traditional photographic emulsions (Fig. 6.10). These devices consist of a
two-dimensional array of moveable electron boxes (or wells) created beneath
a set of electrodes formed on the surface of a thin silicon chip (Fig. 6.11). The
silicon serves the dual purpose of emitting an electron when struck by a pho-
ton  and  acting  as  a  local  trap  for  electrons.  The  potential  energy  seen  by  an
electron in this environment is shown by the curve on the right in Figure 6.11,
with the depth coordinate increasing downward. Though far removed from a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

206

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

“box” potential, the well shape nevertheless serves to conﬁne the emitted elec-
trons in the depth dimension. [Each well or picture element (pixel) in the ar-
ray also is isolated electrically from its neighbors, in effect conﬁning the elec-
trons  in  the  remaining  two  dimensions  perpendicular  to  the  ﬁgure.]  The
number of electrons in a given well, and consequently the number of photons
striking a particular point on the chip, may be read out electronically and the
signal  processed  by  computer  to  enhance  the  image.  The  name  “charge-
coupled device” was coined to describe the way the signals are read from the
individual  wells.  A  row  of  wells  containing  trapped  electrons  is  moved  verti-
cally one step at a time by changing the voltage on the vertical electrodes in a
progressive  manner.  When  a  row  reaches  the  output  register,  the  pixels  are
moved  horizontally  by  systematically  changing  the  voltage  on  the  horizontal
electrodes. In this way an entire row is read out in serial fashion by an ampli-
ﬁer at the end of the output register. Figure 6.12 illustrates the operating prin-
ciple.  CCD  development  has  been  impressive  over  the  past  two  decades,  and
currently square arrays of over 4 million pixels (2048 pixels on a side) packed
into a chip of several square centimeters are available. An entire CCD sensor is
shown in Figure 6.13a; Figure 6.13b shows the cross section of a single pixel in
a CCD image sensor, enlarged 5000 times.

CCD imagers possess several advantages over other light detectors. Because
CCDs detect as many as 90% of the photons hitting their surface, they are far
more  sensitive  than  the  best  photographic  emulsions,  which  can  detect  only
2– 3%  of  those  bone-weary  photons  that  have  traveled  millions  of  lightyears
from  distant  galaxies.  In  addition,  CCDs  can  accurately  measure  the  exact
brightness  of  an  object,  since  their  voltage  output  is  directly  proportional  to
light input over a very wide brightness range. Another great feature of CCDs is
their  ability  to  measure  accurately  both  faint  and  bright  objects  in  the  same
frame. This is not true for photographic emulsions, where bright objects wash
out  faint  details.  Faint  objects  are  recorded  by  cooling  the  CCD  with  liquid
nitrogen to keep competing thermally generated electrons (noise) to a mini-
mum. The simultaneous measurement of bright images is limited only by the
ﬁlling of potential wells with electrons. State-of-the-art CCDs can hold as many
as 100,000 electrons in a single well and are about 100 times better than pho-
tographic plates at simultaneously recording bright and faint objects. The abil-
ity  to  record  where  an  incident  photon  strikes  also  is  important  for  locating
the exact position of a faint star. CCDs afford exceptional geometric accuracy
because  each  pixel  position  is  deﬁned  by  the  rigid  physical  structure  of  the

Figure  6.10 Researchers  at
Arizona  State  University,  using
NASA’s  Hubble  Space  Tele-
scope,  believe  they  are  seeing
the  conclusion  of  the  cosmic
epoch where the young galaxies
started  to  shine  in  signiﬁcant
numbers, about 13 billion years
ago.  The  image  shows  some  of
the objects that the team discov-
ered  using  Hubble’s  new  Ad-
vanced  Camera 
for  Surveys
(ACS),  based  on  CCD  technol-
ogy.  Astronomers  believe  that
these  numerous  objects  are
faint  young  star-forming  galax-
ies  seen  when  the  universe  was
seven  times  smaller  than  it  is 
today  (at  redshifts  of  about  6)
and less than a billion years old.
(H-J.  Yan,  R.  Windhorst  and 
S.  Cohen,  Arizona  State  University
and NASA).

Figure 6.11 Structure of a single picture element (pixel)
in  a  CCD  array.  The  sketch  on  the  right  shows  how  the
potential  energy  of  an  electron  varies  with  depth  in  the
device.

Polysilicon gate

Silicon oxide
Silicon nitride

VG

V(x)

n-type Silicon

p-type Silicon

C

x

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.4

THE PARTICLE IN A BOX

207

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

208

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

chip.  (Because  of  their  high  resolution  and  geometric  accuracy,  CCDs  also
are used  to  record  the  paths  of  energetic  elementary  particles  by  collecting
the  electrons  generated  along  their  tracks.)  Finally,  overall  noise  and  signal

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

(b)

Figure 6.14 The “clover leaf,” the quadruply lensed quasar H1413⫹117. The four im-
ages of comparable brightness are only 1 arcsec apart. The spectra of two of the images
are identical, except for some absorption lines in one that presumably come from differ-
ent gas clouds that are in the other’s line of sight. The redshift is 2.55. The rare conﬁgu-
ration and identical spectra show that we are seeing gravitational lensing rather than a
cluster  of  quasars.

(b) A Hubble Space Telescope view, in which the lensing galaxy is revealed. (NASA/ESA)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.5

THE FINITE SQUARE WELL

209

degradation have decreased so markedly in CCDs that as many as 99.9999% of
the  electrons  are  transferred  in  each  well  shift.  This  is  crucial  since  image
readout involves thousands of such transfers.

Figure  6.14a  shows  a  remarkable  quadruply  lensed  quasar.  The  multiple
images  result  when  light  from  a  single  quasar  is  deﬂected  by  gravita-
tional forces  as  it  passes  near  an  intervening  galaxy  on  its  journey  to  Earth.
Figure  16.14b  shows  the  lensing  galaxy,  beautifully  resolved  by  the  CCD
imager on board the Hubble Space Telescope. These, and similar images of-
fer conclusive  proof  of  the  superior  ability  of  CCDs  to  make  extremely
accurate  position  measurements  of  faint  objects  in  the  presence  of  much
brighter ones.

6.5 THE FINITE SQUARE WELL

O P T I O N A L

I

U

II

III

E

0

L

x

Figure  6.15 Potential-energy
diagram  for  a  well  of  ﬁnite
height U and  width  L.  The 
energy E of  the  particle  is  less
than U.

The “box” potential is an oversimpliﬁcation that is never realized in practice. Given
sufﬁcient  energy,  a  particle  can  escape  the  conﬁnes  of  any  well.  The  potential  en-
ergy for a more realistic situation—the ﬁnite square well—is shown in Figure 6.15,
and essentially is that depicted in Figure 6.6b before taking the limit V : ⬁ . A clas-
sical particle with energy E greater than the well height U can penetrate the gaps at
x ⫽ 0 and  x ⫽ L to enter the outer region. Here it moves freely, but with reduced
speed corresponding to a diminished kinetic energy E ⫺ U.

A classical particle with energy E less than U is permanently bound to the region
0 ⬍ x ⬍ L. Quantum mechanics asserts, however, that there is some probability that
the particle can be found outside this region! That is, the wavefunction generally is
nonzero outside the well, and so the probability of ﬁnding the particle here also is
nonzero.  For  stationary  states,  the  wavefunction  ␺(x)  is  found  from  the  time-
independent Schrödinger equation. Outside the well where U(x) ⫽ U, this is

d 2␺

dx2 ⫽ ␣2␺(x)    x ⬍ 0 and x ⬎ L

with ␣2 ⫽ 2m(U ⫺ E )/ប2 a  constant.  Because  U ⬎ E, ␣2 necessarily  is  positive
and the independent solutions to this equation are the real exponentials e⫹␣x and
e⫺␣x. The positive exponential must be rejected in region III where x ⬎ L to keep
␺(x)  ﬁnite  as  x : ⬁;  likewise,  the  negative  exponential  must  be  rejected  in  re-
gion I where x ⬍ 0 to keep ␺(x) ﬁnite as x : ⫺⬁. Thus, the exterior wave takes
the form

␺(x) ⫽ Ae⫹␣x
␺(x) ⫽ Be⫺␣x

for x ⬍ 0

for x ⬎ L

(6.20)

The  coefﬁcients  A and B are  determined  by  matching  this  wave  smoothly  onto
the wavefunction in the well interior. Speciﬁcally, we require ␺(x) and its ﬁrst deriva-
tive d␺/dx to be continuous at x ⫽ 0 and again at x ⫽ L. This can be done only for
certain  values  of  E,  corresponding  to  the  allowed  energies  for  the  bound  particle.
For these energies, the matching conditions specify the entire wavefunction except
for  a  multiplicative  constant,  which  then  is  determined  by  normalization.  Figure
6.16 shows the wavefunctions and probability densities that result for the three low-
est allowed particle energies. Note that in each case the waveforms join smoothly at
the boundaries of the potential well.

The fact that ␺ is nonzero at the walls increases the de Broglie wavelength in the
well (compared with that in the inﬁnite well), and this in turn lowers the energy and
momentum  of  the  particle.  This  observation  can  be  used  to  approximate  the 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

210

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

␺3␺

␺2␺

␺1␺

I

␺32␺

␺22␺

␺ 12␺

I

III

II

(a)

III

II

(b)

Figure 6.16 (a) Wavefunctions for the lowest three energy states for a particle in a
potential well of ﬁnite height. (b) Probability densities for the lowest three energy
states for a particle in a potential well of ﬁnite height.

allowed energies for the bound particle.10 The wavefunction penetrates the exterior
region on a scale of length set by the penetration depth ␦, given by

Penetration depth

␦ ⫽

1
␣

⫽

ប

√2m(U ⫺ E )

(6.21)

Approximate energies for a
particle in a well of ﬁnite
height

Speciﬁcally, at a distance ␦ beyond the well edge, the wave amplitude has fallen to
1/e of  its  value  at  the  edge  and  approaches  zero  exponentially  in  the  exterior  re-
gion. That is, the exterior wave is essentially zero beyond a distance ␦ on either side
of the potential well. If it were truly zero beyond this distance, the allowed energies
would be those for an inﬁnite well of length L ⫹ 2␦ (compare Equation 6.17), or

En ⬇

n2␲2ប2

2m(L ⫹ 2␦)2

n ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

(6.22)

The allowed energies for a particle bound to the ﬁnite well are given approximately
by Equation 6.22 so long as ␦ is small compared with L. But ␦ itself is energy depen-
dent according to Equation 6.21. Thus, Equation 6.22 becomes an implicit relation
for E that must be solved numerically for a given value of n. The approximation is
best  for  the  lowest-lying  states  and  breaks  down  completely  as  E approaches U,
where ␦ becomes inﬁnite. From this we infer (correctly) that the number of bound
states  is  limited  by  the  height  U of  our  potential  well.  Particles  with  energies E ex-
ceeding U are  not  bound  to  the  well,  that  is,  they  may  be  found  with  comparable
probability in the exterior regions. The case of unbound states will be taken up in
the following chapter.

10This  speciﬁc  approximation  method  was  reported  by  S.  Garrett  in  the  Am.  J.  Phys.

47:195 – 196, 1979.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

EXAMPLE 6.8 A Bound Electron

6.6

THE QUANTUM OSCILLATOR

211

Estimate  the  ground-state  energy  for  an  electron  conﬁned  to  a  potential  well  of
width 0.200 nm and height 100 eV.

Solution We solve Equations 6.21 and 6.22 together, using an iterative procedure.
Because  we  expect  E ⬍⬍ U(⫽ 100 eV),  we  estimate  the  decay  length ␦ by  ﬁrst  ne-
glecting E to get

␦ ⬇

ប

√2mU

⫽

⫽ 0.0195 nm

(197.3 eV ⭈nm/c)

√2(511 ⫻ 103 eV/c2)(100 eV)

Thus,  the  effective  width  of  the  (inﬁnite)  well  is  L ⫹ 2␦ ⫽ 0.239 nm,  for  which  we
calculate the ground-state energy:

E ⬇

␲2(197.3 eV ⭈nm/c)2

2(511 ⫻ 103 eV/c2)(0.239 nm)2 ⫽ 6.58 eV

From this E we calculate U ⫺ E ⫽ 93.42 eV and a new decay length

␦ ⬇

(197.3 eV ⭈nm/c)

√2(511 ⫻ 103 eV/c2)(93.42 eV)

⫽ 0.0202 nm

This,  in  turn,  increases  the  effective  well  width  to  0.240 nm  and  lowers  the  ground-
state  energy  to  E ⫽ 6.53 eV.  The  iterative  process  is  repeated  until  the  desired
accuracy is achieved. Another iteration gives the same result to the accuracy reported.
This is in excellent agreement with the exact value, about 6.52 eV for this case.

Bound-state  waveforms  and  allowed  energies  for  the  ﬁnite
Exercise  3
square well also can be found using purely numerical methods. Go to our compan-
ion  Web  site  (http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e)  and  select  QMTools  Simulations
: Exercise 6.3. The applet shows the potential energy for an electron conﬁned to a
ﬁnite  well  of  width  0.200 nm  and  height  100 eV.  Follow  the  on-site  instructions  to
add a stationary wave and determine the energy of the ground state. Repeat the pro-
cedure for the ﬁrst excited state. Compare the symmetry and the number of nodes
for these two wavefunctions. Find the highest-lying bound state for this ﬁnite well.
Count  nodes  to  determine  which  excited  state  this  is,  and  thus  deduce  the  total
number of bound states this well supports.

EXAMPLE 6.9 Energy of a Finite Well: Exact Treatment

Impose  matching  conditions  on  the  interior  and  exterior  wavefunctions  and  show
how these lead to energy quantization for the ﬁnite square well.

Solution The  exterior  wavefunctions  are  the  decaying  exponential  functions
given  by  Equation  6.20  with  decay  constant ␣ ⫽ [2m(U ⫺ E )/ប2]1/2.  The  interior
wave  is  an  oscillation  with  wavenumber  k ⫽ (2mE/ប2)1/2 having  the  same  form  as
that for the inﬁnite well, Equation 6.15; here we write it as

␺(x) ⫽ C sin kx ⫹ D cos kx

for 0 ⬍ x ⬍ L

To join this smoothly onto the exterior wave, we insist that the wavefunction and its
slope be continuous at the well edges x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L. At x ⫽ 0 the conditions for
smooth joining require

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

212

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

A ⫽ D

(continuity of ␺)

␣A ⫽ kC    冢continuity of 

d␺

dx 冣

Dividing the second equation by the ﬁrst eliminates A, leaving

C
D

⫽

␣

k

In the same way, smooth joining at x ⫽ L requires

C sin kL ⫹ D cos kL ⫽ Be⫺␣L

(continuity of ␺)

kC cos kL ⫺ kD sin kL ⫽ ⫺␣Be⫺␣L

冢continuity of 

d␺

dx 冣

Again  dividing  the  second  equation  by  the  ﬁrst  eliminates  B.  Then  replacing  C/D
with ␣/k gives

(␣/k)cos kL ⫺ sin kL
(␣/k)sin kL ⫹ cos kL

⫽ ⫺

␣

k

For a speciﬁed well height U and width L, this last relation can only be satisﬁed for
special  values  of  E (E is  contained  in  both  k and ␣).  For  any  other  energies,  the
waveform will not match smoothly at the well edges, leaving a wavefunction that is
physically  inadmissable.  (Note  that  the  equation  cannot  be  solved  explicitly  for  E;
rather, solutions must be obtained using numerical or graphical methods.)

Exercise 4 Use the result of Example 6.9 to verify that the ground-state energy for
an electron conﬁned to a square well of width 0.200 nm and height 100 eV is about
6.52 eV.

6.6 THE QUANTUM OSCILLATOR

As a ﬁnal example of a potential well for which exact results can be obtained,
let  us  examine  the  problem  of  a  particle  subject  to  a  linear  restoring  force
F ⫽ ⫺Kx. Here x is the displacement of the particle from equilibrium (x ⫽ 0)
and K is  the  force  constant.  The  corresponding  potential  energy  is  given  by
U(x) ⫽ Kx 2.  The  prototype  physical  system  ﬁtting  this  description  is  a  mass
on  a  spring,  but  the  mathematical  description  actually  applies  to  any  object
limited to small excursions about a point of stable equilibrium.

1
2

Consider the general potential function sketched in Figure 6.17. The posi-
tions a, b,  and  c all  label  equilibrium  points  where  the  force  F ⫽ ⫺dU/dx is
zero. Further, positions a and c are examples of stable equilibria, but b is unsta-
ble.  The  stability  of  equilibrium  is  decided  by  examining  the  forces  in  the
immediate neighborhood of the equilibrium point. Just to the left of a, for ex-
ample, F ⫽ ⫺dU/dx is positive, that is, the force is directed to the right; con-
versely, to the right of a the force is directed to the left. Therefore, a particle
displaced slightly from equilibrium at a encounters a force driving it back to
the equilibrium point (restoring force). Similar arguments show that the equi-
librium at c also is stable. On the other hand, a particle displaced in either di-
rection  from  point  b experiences  a  force  that  drives  it  further  away  from
equilibrium — an  unstable  condition.  In  general,  stable  and  unstable  equilib-
ria are marked by potential curves that are concave or convex, respectively, at

U(x)

c

x

a

b

Stable

Unstable

Stable

Figure  6.17 A  general  poten-
tial  function  U(x).  The  points
labeled a and c are positions of
stable  equilibrium,  for  which
dU/dx ⫽ 0  and  d 2U/dx 2 ⬎ 0.
Point b is  a  position  of  unsta-
ble
for  which
dU/dx ⫽ 0 and d 2U/dx 2 ⬍ 0.

equilibrium, 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.6

THE QUANTUM OSCILLATOR

213

the  equilibrium  point.  To  put  it  another  way,  the  curvature  of  U(x)  is
positive  (d2U/dx2 ⬎ 0)  at  a  point  of  stable  equilibrium,  and  negative
(d2U/dx2 ⬍ 0) at a point of unstable equilibrium.

Near a point of stable equilibrium such as a (or c), U(x) can be ﬁt quite well

by a parabola:

U (x) ⫽ U (a) ⫹ 1

2K (x ⫺ a)2

(6.23)

Of  course,  the  curvature  of  this  parabola  (⫽ K )  must  match  that  of  U(x)  at
the equilibrium point x ⫽ a:

K ⫽

d 2U

dx2 兩a

(6.24)

Further,  U(a),  the  potential  energy  at  equilibrium,  may  be  taken  as  zero  if  we
agree to make this our energy reference, that is, if we subsequently measure all
energies from this level. In the same spirit, the coordinate origin may be placed
at x ⫽ a, in effect allowing us to set a ⫽ 0. With U(a) ⫽ 0 and a ⫽ 0, Equation
6.23 becomes the spring potential once again; in other words, a  particle  lim-
ited to small excursions about any stable equilibrium point behaves as if
it were attached to a spring with a force constant K prescribed by the cur-
vature of the true potential at equilibrium. In this way the oscillator becomes
a ﬁrst approximation to the vibrations occurring in many real systems.

Harmonic approximation to
vibrations occurring in real
systems

The  motion  of  a  classical  oscillator  with  mass  m is  simple  harmonic  vibra-
. If the particle is removed from equi-
tion at the angular frequency 
librium a distance A and released, it oscillates between the points x ⫽ ⫺A and
x ⫽ ⫹A (A is  the  amplitude  of  vibration),  with  total  energy  E ⫽ KA2.  By
changing the initial point of release A, the classical particle can in principle be
given any (nonnegative) energy whatsoever, including zero.

␻ ⫽ √K/m

1
2

1
2

The quantum oscillator is described by the potential energy U(x) ⫽ Kx 2 ⫽

m␻2x 2 in the Schrödinger equation. After a little rearrangement we get

1
2

d 2␺
dx2 ⫽

2m

ប2 冢 1

2

m␻2x2 ⫺ E冣 ␺(x)

(6.25)

as  the  equation  for  the  stationary  states  of  the  oscillator.  The  mathematical
technique for solving this equation is beyond the level of this text. (The expo-
nential and trigonometric forms for ␺ employed previously will not work here
because  of  the  presence  of  x 2 in  the  potential.)  It  is  instructive,  however,  to
make some intelligent guesses and verify their accuracy by direct substitution.
The ground-state wavefunction should possess the following attributes:

1. ␺ should be symmetric about the midpoint of the potential well x ⫽ 0.
2. ␺ should be nodeless, but approaching zero for 兩x 兩 large.
Both expectations are derived from our experience with the lowest energy
states of the inﬁnite and ﬁnite square wells, which you might want to review at
this time. The symmetry condition (1) requires ␺ to be some function of x 2;
further, the function must have no zeros (other than at inﬁnity) to meet the
nodeless requirement (2). The simplest choice fulﬁlling both demands is the
Gaussian form

␺(x) ⫽ C 0e⫺␣x2

(6.26)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

214

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

␺0(x)␺

for some as-yet-unknown constants C 0 and ␣. Taking the second derivative of
␺(x) in Equation 6.26 gives (as you should verify)

d 2␺
dx2 ⫽ {4␣2x2 ⫺ 2␣}C0e⫺␣x2

⫽ {4␣2x2 ⫺ 2␣}␺(x)

which has the same structure as Equation 6.25. Comparing like terms between
them, we see that we have a solution provided that both

4␣2 ⫽

2m
ប2

1
2

m␻2    or    ␣ ⫽

m␻
2ប

and

2mE
ប2 ⫽ 2␣ ⫽

m␻

ប     or    E ⫽ 1

2 ប␻

(6.27)

(6.28)

1
2

In  this  way  we  discover  that  the  oscillator  ground  state  is  described  by
the wavefunction ␺0(x) ⫽ C0exp(⫺m␻x2/2ប) and that the energy of this state
is E0 ⫽ ប␻. The constant C0 is reserved for normalization (see Example 6.10).
The  ground-state  wave  ␺0 and  associated  probability  density  兩␺0兩2 are
illustrated in Figure 6.18. The dashed vertical lines mark the limits of vibration
for a classical oscillator with the same energy. Note the considerable penetra-
tion  of  the  wave  into  the  classically  forbidden  regions  x ⬎ A and x ⬍ ⫺A.  A
detailed  analysis  shows  that  the  particle  can  be found in  these  nonclassical
regions about 16% of the time (see Example 6.12).

x

x

0
(a)

␺0(x)2
␺

0
(b)

Figure 6.18 (a) Wavefunction
for  the  ground  state  of  a  parti-
cle  in  the  oscillator  potential
well. (b) The probability density
for  the  ground  state  of  a  parti-
cle  in  the  oscillator  potential
well.  The  dashed  vertical  lines
mark  the  limits  of  vibration  for
a classical particle with the same
energy, 

x ⫽ ⫾A ⫽ ⫾√ប/m␻
.

EXAMPLE 6.10 Normalizing the Oscillator
Ground State Wavefunction

EXAMPLE 6.11 Limits of Vibration for a

Classical Oscillator

Normalize the oscillator ground-state wavefunction found
in the preceding paragraph.

␺0(x) ⫽ C0e⫺m␻x2/2ប
, 

the 

integrated

Solution With 
probability is

冕⬁

⫺⬁

兩 ␺0(x) 兩2 dx ⫽ C 0

e⫺m␻x2/ប dx

2 冕⬁

⫺⬁

Evaluation of the integral requires advanced techniques.
We shall be content here simply to quote the formula

In our case we identify a with m␻/ប and obtain

冕⬁

⫺⬁

冕⬁

⫺⬁

e⫺ax2

dx ⫽√ ␲

a

    a ⬎ 0

兩 ␺0(x) 兩2 dx ⫽ C 0

2 √ ␲ប

m␻

Normalization  requires  this  integrated  probability  to  be
1, leading to

C 0 ⫽ 冢 m␻

␲ប 冣1/4

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Obtain the limits of vibration for a classical oscillator hav-
ing the same total energy as the quantum oscillator in its
ground state.

1
2

Solution The ground-state energy of the quantum oscil-
lator is E0 ⫽ ប␻. At its limits of vibration x ⫽ ⫾A, the clas-
sical  oscillator  has  transformed  all  this  energy  into  elastic
potential  energy  of  the  spring,  given  by  KA2 ⫽ m␻2A2.
Therefore,

1
2

1
2

1
2ប␻ ⫽ 1

2m␻2A2    or    A ⫽√ ប

m␻

The  classical  oscillator  vibrates  in  the  interval  given  by
⫺A ⱕ x ⱕ A,  having  insufﬁcient  energy  to  exceed  these
limits.

EXAMPLE 6.12 The Quantum Oscillator in the

Nonclassical Region

Calculate the probability that a quantum oscillator in its
ground  state  will  be  found  outside  the  range  permitted
for a classical oscillator with the same energy.

 

Solution Because  the  classical  oscillator  is  conﬁned  to
the interval ⫺A ⱕ x ⱕ A, where A is its amplitude of vibra-
tion, the question is one of ﬁnding the quantum oscillator
outside  this  interval.  From  the  previous  example  we  have
A ⫽ √ប/m␻
for a classical oscillator with energy  ប␻. The
quantum  oscillator  with  this  energy  is  described  by
the wavefunction  ␺0(x) ⫽ C0 exp(⫺m␻x2/2ប),  with  C0 ⫽
(m␻/␲ប)1/4 from  Example  6.10.  The  probability  in  ques-
tion is found by integrating the probability density 兩␺0兩2 in
the region beyond the classical limits of vibration, or

1
2

P ⫽冕⫺A

⫺⬁

兩 ␺0 兩2 dx ⫹冕⬁

A

兩 ␺0 兩2 dx

From  the  symmetry  of  ␺0,  the  two  integrals  contribute
equally to P, so

6.6

THE QUANTUM OSCILLATOR

215

P ⫽ 2 冢 m␻

␲ប 冣1/2冕⬁

A

e⫺m␻x2/ប dx

Changing  variables  from  x to
A ⫽ √ប/m␻

(corresponding to z ⫽ 1) leads to

z ⫽ √m␻/ប

x and  using

P ⫽

e⫺z2

dz

2

√␲ 冕⬁

1

Expressions  of  this  sort  are  encountered  frequently  in
probability  studies.  With  the  lower  limit  of  integration
changed  to  a  variable — say,  y — the  result  for  P deﬁnes
the complementary error function erfc(y). Values of the error
function  may  be  found  in  tables.  In  this  way  we  obtain
P ⫽ erfc(1) ⫽ 0.157, or about 16%.

To obtain excited states of the oscillator, a procedure can be followed simi-
lar to that for the ground state. The ﬁrst excited state should be antisymmetric
about the midpoint of the oscillator well (x ⫽ 0) and display exactly one node.
By virtue of the antisymmetry, this node must occur at the origin, so that a suit-
able  trial  solution  would  be ␺(x) ⫽ x exp(⫺␣x2).  Substituting  this  form  into
Equation  6.25  yields  the  same  ␣ as  before,  along  with  the  ﬁrst  excited-state
energy E1 ⫽ ប␻.

Continuing  in  this  manner,  we  could  generate  ever-higher-lying  oscillator
states with their respective energies, but the procedure rapidly becomes too la-
borious to be practical. What is needed is a systematic approach, such as that
provided  by  the  method  of  power  series  expansion.11 Pursuing  this  method
would take us too far aﬁeld, but the result for the allowed oscillator energies is
quite simple and sufﬁciently important that it be included here:

3
2

En ⫽ (n ⫹ 1

2)ប␻

n ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . .

(6.29)

The  energy-level  diagram  following  from  Equation  6.29  is  given  in  Figure
6.19. Note the uniform spacing of levels, widely recognized as the hallmark of
the  harmonic  oscillator  spectrum.  The  energy  difference  between  adjacent
levels  is  just  ⌬E ⫽ ប␻.  In  these  results  we  ﬁnd  the  quantum  justiﬁcation  for
Planck’s revolutionary hypothesis concerning his cavity resonators (see Section
3.2).  In  deriving  his  blackbody  radiation  formula,  Planck  assumed  that  these
resonators  (oscillators),  which  made  up  the  cavity  walls,  could  possess  only
those energies that were multiples of hf ⫽ ប␻. Although Planck could not have
foreseen  the  zero-point  energy  ប␻/2,  it  would  make  no  difference:  His  res-
onators still would emit or absorb light energy in the bundles ⌬E ⫽ hf neces-
sary to reproduce the blackbody spectrum.

11The method of power series expansion as applied to the problem of the quantum oscillator is
developed  in  any  more  advanced  quantum  mechanics  text.  See,  for  example,  E.  E.  Anderson,
Modern Physics and Quantum Mechanics, Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Company, 1971.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Energy levels for the
harmonic oscillator

U(x)

hω
E5 = – 11
2
E4 = – 9
hω
2
hω
E3 = – 7
2
hω
E2 = – 5
2
hω
E1 = – 3
2
hω

x

E0 = – 1
2

∆E = 

hω

0

Figure  6.19 Energy-level  dia-
gram  for  the  quantum  oscilla-
tor.  Note  that  the  levels  are
equally  spaced,  with  a  separa-
tion  equal  to  ប␻.  The  ground
state energy is E0.

216

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

2␺

n

n = 0

– 5

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

– 5

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

n = 1

n = 2

– 5

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

n = 3

– 5

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

n = 10

– 5

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure  6.20 Probability  densities  for  a  few  states  of  the  quantum  oscillator.  The
dashed curves represent the classical probabilities corresponding to the same energies.

The probability densities for some of the oscillator states are plotted in Fig-
ure 6.20. The dashed lines, representing the classical probability densities for
the same energy, are provided for comparison (see Problem 28 for the calcula-
tion  of  classical  probabilities).  Note  that  as  n increases,  agreement  between
the classical and quantum probabilities improves, as expected from the corre-
spondence principle.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

EXAMPLE 6.13 Quantization of 

Vibrational Energy

The energy of a quantum oscillator is restricted to be one
of the values (n ⫹ )ប␻. How can this quantization apply
to the motion of a mass on a spring, which seemingly can
vibrate with any amplitude (energy) whatever?

1
2

the  macroscopic 

level,  a 

Solution The  discrete  values  for  the  allowed  energies
of  the  oscillator  would  go  unnoticed  if  the  spacing
between  adjacent  levels  were  too  small  to  be  detected.
At
laboratory  mass  m
of, say, 0.0100 kg  on  a  spring  having  force  constant
K ⫽ 0.100 N/m (a typical value) would oscillate with an-
gular  frequency 
.  The  corre-
sponding  period  of  vibration  is  T ⫽ 2␲/␻ ⫽ 1.99 s.  In
this case the quantum level spacing is only

␻ ⫽ √K/m ⫽ 3.16 rad/s

6.7

EXPECTATION VALUES

217

Such small energies are far below present limits of detec-
tion.

At the atomic level, however, much higher frequencies
are commonplace. Consider the vibrational frequency of
the hydrogen molecule. This behaves as an oscillator with
K ⫽ 510.5 N/m  and  reduced  mass  ␮ ⫽ 8.37 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg.
The angular frequency of oscillation is therefore

␻ ⫽√ K

␮

⫽√ 510.5 N/m

8.37 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg

⫽ 7.81 ⫻ 1014 rad/s

At  such  frequencies,  the  quantum  of  energy  ប␻ is
0.513 eV, which can be measured easily!

Sharp and fuzzy variables

⌬E ⫽ ប␻ ⫽ (6.582 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈s)(3.16 rad/s)

⫽ 2.08 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV

6.7 EXPECTATION VALUES

It  should  be  evident  by  now  that  two  distinct  types  of  measurable  quantities
are associated with a given wavefunction ⌿(x, t). One type — like the energy E
for the stationary states — is ﬁxed by the quantum number labeling the wave.
Therefore,  every  measurement  of  this  quantity  performed  on  the  system  de-
scribed by ⌿ yields the same value. Quantities such as E we call sharp to distin-
guish them from others — like the position x — for which the wavefunction ⌿
furnishes only probabilities. We say x is an example of a dynamic quantity that
is fuzzy. In  the  following  paragraphs  we  discuss  what  more  can  be  learned
about these “fuzzy” quantities.

A particle described by the wavefunction ⌿ may occupy various places x with
probability given by the wave intensity there, 兩⌿(x)兩2. Predictions made this way
from ⌿ can be tested by making repeated measurements of the particle position.
Table 6.1 shows results that might be obtained in a hypothetical experiment of
this sort. The table consists of 18 entries, each one representing the actual posi-
tion  of  the  particle  recorded  in  that  particular  measurement.  We  see  that  the

Table 6.1 Hypothetical Data Set for Position of a Particle 

as Recorded in Repeated Trials

Position

Position

Position

Trial

(arbitrary units)

Trial

(arbitrary units)

Trial

(arbitrary units)

1
2
3
4
5
6

x1 ⫽ 2.5
x2 ⫽ 3.7
x3 ⫽ 1.4
x4 ⫽ 7.9
x5 ⫽ 6.2
x6 ⫽ 5.4

7
8
9
10
11
12

x 7 ⫽ 8.0
x 8 ⫽ 6.4
x 9 ⫽ 4.1
x10 ⫽ 5.4
x11 ⫽ 7.0
x12 ⫽ 3.3

13
14
15
16
17
18

x13 ⫽ 4.2
x14 ⫽ 8.8
x15 ⫽ 6.2
x16 ⫽ 7.1
x17 ⫽ 5.4
x18 ⫽ 5.3

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

218

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

entry 5.4 occurs most often (in 3 of the 18 trials); it represents the most probable
position based on the data available. The probability associated with this position,
again based on the available data, is 3/18 ⫽ 0.167. These numbers will ﬂuctuate
as additional measurements are taken, but they should approach limiting values.
The theoretical predictions refer to these limiting values. A good test of the the-
ory would require much more data than we have shown in this illustration.

The information in Table 6.1 also can be used to ﬁnd the average position

of the particle:

x ⫽

(2.5 ⫹ 3.7 ⫹ 1.4 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ 5.4 ⫹ 5.3)

18

⫽ 5.46

This  same  number  can  be  found  in  a  different  way.  First,  order  the  table
entries  by  value,  starting  with  the  smallest:  1.4,  2.5,  3.3, . . . ,  5.4,  6.2, . . . ,
8.0, 8.8.  Now  take  each  value,  multiply  by  its  frequency  of  occurrence,  and
sum the results:

1.4 冢 1

18 冣 ⫹ 2.5 冢 1
⫹ 6.2 冢 2

18 冣
18 冣 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ 5.4 冢 3
18 冣 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ 8.8 冢 1
18 冣 ⫽ 5.46

The two procedures are equivalent, but the latter involves a sum over ordered
values rather than individual table entries. We may generalize this last expres-
sion  to  include  other  values  for  the  position  of  the  particle,  provided  we
weight each one by its observed frequency of occurrence (in this case, zero).
This allows us to write a general prescription to calculate the average particle
position from any data set:

x ⫽ 兺xPx

(6.30)

The sum now includes all values of x, each weighted by its frequency or proba-
bility of occurrence Px. Because the possible values of x are distributed contin-
uously over the entire range of real numbers, the sum in Equation 6.30 really
should be an integral and Px should refer to the probability of ﬁnding the par-
ticle in the inﬁnitesimal interval dx about the point x; that is, the probability
Px : P(x)dx,  where  P(x)  is  the  probability  density.  In  quantum  mechanics,
P(x) ⫽ 兩⌿兩2 and the average value of x, written in quantum mechanics as 具x典,
is called the expectation value. Then,

具x 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

x 兩 ⌿(x, t) 兩2 dx

(6.31)

Notice that 具x典 may be a function of time. For a stationary state, however, 兩⌿兩2
is static and, as a consequence, 具x典 is independent of t.

In  similar  fashion  we  ﬁnd  that  the  average  or  expectation  value  for  any

function of x, say f (x), is

具 f 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

f (x)兩 ⌿ 兩2 dx

(6.32)

With f (x) ⫽ U(x), Equation 6.32 becomes 具U 典, the average potential energy of
the particle. With f (x) ⫽ x 2, the quantum uncertainty in particle position may

Average position of a particle

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.7

EXPECTATION VALUES

219

be found. To see how this is done, we return to Table 6.1 and notice that the
entries scatter about the average value. The amount of scatter is measured by
the standard deviation, ␴, of the data, deﬁned as

␴ ⫽√ 兺(x i ⫺ x)2

N

(6.33)

where N is the number of data points — in this case, 18. Writing out the square
under the radical gives

兺(x i)2

N

⫺ 2(x)

兺(x i)

N

⫹ (x)2 兺 冢 1

N 冣 ⫽ (x2) ⫺ 2(x)(x) ⫹ (x)2

⫽ (x2) ⫺ (x)2

and so

␴ ⫽ √(x2) ⫺ (x)2

From  Equation  6.33  we  see  that  if  the  standard  deviation  were  zero,  all  data
entries would be identical and equal to the average. In that case the distribu-
tion is sharp; otherwise, the data exhibit some spread (as in Table 6.1) and the
standard  deviation  is  greater  than  zero.  In  quantum  mechanics  the  standard
deviation, written ⌬x, is often called the uncertainty in position. The preceding
development  implies  that  the  quantum  uncertainty  in  position  can  be  calcu-
lated from expectation values as

⌬x ⫽ √具x2典 ⫺ 具x典2

(6.34)

The degree to which particle position is fuzzy is given by the magnitude of ⌬x;
note that the position is sharp only if ⌬x ⫽ 0.

EXAMPLE 6.14 Standard Deviation 

from Averages

Compute 
given in Table 6.1.

(x2)

and  the  standard  deviation  for  the  data

Solution Squaring  the  data  entries  of  Table  6.1
and adding  the  results  gives  兺(x i)2 ⫽ 603.91.  Dividing
this  by  the  number  of  data  points,  N ⫽ 18,  we  ﬁnd
(x2)

⫽ 603.91/18 ⫽ 33.55. Then,

␴ ⫽ √33.55 ⫺ (5.46)2 ⫽ 1.93

具x典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

x 兩 ⌿ 兩2 dx ⫽ 冢 2

L 冣冕L

0

x sin2 冢 ␲x

L 冣 dx

Making  the  change  of  variable  ␪ ⫽ ␲x/L (so  that  d␪ ⫽
␲dx/L) gives

具x典 ⫽

␪ sin2 ␪ d␪

2L

␲2 冕␲

0

The integral is evaluated with the help of the trigonomet-
ric identity 2 sin2 ␪ ⫽ 1 ⫺ cos 2␪, giving

for this case.

具x典 ⫽

L

␲2 冢冕␲

0

␪ d␪ ⫺冕␲

0

␪ cos 2␪ d␪冣

EXAMPLE 6.15 Location of a Particle in a Box
Compute  the  average  position 具x典 and  the  quantum  un-
certainty  in  this  value,  ⌬x,  for  the  particle  in  a  box,  as-
suming it is in the ground state.

Solution The  possible  particle  positions  within  the
box  are  weighted  according 
the  probability
density given  by  兩⌿兩2 ⫽ (2/L)sin2(n␲x/L),  with  n ⫽ 1
for the ground state. The average position is calculated
as

to 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

An  integration  by  parts  shows  that  the  second  integral
vanishes,  whereas  the  ﬁrst  integrates  to  ␲2/2.  Thus,
the average particle position is the midpoint 具x典 ⫽ L/2 as
expected,  because  there  is  equal  probability  of  ﬁnding
the particle in the left half or the right half of the box.

具x 2典 is  computed  in  much  the  same  way,  but  with  an
extra  factor  of  x in  the  integrand.  After  changing  vari-
ables to ␪ ⫽ ␲x/L, we get

具x2典 ⫽

L2

␲3 冢冕␲

0

␪2 d␪ ⫺冕␲

0

␪2 cos 2␪ d␪冣

220

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

The  ﬁrst  integral  evaluates  to ␲3/3;  the  second  may  be
integrated twice by parts to get

冕␲

0

␪2 cos 2␪ d␪ ⫽ ⫺冕␲

0

␪ sin 2␪ d␪

⫽ 1

2 ␪ cos 2␪兩␲

0 ⫽ ␲/2

Then,

具x2典 ⫽

L2

␲3 冢 ␲3

3

⫺

␲

2 冣 ⫽

L2
3

⫺

L2
2␲2

Finally, the uncertainty in position for this particle is

⌬x ⫽ √具x2典 ⫺ 具x典2 ⫽ L√ 1

3

⫺

1
2␲2 ⫺

1
4

⫽ 0.181L

This  is  an  appreciable  ﬁgure,  amounting  to  nearly  one-
ﬁfth  the  size  of  the  box.  Consequently,  the  whereabouts
of such a particle are largely unknown. With some conﬁ-
dence, we may assert only that the particle is likely to be
in the range L/2 ⫾ 0.181L.

Finally, notice that none of these results depends on the
time, because in a stationary state t enters only through the
exponential  factor  e⫺i␻t,  which  cancels  when  ⌿ is  com-
bined with ⌿* in the calculation of averages. Therefore, it
is generally true that, in a stationary state, all averages,
as well as probabilities, are time independent.

We have  learned  how  to  predict  the  average  position  of  a  particle,  具x典;
the  uncertainty  in  this  position,  ⌬x;  the  average  potential  energy  of  the
particle, 具U 典; and so on. But what about the average momentum 具p典 of the par-
ticle or its average kinetic energy 具K典? These could be calculated if p(x), the
momentum  as  a  function  of  x,  were  known.  In  classical  mechanics,  p(x)  may
be obtained from the equation for the classical path taken by the particle, x(t).
Differentiating this function once gives the velocity v(t). Then inverting x(t) to
get t as a function of x, and substituting this result into v(t), gives v(x) and the
desired relation p(x) ⫽ mv(x). In quantum mechanics, however, x and t are in-
dependent variables—there is no path, nor any function connecting p with x! If
there were, then p could be found from x using p(x) and both x and p would
be known precisely, in violation of the uncertainty principle.

To obtain 具p典 we must try a different approach: We identify the time deriva-
tive  of  the  average  particle  position  with  the  average  velocity  of  the  particle.
After multiplication by m, this gives the average momentum 具p典:

Average momentum of a
particle

具p典 ⫽ m

d具x典
dt

(6.35)

Equation 6.35 cannot be derived from anything we have said previously. When
applied  to  macroscopic  objects  where  the  quantum  uncertainties  in  position
and momentum are small, the averages 具x典 and 具p典 become indistinguishable
from “the” position and “the” momentum of the object, and Equation 6.35 re-
duces to the classical deﬁnition of momentum.

An equivalent expression for 具p典 follows from Equation 6.35 by substituting
具x典 from  Equation  6.31  and  differentiating  under  the  integral  sign.  Using
Schrödinger’s equation to eliminate time derivatives of ⌿ and its conjugate ⌿*
gives (after much manipulation!)

具p典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* 冢 ប

i 冣 ⭸⌿

⭸x

dx

(6.36)

Exercise 5 Show that 具p典 ⫽ 0 for any state of a particle in a box.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.8

OBSERVABLES AND OPERATORS

221

6.8 OBSERVABLES AND OPERATORS

An observable is any particle property that can be measured. The position and
momentum of a particle are observables, as are its kinetic and potential ener-
gies.12 In quantum mechanics, we associate an operator with each of these ob-
servables. Using this operator, one can calculate the average value of the cor-
responding  observable.  An  operator  here  refers  to  an  operation  to  be
performed on whatever function follows the operator. The quantity operated
on  is  called  the  operand. In  this  language  a  constant  c becomes  an  operator,
whose meaning is understood by supplying any function f (x) to obtain cf(x).
Here the operator c means “multiplication by the constant c.” A more compli-
cated  operator  is  d/dx, which,  after  supplying  an  operand  f(x),  means
“take the  derivative  of  f(x)  with  respect  to  x.”  Still  another  example  is 
(d/dx)2 ⫽ (d/dx)(d/dx).  Supplying  the  operand  f(x)  gives  (d/dx)2f(x) ⫽
(d/dx)(df/dx) ⫽ d 2f/dx 2.  Hence,  (d/dx)2 means  “take  the  second  derivative
with respect to x, that is, take the indicated derivative twice.”

The operator concept is useful in quantum mechanics because all expecta-
tion  values  we  have  encountered  so  far  can  be  written  in  the  same  general
form, namely,

具Q 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* [Q ]⌿ dx

(6.37)

Operators in quantum
mechanics

In this expression, Q is the observable and [Q] is the associated operator. The
order of terms in Equation 6.37 is important; it indicates that the operand for [Q]
always  is  ⌿.  Comparing  the  general  form  with  that  for  具p典 in  Equation  6.36
shows  that  the  momentum  operator  is  [p] ⫽ (ប/i)(⭸/⭸x).  Similarly,  writing
x兩⌿兩2 ⫽ ⌿*x⌿ in Equation 6.31 implies that the operator for position is [x] ⫽
x. From [x] and [p] the operator for any other observable can be found. For
instance, the operator for x 2 is just [x 2] ⫽ [x]2 ⫽ x 2. For that matter, the oper-
ator  for  potential  energy  is  simply  [U ] ⫽ U([x]) ⫽ U(x),  meaning  that  aver-
age potential energy is computed as

具U 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* [U ]⌿ dx ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* U(x)⌿ dx

Still another example is the kinetic energy K. Classically, K is a function of p:
K ⫽ p2/2m.  Then 
is  [K] ⫽ ([p])2/2m ⫽
(⫺ប/2m)⭸2/⭸x 2, and average kinetic energy is found from

the  kinetic  energy  operator 

具K 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* [K ]⌿ dx ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* 冢⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2⌿

⭸x2 冣 dx

To ﬁnd the average total energy for a particle, we sum the average kinetic and
potential energies to get

具E 典 ⫽ 具K 典 ⫹ 具U 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

⌿* 冦⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2

⭸x2 ⫹ U (x)冧 ⌿ dx

(6.38)

12By contrast, the wavefunction ⌿, although clearly indispensable to the quantum description, is

not directly measurable and so is not an observable.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

222

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

Table 6.2 Common Observables and 

Associated Operators

Observable

Symbol

Associated Operator

Position

Momentum

Potential energy

Kinetic energy

Hamiltonian

Total energy

x

p

U

K

H

E

x
ប

⭸

⭸x

i
U(x)
ប2

⫺

⫺

i ប

2m
ប2

2m
⭸

⭸t

⭸2
⭸x2
⭸2
⭸x2

⫹ U(x)

The form of this result suggests that the term in the braces is the operator for
total energy. This operator is called the Hamiltonian, symbolized by [H ]:

[H ] ⫽ ⫺

ប2

2m

⭸2
⭸x2

⫹ U(x)

(6.39)

The designation [E] is reserved for another operator, which arises as follows:
Inspection  of  Schrödinger’s  equation  (Equation  6.10)  shows  that  it  can  be
written neatly as [H ]⌿ ⫽ iប⭸⌿/⭸t. Using this in Equation 6.38 gives an equiv-
alent expression for 具E 典 and leads to the identiﬁcation of the energy operator :

[E ] ⫽ i ប

⭸

⭸t

(6.40)

Notice  that  [H ]  is  an  operation  involving  only  the  spatial  coordinate  x,
whereas [E] depends only on the time t. That is, [H ] and [E] really are two
different  operators,  but  they  produce  identical  results  when  applied  to  any
solution of Schrödinger’s equation. This is because the LHS of Schrödinger’s
equation  is  simply  [H ]⌿,  while  the  RHS  is  none  other  than  [E]⌿ (compare
Equation 6.10)! Table 6.2 summarizes the observables we have discussed and
their associated operators.

O P T I O N A L

QUANTUM UNCERTAINTY AND THE
EIGENVALUE PROPERTY

Quantum uncertainty for any
observable Q

In Section 6.7 we showed how ⌬x, the quantum uncertainty in position, could be found
from the expectation values 具x 2典 and 具x典. But the argument given there applies to any
observable, that is, the quantum uncertainty ⌬Q for any observable Q is calculated as

⌬Q ⫽ √具Q2典 ⫺ 具Q 典2

(6.41)

Again, if ⌬Q ⫽ 0, Q is said to be a sharp observable and all measurements of Q yield
the same value. More often, however, ⌬Q ⬎ 0 and repeated measurements reveal a
distribution of values — as in Table 6.1 for the observable x. In such cases, we say the
observable is fuzzy, suggesting that, prior to actual measurement, the particle cannot
be said to possess a unique value of Q.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6.8

OBSERVABLES AND OPERATORS

223

In  classical  physics  all  observables  are  sharp.13 The  extent  to  which  sharp
observables can be speciﬁed in quantum physics is limited by uncertainty principles,
such as

⌬x ⌬p ⱖ

1
2

ប

(6.42)

The uncertainties here are to be calculated from Equation 6.41. Equation 6.42 says
that no matter what the state of the particle, the spread in distributions obtained in
measurements  of  x and  of  p will  be  inversely  related:  when  one  is  small,  the  other
will be large. Alternatively, if the position of the particle is quite “fuzzy,” its momen-
tum can be relatively “sharp,” and vice versa. The degree to which both may be si-
multaneously sharp is limited by the size of ប. The incredibly small value of ប in SI
units is an indication that quantum ideas are unnecessary at the macroscopic level.

Despite restrictions imposed by uncertainty principles, some observables in quan-
tum physics may still be sharp. The energy E of all stationary states is one example.
In the free particle plane waves of Section 6.2 we have another: The plane wave with
wavenumber k,

⌿k(x, t) ⫽ ei(kx⫺␻t)

describes  a  particle  with  momentum  p ⫽ បk.  Evidently,  momentum  is  a  sharp  ob-
servable for this wavefunction. We ﬁnd that the action of the momentum operator
in this instance is especially simple:

[p]⌿k(x, t) ⫽ 冢 ប

i

⭸

⭸x 冣 ei(kx⫺␻t) ⫽ បk⌿k(x, t)

Eigenfunctions and
eigenvalues

that is, the operation [p] returns the original function multiplied by a constant. This
is an example of an eigenvalue problem for the operator [p].14 The wavefunction
⌿k is the eigenfunction, and the constant, in this case បk, is the eigenvalue. Notice that
the eigenvalue is just the sharp value of particle momentum for this wave. This con-
nection between sharp observables and eigenvalues is a general one: For an observ-
able Q to be sharp, the wavefunction must be an eigenfunction of the opera-
tor for Q. Further, the sharp value for Q in this state is the eigenvalue. In this
way the eigenvalue property can serve as a simple test for sharp observables, as the
following examples illustrate.

EXAMPLE 6.16 Plane Waves and Sharp Observables
Use the eigenvalue test to show that the plane wave ⌿k(x, t) ⫽ e i(kx⫺␻t) is one for which
total energy is a sharp observable. What value does the energy take in this case?

Solution To decide the issue we examine the action of the energy operator [E] on
the  candidate  function  ei(kx⫺␻t).  Since  taking  a  derivative  with  respect  to  t of  this
function is equivalent to multiplying the function by ⫺i␻, we have

[E ]ei(kx⫺␻t) ⫽ 冢iប

⭸

⭸t 冣 ei(kx⫺␻t) ⫽ ប␻ei(kx⫺␻t)

13We discount in this discussion any random errors of measurement. In principle at least, the

imprecision resulting from such errors can be reduced to arbitrarily low levels.

14The eigenvalue problem for any operator [Q] is [Q]␺ ⫽ q␺; that is, the result of the opera-
tion  [Q]  on  some  function ␺ is  simply  to  return  a  multiple  q of  the  same  function.  This  is
possible only for certain special functions ␺, the eigenfunctions, and then only for certain spe-
cial values of q, the eigenvalues. Generally, [Q] is known; the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues
are found by imposing the eigenvalue condition.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

224

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

showing that e i(kx⫺␻t) is an eigenfunction of the energy operator [E] and the eigen-
value is ប␻. Thus, energy is a sharp observable and has the value ប␻in this state.

It is instructive to compare this result with the outcome found by using the other
energy operator, [H]. The Hamiltonian for a free particle is simply the kinetic en-
ergy operator [K ], because the potential energy is zero in this case. Then

[H ]ei(kx⫺␻t) ⫽ 冢⫺
⫽ 冢⫺

ប2

⭸2

ប2
2m

⭸x2 冣 ei(kx⫺␻t)
2m 冣 (ik)2ei(kx⫺␻t)

Again, the operation returns the original function with a multiplier, so that ei(kx⫺␻t)
also is an eigenfunction of [H]. The eigenvalue in this case is ប2k2/2m, which also
must  be  the  sharp  value  of  particle  energy.  The  equivalence  with  ប␻ follows  from
the dispersion relation for free particles (see footnote 1).

Exercise 6 Show that total energy is a sharp observable for any stationary state.

EXAMPLE 6.17 Sharp Observables for a Particle in a Box
Are the stationary states of the inﬁnite square well eigenfunctions of [p]? of [p]2? If
so, what are the eigenvalues? Discuss the implications of these results.

⌿(x, t) ⫽ √2/L sin(n␲x/L)e⫺iEnt/ប

Solution The  candidate  function  in  this  case  is  any  one  of  the  square  well  wave-
functions 
.  Because  the  ﬁrst  derivative  gives
(d/dx)sin(n␲x/L) ⫽ (n␲/L)cos(n␲x/L),  we  see  at  once  that  the  operator  [p]  will
not return the original function ⌿, and so these are not eigenfunctions of the mo-
mentum operator. They are, however, eigenfunctions of [p]2. In particular, we have
(d 2/dx 2)sin(n␲x/L) ⫽ ⫺(n␲/L)2sin(n␲x/L), so that

[p]2⌿(x, t) ⫽ ⫺(ប/i)2 冢 n␲
L 冣2

⌿(x, t)

⫽ 冢 n␲ប
L 冣2

⌿(x, t)

The  eigenvalue  is  the  multiplier  (n␲ប/L)2.  Thus,  the  squared  momentum  (or
magnitude of momentum) is sharp for such states, and repeated measurements of
p2 (or 兩p 兩)  for  the  state  labeled  by  n will  give  identical  results  equal  to  (n␲ប/L)2
(or n␲ប/L). By contrast, the momentum itself is not sharp, meaning that different
values for p will be obtained in successive measurements. In particular, it is the sign
or direction of momentum that is fuzzy, consistent with the classical notion of a par-
ticle bouncing back and forth between the walls of the “box.”

SUMMARY

In  quantum  mechanics,  matter  waves  (or  de  Broglie  waves)  are  represented
by a  wavefunction  ⌿(x, t).  The  probability  that  a  particle  constrained  to
move along  the  x-axis  will  be  found  in  an  interval  dx at  time  t is  given  by
兩⌿兩2dx.  These  probabilities  summed  over  all  values  of  x must  total  1  (cer-
tainty). That is,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

冕⬁

⫺⬁

兩 ⌿ 兩2 dx ⫽ 1

(6.2)

This is called the normalization condition. Furthermore, the probability that
the particle will be found in any interval a ⱕ x ⱕ b is obtained by integrating
the probability density 兩⌿兩2 over this interval.

SUMMARY

225

Aside  from  furnishing  probabilities,  the  wavefunction  can  be  used  to  ﬁnd
the average, or expectation value, of any dynamical quantity. The average po-
sition of a particle at any time t is

具x典 ⫽冕⬁
具Q 典 ⫽冕⬁

⫺⬁

In general, the average value of any observable Q at time t is

⌿*x⌿ dx

(6.31)

⫺⬁

⌿*[Q ]⌿ dx

(6.37)

where [Q] is the associated operator. The operator for position is just [x] ⫽ x,
and that for particle momentum is [p] ⫽ (ប/i)⭸/⭸x.

The wavefunction ⌿ must satisfy the Schrödinger equation,

⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2⌿
⭸x2 ⫹ U(x)⌿(x, t) ⫽ i ប

⭸⌿
⭸t

(6.10)

Separable  solutions  to  this  equation,  called  stationary  states, are ⌿(x, t) ⫽
␺(x)e⫺i␻t,  with  ␺(x)  a  time-independent  wavefunction  satisfying  the  time-
independent Schrödinger equation

⫺

ប2
2m

d 2␺
dx2 ⫹ U (x)␺(x) ⫽ E␺(x)

(6.13)

The  approach  of  quantum  mechanics  is  to  solve  Equation  6.13  for ␺ and E,
given the potential energy U(x) for the system. In doing so, we must require

• that ␺(x) be continuous
• that ␺(x) be ﬁnite for all x, including x ⫽ ⫾⬁
• that ␺(x) be single valued
• that d␺/dx be continuous wherever U(x) is ﬁnite
Explicit solutions to Schrödinger’s equation can be found for several poten-
tials of special importance. For a free particle the stationary states are the plane
waves ␺(x) ⫽ eikx of wavenumber k and energy E ⫽ ប2k2/2m. The particle mo-
mentum  in  such  states  is  p ⫽ បk,  but  the  location  of  the  particle  is  completely
unknown. A free particle known to be in some range ⌬x is described not by a
plane  wave,  but  by  a wave  packet, or group, formed  from  a  superposition  of
plane waves. The momentum of such a particle is not known precisely, but only
to some accuracy ⌬p that is related to ⌬x by the uncertainty principle,

⌬x ⌬p ⱖ 1

2 ប

(6.42)

For  a  particle  conﬁned  to  a  one-dimensional  box  of  length  L,  the  station-
ary-state waves are those for which an integral number of half-wavelengths can
be ﬁt inside, that is, L ⫽ n␭/2. In this case the energies are quantized as

En ⫽

n2␲2ប2

2mL2     n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(6.17)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

226

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

and the wavefunctions within the box are given by

␺n(x) ⫽√ 2

L

 sin 冢 n␲x

L 冣    n ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(6.18)

For  the  harmonic  oscillator the  potential  energy  function  is  U(x) ⫽

m␻2x2, and the total particle energy is quantized according to the relation

1
2

En ⫽ 冢n ⫹

1

2 冣 ប␻    n ⫽ 0, 1, 2,  ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(6.29)

The lowest energy is E0 ⫽ ប␻; the separation between adjacent energy levels
is uniform and equal to ប␻. The wavefunction for the oscillator ground state is

1
2

␺0(x) ⫽ C0e⫺␣x2

(6.26)

where ␣ ⫽ m␻/2ប and C0 is a normalizing constant. The oscillator results ap-
ply to any system executing small-amplitude vibrations about a point of stable
equilibrium. The effective spring constant in the general case is

K ⫽ m␻2 ⫽

d 2U

dx2 兩a

(6.24)

with the derivative of the potential evaluated at the equilibrium point a.

The stationary state waves for any potential share the following attributes:
• Their time dependence is e⫺i␻t.
• They yield probabilities that are time independent.
• All average values obtained from stationary states are time independent.
• The  energy  in  any  stationary  state  is  a  sharp  observable; that  is,  re-
peated measurements of particle energy performed on identical systems
always yield the same result, E ⫽ ប␻.

For  other  observables,  such  as  position,  repeated  measurements  usually
yield  different  results.  We  say  these  observables  are  fuzzy. Their  inherent
“fuzziness” is reﬂected by the spread in results about the average value, as mea-
sured  by  the  standard  deviation,  or  uncertainty. The  uncertainty  in  any  ob-
servable Q can be calculated from expectation values as

⌬Q ⫽ √具Q2典 ⫺ 具Q 典2

(6.41)

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. L.  de  Broglie,  New  Perspectives  in  Physics,  New  York,  Basic
Books Inc., 1962. A series of essays by Louis de Broglie on
various  aspects  of  theoretical  physics  and  on  the  history
and philosophy of science. A large part of this work is de-
voted  to  de  Broglie’s  developing  attitudes  toward  the  in-
terpretation of wave mechanics and wave – particle duality.
2. For an in-depth look at the problems of interpretation
and measurement surrounding the formalism of quan-
tum  theory,  see  M.  Jammer,  The  Philosophy  of  Quantum
Mechanics, New York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1974.

3. A  concise,  solid  introduction  to  the  basic  principles  of
quantum  physics  with  applications  may  be  found  in
Chapter 41 of Physics for Scientists and Engineers with Mod-

ern  Physics, 6th  ed.,  by  R.  Serway  and  J.  Jewett,  Jr.,  Bel-
mont, CA, Brooks/Cole – Thomson Learning, 2004.

4. A  novel  but  delightfully  refreshing  exposition  of  quan-
tum  theory  is  presented  by  R.  Feynman,  R.  Leighton,
and  M.  Sands  in  The  Feynman  Lectures  on  Physics  Vol.  III,
Modern Physics, Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co., 1965. This work is more advanced and sophisticated
than  other  introductory  texts  in  the  ﬁeld,  though  still
somewhat below the intermediate level.

5. For  a  very  readable  introduction  to  charge-coupled  de-
vices,  see  “Charge-coupled  Devices  in  Astronomy”,  Sci.
Am.,  volume  247(4),  pp  66 – 74,  Oct.  1982,  by  Jerome
Kristian and Morley Blouke.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QUESTIONS

PROBLEMS

227

1. The probability density at certain points for a particle
in a box is zero, as seen in Figure 6.9. Does this imply
that  the  particle  cannot  move  across  these  points?
Explain.

2. Discuss  the  relation  between  the  zero-point  energy  and

the uncertainty principle.

3. Consider a square well with one ﬁnite wall and one inﬁ-
nite wall. Compare the energy and momentum of a par-
ticle  trapped  in  this  well  to  the  energy  and  momentum
of  an  identical  particle  trapped  in  an  inﬁnite  well  with
the same width.

4. Explain why a wave packet moves with the group velocity

rather than with the phase velocity.

5. According  to  Section  6.2,  a  free  particle  can  be  repre-
sented  by  any  number  of  waveforms,  depending  on  the

values  chosen  for  the  coefﬁcients  a(k).  What  is  the
source of this ambiguity, and how is it resolved?

6. Because  the  Schrödinger  equation  can  be  formulated  in
terms of operators as [H ]⌿ ⫽ [E]⌿, is it incorrect to con-
clude from this the operator equivalence [H ] ⫽ [E]?

7. For  a  particle  in  a  box,  the  squared  momentum  p 2 is  a
sharp  observable,  but  the  momentum  itself  is  fuzzy.  Ex-
plain how this can be so, and how it relates to the classi-
cal motion of such a particle.

8. A philosopher once said that “it is necessary for the very
existence of science that the same conditions always pro-
duce the same results.” In view of what has been said in
this  chapter,  present  an  argument  showing  that  this
statement is false. How might the statement be reworded
to make it true?

PROBLEMS

6.1 The Born Interpretation

1. Of  the  functions  graphed  in  Figure  P6.1,  which  are
candidates for the Schrödinger wavefunction of an ac-
tual  physical  system?  For  those  that  are  not,  state  why
they fail to qualify.

2. A particle is described by the wavefunction

ψ

ψ

ψ

ψ

(a)

(c)

x

x

ψ

(e)

Figure P6.1

x

x

(b)

(d)

x

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

␺(x) ⫽冦A cos 冢 2␲x

0   

otherwise

L 冣    for ⫺

L
4

ⱕ x ⱕ

L
4

(a) Determine the normalization constant A. (b) What
is  the  probability  that  the  particle  will  be  found  be-
tween x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L/8 if a measurement of its posi-
tion is made?

6.2 Wavefunction for a Free Particle

3. A free electron has a wavefunction

␺(x) ⫽ A sin(5 ⫻ 1010 x)

where x is measured in meters. Find (a) the electron’s
de  Broglie  wavelength,  (b)  the  electron’s  momentum,
and (c) the electron’s energy in electron volts.

4. Spreading  of  a  Gaussian  wave  packet.  The  Gaussian
wave packet  ⌿(x,  0)  of  Example  6.3  is  built  out  of
plane waves  according  to  the  amplitude  distribu-
tion function 
.  Calculate
⌿(x, t) for this packet and describe its evolution.

a(k) ⫽ (C␣/√␲)exp(⫺␣2k2)

6.3 Wavefunctions in the Presence of Forces

5. In  a  region  of  space,  a  particle  with  zero  energy  has  a

wavefunction

␺(x) ⫽ Axe⫺x2/L2

(a) Find the potential energy U as a function of x.
(b) Make a sketch of U(x) versus x.

6. The wavefunction of a particle is given by

␺(x) ⫽ A cos(kx) ⫹ B sin(kx)

where A, B, and k are constants. Show that ␺ is a solu-
tion of the Schrödinger equation (Eq. 6.13), assuming

228

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

 

the particle is free (U ⫽ 0), and ﬁnd the corresponding
energy E of the particle.

6.4 The Particle in a Box

7. Show  that  allowing  the  state  n ⫽ 0  for  a  particle  in  a
one-dimensional box violates the uncertainty principle,
⌬x ⌬p ⱖ ប/2.

8. A  bead  of  mass  5.00 g  slides  freely  on  a  wire  20.0 cm
long. Treating this system as a particle in a one-dimen-
sional  box,  calculate  the  value  of  n corresponding
to the  state  of  the  bead  if  it  is  moving  at  a  speed  of
0.100 nm per year (that is, apparently at rest).

9. The nuclear potential that binds protons and neutrons
in  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  is  often  approximated  by  a
square  well.  Imagine  a  proton  conﬁned  in  an  inﬁnite
square well of length 10⫺5 nm, a typical nuclear diame-
ter.  Calculate  the  wavelength  and  energy  associated
with  the  photon  that  is  emitted  when  the  proton  un-
dergoes a transition from the ﬁrst excited state (n ⫽ 2)
to the ground state (n ⫽ 1). In what region of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum does this wavelength belong?

10. An  electron  is  contained  in  a  one-dimensional  box  of
width  0.100  nm.  (a)  Draw  an  energy-level  diagram  for
the electron for levels up to n ⫽ 4. (b) Find the wave-
lengths of all photons that can be emitted by the elec-
tron  in  making  transitions  that  would  eventually  get  it
from the n ⫽ 4 state to the n ⫽ 1 state.

11. Consider  a  particle  moving  in  a  one-dimensional  box
with walls at x ⫽ ⫺L/2 and x ⫽ L/2. (a) Write the wave-
functions and probability densities for the states n ⫽ 1,
n ⫽ 2,  and  n ⫽ 3.  (b)  Sketch  the  wavefunctions  and
probability densities. (Hint: Make an analogy to the case
of a particle in a box with walls at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L.)

12. A ruby laser emits light of wavelength 694.3 nm. If this
light  is  due  to  transitions  from  the  n ⫽ 2  state  to  the
n ⫽ 1  state  of  an  electron  in  a  box,  ﬁnd  the  width  of
the box.

13. A  proton  is  conﬁned  to  moving  in  a  one-dimensional
box of width 0.200 nm. (a) Find the lowest possible en-
ergy of the proton. (b) What is the lowest possible en-
ergy of an electron conﬁned to the same box? (c) How
do you account for the large difference in your results
for (a) and (b)?

14. A particle of mass m is placed in a one-dimensional box
of  length  L.  The  box  is  so  small  that  the  particle’s
motion  is  relativistic,  so  that  E ⫽ p2/2m is not  valid.
(a) Derive  an  expression  for  the  energy  levels  of  the
particle  using  the  relativistic  energy – momentum  rela-
tion  and  the  quantization  of  momentum  that  derives
from conﬁnement. (b) If the particle is an electron in a
box of length L ⫽ 1.00 ⫻ 10⫺12 m, ﬁnd its lowest possi-
ble kinetic energy. By what percent is the nonrelativistic
formula for the energy in error?

15. Consider  a  “crystal”  consisting  of  two  nuclei  and  two
electrons, as shown in Figure P6.15. (a) Taking into ac-
count  all  the  pairs  of  interactions,  ﬁnd  the  potential

energy  of  the  system  as  a  function  of  d.  (b)  Assuming
the electrons to be restricted to a one-dimensional box
of  length  3d, ﬁnd  the  minimum  kinetic  energy  of  the
two  electrons.  (c)  Find  the  value  of  d for  which  the
total energy is a minimum. (d) Compare this value of d
with the spacing of atoms in lithium, which has a den-
sity of 0.53 g/cm3 and an atomic weight of 7. (This type
of  calculation  can  be  used  to  estimate  the  densities  of
crystals and certain stars.)

q1
–

q2
+

q1
–

q2
+

q1 = –e

q2 = +e

d

d

d

Figure P6.15

16. An electron is trapped in an inﬁnitely deep potential well
0.300 nm  in  width.  (a)  If  the  electron  is  in  its  ground
state, what is the probability of ﬁnding it within 0.100 nm
of  the  left-hand  wall?  (b)  Repeat  (a)  for  an  electron  in
the  99th  excited  state  (n ⫽ 100).  (c)  Are  your  answers
consistent with the correspondence principle?

17. An electron is trapped at a defect in a crystal. The de-
fect may be modeled as a one-dimensional, rigid-walled
box  of  width  1.00 nm.  (a)  Sketch  the  wavefunctions
and  probability  densities  for  the  n ⫽ 1  and  n ⫽ 2
states.  (b)  For  the  n ⫽ 1  state,  ﬁnd  the  probability
of ﬁnding  the  electron  between  x1 ⫽ 0.15 nm  and
x 2 ⫽ 0.35 nm,  where  x ⫽ 0  is  the  left  side  of  the  box.
(c) Repeat (b) for the n ⫽ 2 state. (d) Calculate the en-
ergies in electron volts of the n ⫽ 1 and n ⫽ 2 states.

18. Find the points of maximum and minimum probability
density  for  the  nth  state  of  a  particle  in  a  one-dimen-
sional box. Check your result for the n ⫽ 2 state.

19. A  1.00-g  marble  is  constrained  to  roll  inside  a  tube  of
length L ⫽ 1.00 cm.  The  tube  is  capped  at  both  ends.
Modeling  this  as  a  one-dimensional  inﬁnite  square
well,  ﬁnd  the  value  of  the  quantum  number  n if  the
marble is initially given an energy of 1.00 mJ. Calculate
the excitation energy required to promote the marble to
the next available energy state.

6.5 The Finite Square Well
20. Consider  a  particle  with  energy  E bound  to  a  ﬁnite
square well of height U and width 2L situated on ⫺L ⱕ
x ⱕ ⫹L.  Because  the  potential  energy  is  symmetric
about  the  midpoint  of  the  well,  the  stationary  state
waves  will  be  either  symmetric  or  antisymmetric  about
this point. (a) Show that for E ⬍ U, the conditions for
smooth joining of the interior and exterior waves lead
to  the  following  equation  for  the  allowed  energies  of
the symmetric waves:

k tan kL ⫽ ␣

(symmetric case)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

␣ ⫽ √(2m/ប2)(U ⫺ E )

where 
is  the
wavenumber of oscillation in the interior. (b) Show that
the energy condition found in (a) can be rewritten as

k ⫽ √2mE/ប2

and 

k sec kL ⫽

√2mU

ប

Apply the result in this form to an electron trapped at a
defect site in a crystal, modeling the defect as a square
well  of  height  5 eV  and  width  0.2 nm.  Solve  the  equa-
tion numerically to ﬁnd the ground-state energy for the
electron, accurate to ⫾0.001 eV.

21. Sketch the wavefunction ␺(x) and the probability den-
sity 兩␺(x)兩2 for the n ⫽ 4 state of a particle in a ﬁnite po-
tential well.

22.

The  potential  energy  of  a  proton  conﬁned  to
an atomic nucleus can be modeled as a square
well of width 1.00 ⫻ 10⫺5 nm and height 26.0 MeV. De-
termine  the  energy  of  the  proton  in  the  ground  state
and ﬁrst excited state for this case, using the Java applet
available  at  our  companion  Website  (http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e QMTools Simulations : Prob-
lem 6.22). Refer to Exercise 3 of Example 6.8 for details.
Calculate  the  wavelength  of  the  photon  emitted  when
the proton undergoes a transition from the ﬁrst excited
state to the ground state, and compare your result with
that found using the inﬁnite-well model of Problem 9.

23. Consider a square well having an inﬁnite wall at x ⫽ 0
and  a  wall  of  height  U at x ⫽ L (Fig.  P6.23).  For  the
case E ⬍ U,  obtain  solutions  to  the  Schrödinger  equa-
tion  inside  the  well  (0 ⱕ x ⱕ L)  and  in  the  region  be-
yond  (x ⬎ L)  that  satisfy  the  appropriate  boundary
conditions  at  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ ⬁.  Enforce  the  proper
matching  conditions  at  x ⫽ L to  ﬁnd  an  equation  for
the  allowed  energies  of  this  system.  Are  there  condi-
tions for which no solution is possible? Explain.

∞

0

U

E

L

Figure P6.23

6.6 The Quantum Oscillator
24. The wavefunction

␺(x) ⫽ Cxe⫺␣x2

also describes a state of the quantum oscillator, provided
the  constant  ␣ is  chosen  appropriately.  (a)  Using
Schrödinger’s  equation,  obtain  an  expression  for  ␣ in
terms of the oscillator mass m and the classical frequency
of vibration ␻. What is the energy of this state? (b) Nor-
malize this wave. (Hint: See the integral of Problem 32.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

229

25. Show that the oscillator energies in Equation 6.29 cor-

respond to the classical amplitudes

An ⫽√ (2n ⫹ 1)ប

m␻

26. Obtain  an  expression  for  the  probability  density  Pc(x)
of  a  classical oscillator  with  mass  m,  frequency  ␻,  and
amplitude A. (Hint: See Problem 28 for the calculation
of classical probabilities.)

27.

Coherent  states.  Use  the  Java  applet  available
at our  companion  website  (http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e  QMTools  Simulations  :  Prob-
lem 6.27) to explore the time development of a Gauss-
ian  waveform  conﬁned  to  the  oscillator  well.  The  de-
fault  settings  for  the  initial  wave  describe  a  Gaussian
centered in the well with an adjustable width set by the
value  of  the  parameter  a.  Describe  the  time  evolution
of this wavefunction. Is it what you expected? Account
for  your  observations.  Now  displace  the  initial  wave-
form off of center by increasing the parameter d from
zero to d ⫽ 1. Again describe the time evolution of the
resulting  wavefunction.  What  is  remarkable  about  this
case?  Such  wavefunctions,  called  coherent  states,  are  im-
portant in the quantum theory of radiation.

6.7 Expectation Values
28. Classical probabilities. (a) Show that the classical probabil-
ity density describing a particle in an inﬁnite square well
of dimension L is Pc(x) ⫽ 1/L. (Hint: The classical prob-
ability  for  ﬁnding  a  particle  in  dx — Pc(x)dx — is  propor-
tional  to  the  time the  particle  spends  in  this  interval.)
(b) Using  Pc(x),  determine  the  classical averages 具x典 and
具x 2典 for a particle conﬁned to the well, and compare with
the quantum results found in Example 6.15. Discuss your
ﬁndings in light of the correspondence principle.

29. An electron is described by the wavefunction

␺(x) ⫽ 冦0      

Ce⫺x(1 ⫺ e⫺x)    for x ⬎ 0

for x ⬍ 0

where x is in nanometers and C is a constant. (a) Find the
value  of  C that  normalizes ␺.  (b)  Where  is  the  electron
most likely to be found; that is, for what value of x is the
probability for ﬁnding the electron largest? (c) Calculate
具x典 for this electron and compare your result with its most
likely position. Comment on any differences you ﬁnd.

30. For  any  eigenfunction  ␺n of  the  inﬁnite  square  well,

show that 具x典 ⫽ L/2 and that

具x2典 ⫽

L2
3

⫺

L2

2(n␲)2

where L is the well dimension.
31. An electron has a wavefunction

␺(x) ⫽ Ce⫺兩x兩/x0

where x0 is  a  constant  and 
for  normaliza-
tion  (see  Example  6.1).  For  this  case,  obtain  expres-

C ⫽ 1/√x 0

230

CHAPTER 6

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN ONE DIMENSION

sions  for  具x典 and ⌬x in  terms  of  x0.  Also  calculate  the
probability  that  the  electron  will  be  found  within  a
standard deviation of its average position, that is, in the
range 具x典 ⫺ ⌬x to 具x典 ⫹ ⌬x, and show that this is inde-
pendent of x 0.

32. Calculate 具x典, 具x2典,  and  ⌬x for  a  quantum  oscillator  in

its ground state. Hint: Use the integral formula

冕⬁

0

x2e⫺ax2

dx ⫽

1

4a √ ␲

a

    a ⬎ 0

33. (a) What value do you expect for 具p典 for the quantum
oscillator?  Support  your  answer  with  a  symmetry  argu-
ment  rather  than  a  calculation.  (b)  Energy  principles
for the quantum oscillator can be used to relate 具p2典 to
具x 2典. Use this relation, along with the value of 具x 2典 from

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

36.

The quantum bouncer. The bouncer is the quan-
tum  analog  to  the  classical  problem  of  a  ball
bouncing  vertically  (and  elastically)  on  a  level  surface
and is modeled by the potential energy shown in Figure
P6.36. The coordinate normal to the surface is denoted
by x, and the surface itself is located at x ⫽ 0. Above the
surface,  the  potential  energy  for  the  bouncer  is  linear,
representing  the  attractive  force  of  a  uniform  ﬁeld — in
this case the gravity ﬁeld near the Earth. Below the sur-
face,  the  potential  energy  rises  abruptly  to  a  very  large
value consistent with the bouncer’s inability to penetrate
this  region.  Obtaining  stationary  states  for  the  bouncer
from  the  Schrödinger  equation  using  analytical  tech-
niques requires knowledge of special functions. Numeri-
cal solution furnishes a simpler alternative and allows for
effortless  study  of  the  bound-state  waveforms,  once  they
are found. The Java applet for the quantum bouncer can
be found at http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e QMTools
Simulations : Problem 6.36. Use the applet as described
there to ﬁnd the three lowest-lying states of a tennis ball

Problem 32, to ﬁnd 具p2典 for the oscillator ground state.
(c) Evaluate ⌬p, using the results of (a) and (b).

34. From the results of Problems 32 and 33, evaluate ⌬x ⌬p
for the quantum oscillator in its ground state. Is the re-
sult  consistent  with  the  uncertainty  principle?  (Note
that  your  computation  veriﬁes  the  minimum  uncer-
tainty  product;  furthermore,  the  harmonic  oscillator
ground  state  is  the  only quantum  state  for  which  this
minimum uncertainty is realized.)

6.8 Observables and Operators
35. Which of the following functions are eigenfunctions of
the momentum operator [p]? For those that are eigen-
functions, what are the eigenvalues?
(a) A sin(kx)
(b) A sin(kx) ⫺ A cos(kx)

(c) A cos(kx) ⫹ iA sin(kx)
(d) Ae ik(x⫺a)

(mass ⬇ 50 g) bouncing on a hard ﬂoor. Count the num-
ber of nodes for each wavefunction to verify the general
rule  that  the  nth  excited  state  exhibits  exactly  n nodes.
For  each  state,  determine  the  most  probable  distance
above the ﬂoor for the bouncing ball and compare with
the maximum height reached in the classical case. (Clas-
sically, the ball is most likely to be found at the top of its
ﬂight, where its speed drops to zero — see Problem 28.)

37. Nonstationary  states.  Consider  a  particle  in  an  inﬁnite
square well described initially by a wave that is a superpo-
sition of the ground and ﬁrst excited states of the well:

⌿(x, 0) ⫽ C[␺1(x) ⫹ ␺2(x)]

C ⫽ 1/√2

(a) Show that the value 
normalizes this wave,
assuming ␺1 and ␺2 are  themselves  normalized.
(b) Find ␺ (x, t) at any later time t. (c) Show that the su-
perposition is not a stationary state, but that the average
energy in this state is the arithmetic mean (E1 ⫹ E2)/2
of the ground- and ﬁrst excited-state energies E1 and E2.
38. For  the  nonstationary  state  of  Problem  37,  show  that

the average particle position 具x典 oscillates with time as

具x 典 ⫽ x 0 ⫹ A cos(⍀t)

where

1

2 冢冕 x 兩 ␺1 兩2 dx ⫹冕 x 兩 ␺2 兩2 dx冣

x 0 ⫽

A ⫽冕 x␺1*␺2 dx

∞

0

x

and ⍀ ⫽ (E2 ⫺ E1)/ប.  Evaluate  your  results  for  the
mean position x 0 and amplitude of oscillation A for an
electron in a well 1 nm wide. Calculate the time for the
electron to shuttle back and forth in the well once. Cal-
culate the same time classically for an electron with en-
ergy equal to the average, (E1 ⫹ E2)/2.

Figure P6.36

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7
Tunneling Phenomena

Chapter Outline

7.1 The Square Barrier
7.2 Barrier Penetration: 

Some Applications
Field Emission
␣ Decay
Ammonia Inversion
Decay of Black Holes

Summary
ESSAY The Scanning Tunneling

Microscope, Roger A. Freedman
and Paul K. Hansma

In this chapter the principles of wave mechanics are applied to particles strik-
ing  a  potential  barrier.  Unlike  potential  wells  that  attract  and  trap  particles,
barriers  repel  them.  Because  barriers  have  no  bound  states,  the  emphasis
shifts  to  determining  whether  a  particle  incident  on  a  barrier  is  reﬂected  or
transmitted.

In the course of this study we shall encounter a peculiar phenomenon called
tunneling.  A  purely  wave-mechanical  effect,  tunneling  nevertheless  is  essential
to the operation of many modern-day devices and shapes our world on a scale
from atomic all the way up to galactic proportions. The chapter includes a dis-
cussion of the role played by tunneling in several phenomena of practical inter-
est, such as ﬁeld emission, radioactive decay, and the operation of the ammonia
maser.  Finally,  the  chapter  is  followed  by  an  essay  on  the  scanning  tunneling
microscope, or STM, a remarkable device that uses tunneling to make images
of surfaces with resolution comparable to the size of a single atom.

7.1 THE SQUARE BARRIER

The square barrier is represented by a potential energy function U(x) that
is  constant  at  U in  the  barrier  region,  say  between  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L,  and
zero outside this region. One method for producing a square barrier poten-
tial using charged hollow cylinders is shown in Figure 7.1a. The outer cylin-
ders  are  grounded  while  the  central  one  is  held  at  some  positive  potential
V. For a particle with charge q, the barrier potential energy is U ⫽ qV. The

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

231

232

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

q

V

+ + + +

+ + + +

(a)

U =  qV

x

0

L

(b)

Figure 7.1 (a) Aligned metallic cylinders serve as a potential barrier to charged parti-
cles.  The  central  cylinder  is  held  at  some  positive  electric  potential  V,  and  the  outer
cylinders are grounded. A charge q whose total energy is less than qV is unable to pene-
trate the central cylinder classically, but can do so quantum mechanically by a process
called tunneling. (b) The potential energy seen by this charge in the limit where the
gaps between the cylinders have shrunk to zero size. The result is the square barrier po-
tential of height U.

charge experiences no electric force except in the gaps separating the cylin-
ders. The force in the gaps is repulsive, tending to expel a positive charge q
from  the  central  cylinder.  The  electric  potential  energy  for  the  idealized
case  in  which  the  gaps  have  shrunk  to  zero  size  is  the  square  barrier,
sketched in Figure 7.1b.

A classical particle incident on the barrier, say from the left, experiences a
retarding force on arriving at x ⫽ 0. Particles with energies E greater than U
are  able  to  overcome  this  force,  but  suffer  a  reduction  in  speed  to  a  value
commensurate with their diminished kinetic energy (E ⫺ U ) in the barrier re-
gion.  Such  particles  continue  moving  to  the  right  with  reduced  speed  until
they reach x ⫽ L, where they receive a “kick” accelerating them back to their
original  speed.  Thus,  particles  having  energy  E ⬎ U are  able  to  cross  the
barrier with their speed restored to its initial value. By contrast, particles with
energy E ⬍ U are  turned  back  (reﬂected)  by  the  barrier,  having  insufﬁcient
energy to cross or even penetrate it. In this way the barrier divides the space
into  classically  allowed  and  forbidden  regions  determined  by  the  particle
energy: If E ⬎ U, the whole space is accessible to the particle; for E ⬍ U only
the interval to the side of the barrier in which the particle originates is accessi-
ble—the barrier region itself is forbidden, and this precludes particle motion
on the far side as well.

According to quantum mechanics, however, there is no region inaccessi-
ble  to  our  particle,  regardless  of  its  energy, since  the  matter  wave  associ-
ated  with  the  particle  is  nonzero  everywhere.  A  typical  wavefunction  for  this
case, illustrated in Figure 7.2a, clearly shows the penetration of the wave into
the barrier and beyond. This barrier penetration is in complete disagreement
with classical physics. The process of penetrating the barrier is called tunnel-
ing: we say the particle has tunneled through the barrier.

The  mathematical  expression  for  ⌿ on  either  side  of  the  barrier  is  easily
found. To the left of the barrier the particle is free, so the wavefunction here is
composed of the free particle plane waves introduced in Chapter 6:

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Aei(kx⫺␻t) ⫹ Bei(⫺kx⫺␻t)

(7.1)

This  wavefunction  ⌿(x, t)  is  actually  the  sum  of  two  plane  waves.  Both  have
frequency ␻ and  energy  E ⫽ ប␻ ⫽ ប2k2/2m,  but  the  ﬁrst  moves  from  left  to
right (wavenumber k), the second from right to left (wavenumber ⫺k). Thus,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.1

THE SQUARE BARRIER

233

Ψ
I

I

Ψ
II

Ψ

U III

III

II

L

(a)

(incident)

Ae +ikx

(reflected)

Be –ikx

(transmitted)

Fe +ikx

x

0

L

(b)

Figure 7.2 (a) A typical stationary-state wave for a particle in the presence of a square
barrier.  The  energy  E of  the  particle  is  less  than  the  barrier  height  U.  Since  the
wave amplitude  is  nonzero  in  the  barrier,  there  is  some  probability  of  ﬁnding  the
particle  there.  (b) Decomposition  of  the  stationary  wave  into  incident,  reﬂected,  and
transmitted waves.

that part of ⌿ proportional to A is interpreted as a wave incident on the bar-
rier from the left; that proportional to B as a wave reﬂected from the barrier
and moving from right to left (Fig. 7.2b). The reﬂection coefﬁcient R for the
barrier is calculated as the ratio of the reﬂected probability density to the inci-
dent probability density:

R ⫽

(⌿ * ⌿)reflected
(⌿ * ⌿)incident

⫽

B *B
A *A

⫽

兩 B 兩2
兩 A 兩2

(7.2)

Reﬂection coefﬁcient for a
barrier

In wave terminology, R is the fraction of wave intensity in the reﬂected beam;
in particle language, R becomes the likelihood (probability) that a particle in-
cident on the barrier from the left is reﬂected by it.

Similar arguments apply to the right of the barrier, where, again, the parti-

cle is free:

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Fei(kx⫺␻t) ⫹ Gei(⫺kx⫺␻t)

(7.3)

This form for ⌿(x, t) is valid in the range x ⬎ L, with the term proportional to
F describing  a  wave  traveling  to  the  right,  and  that  proportional  to  G a  wave
traveling to the left in this region. The latter has no physical interpretation for
waves  incident  on  the  barrier  from  the  left,  and  so  is  discarded  by  requiring
G ⫽ 0. The former is that part of the incident wave that is transmitted through
the barrier. The relative intensity of this transmitted wave is the transmission
coefﬁcient for the barrier T :

T ⫽

(⌿ * ⌿)transmitted
(⌿ * ⌿)incident

⫽

F *F
A *A

⫽

兩 F 兩2
兩 A 兩2

(7.4)

Transmission coefﬁcient for a
barrier

The transmission coefﬁcient measures the likelihood (probability) that a parti-
cle  incident  on  the  barrier  from  the  left  penetrates  to  emerge  on  the  other
side. Since a particle incident on the barrier is either reﬂected or transmitted,
the probabilities for these events must sum to unity:

Equation 7.5 expresses a kind of sum rule obeyed by the barrier coefﬁcients.
Further,  the  degree  of  transmission  or  reﬂection  will  depend  on  particle

R ⫹ T ⫽ 1

(7.5)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

234

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

energy.  In  the  classical  case  T ⫽ 0  (and  R ⫽ 1)  for  E ⬍ U,  but  T ⫽ 1  (and
R ⫽ 0)  for  E ⬎ U.  The  wave-mechanical  predictions  for  the  functions  T(E)
and R(E ) are more complicated; to obtain them we must examine the matter
wave within the barrier.

To  ﬁnd ⌿ in  the  barrier,  we  must  solve  Schrödinger’s  equation.  Let
us consider  stationary  states  ␺(x)e⫺i␻t whose  energy  E ⫽ ប␻ is  below
the top of  the  barrier.  This  is  the  case  E ⬍ U for  which  no  barrier  pen-
etration  is permitted  classically.  In  the  region  of  the  barrier  (0 ⬍ x ⬍ L),
U(x) ⫽ U and the time-independent Schrödinger equation for ␺(x) can be
rearranged as

d 2␺

dx2 ⫽ 冦 2m(U ⫺ E )

ប2

冧 ␺(x)

With E ⬍ U,  the  term  in  braces  is  a  positive  constant,  and  solutions  to  this
equation are the real exponential forms e⫾␣x. Since (d 2/dx 2)e⫾␣x ⫽ (␣)2e⫾␣x, we
should identify the term in braces with ␣2 or, equivalently,

␣ ⫽

√2m(U ⫺ E )

ប

(7.6)

For  wide  barriers,  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  particle  should  decrease
steadily into the barrier; in such cases only the decaying exponential is impor-
tant, and it is convenient to deﬁne a barrier penetration depth ␦ ⫽ 1/␣. At a
distance ␦ into the barrier, the wavefunction has fallen to 1/e of its value at the
barrier  edge;  thus,  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  particle  is  appreciable  only
within about ␦ of the barrier edge.

The complete wavefunction in the barrier is, then,

⌿(x, t) ⫽ ␺(x)e⫺i␻t ⫽ Ce⫺␣x⫺i␻t ⫹ De⫹␣x⫺i␻t

for 0 ⬍ x ⬍ L

(7.7)

The  coefﬁcients  C and D are  ﬁxed  by  requiring  smooth  joining  of  the  wave-
function across the barrier edges; that is, both ⌿ and ⭸⌿/⭸x must be continu-
ous  at  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L.  Writing  out  the  joining  conditions  using  Equations
7.1, 7.3, and 7.7 for ⌿ in the regions to the left, to the right, and within the
barrier, respectively, gives

A ⫹ B ⫽ C ⫹ D      (continuity of ⌿ at x ⫽ 0)

Joining conditions at a
square barrier

ikA ⫺ ikB ⫽ ␣D ⫺ ␣C    冢continuity of 

⭸⌿
⭸x

 at x ⫽ 0冣

Ce⫺␣L ⫹ De⫹␣L ⫽ FeikL        (continuity of ⌿ at x ⫽ L)
 at x ⫽ L冣

(␣D)e⫹␣L ⫺ (␣C )e⫺␣L ⫽ ikFeikL      冢continuity of 

⭸⌿
⭸x

(7.8)

In  keeping  with  our  previous  remarks,  we  have  set  G ⫽ 0.  Still,  there  is  one
more  unknown  than  there  are  equations  to  ﬁnd  them.  Actually  this  is  as  it
should be, since the amplitude of the incident wave merely sets the scale for
the  other  amplitudes.  That  is,  doubling  the  incident  wave  amplitude  simply
doubles  the  amplitudes  of  the  reﬂected  and  transmitted  waves.  Dividing
Equations 7.8 through by A furnishes four equations for the four ratios B/A,
C/A, D/A,  and  F/A.  These  equations  may  be  solved  by  repeated  substitution

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.1

THE SQUARE BARRIER

235

to ﬁnd  B/A and  so  on  in  terms  of  the  barrier  height  U,  the  barrier  width
L, and  the  particle  energy  E.  The  result  for  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  T
is (see Problem 7)

T

1

T(E ) ⫽ 冦1 ⫹

1

4 冤

U 2

E(U ⫺ E )冥 sinh2␣L冧⫺1

(7.9)

where sinh denotes the hyperbolic sine function: sinh x ⫽ (e x ⫺ e⫺x)/2.

A sketch of T(E ) for the square barrier is shown in Figure 7.3. Equation
7.9  holds  only  for  energies  E below  the  barrier  height  U.  For  E ⬎ U, ␣
becomes imaginary and sinh(␣L) turns oscillatory. This leads to fluctuations
in T(E ) and isolated energies for which transmission occurs with complete
certainty,  that  is,  T(E ) ⫽ 1.  Such  transmission  resonances arise  from  wave
interference and constitute further evidence for the wave nature of matter
(see Example 7.3).

0

U

E1

E2

E

E3

Figure  7.3 A  sketch  of  the
transmission  coefﬁcient  T(E)
for  a  square  barrier.  Oscillation
in T(E)  with  E,  and  the  trans-
mission  resonances  at  E1, E2,
and E3, are further evidence for
the wave nature of matter.

EXAMPLE 7.1 Transmission Coefﬁcient 

for an Oxide Layer

Two copper conducting wires are separated by an insulat-
ing  oxide  layer  (CuO).  Modeling  the  oxide  layer  as  a
square  barrier  of  height  10.0 eV,  estimate  the  transmis-
sion  coefﬁcient  for  penetration  by  7.00-eV  electrons
(a) if  the  layer  thickness  is  5.00 nm  and  (b)  if  the  layer
thickness is 1.00 nm.

Solution From  Equation  7.6  we  calculate  ␣ for  this
case, using ប ⫽ 1.973 keV ⭈ Å/c and m e ⫽ 511 keV/c 2 for
electrons to get

␣ ⫽

⫽

√2m e(U ⫺ E )

ប

√2(511 keV/c2)(3.00 ⫻ 10⫺3 keV)

1.973 keV ⭈Å/c

⫽ 0.8875 Å⫺1

The transmission coefﬁcient from Equation 7.9 is then

T ⫽ 冦1 ⫹

1

4 冤 102

7(3)冥 sinh2(0.8875 Å⫺1)L冧⫺1

Substituting L ⫽ 50.0 Å (5.00 nm) gives

T ⫽ 0.963 ⫻ 10⫺38

a fantastically small number on the order of 10⫺38! With
L ⫽ 10.0 Å (1.00 nm), however, we ﬁnd

T ⫽ 0.657 ⫻ 10⫺7

We see that reducing the layer thickness by a factor of 5
enhances  the  likelihood  of  penetration  by  nearly  31  or-
ders of magnitude!

Exercise  1 Go  to  our  companion  Web  site  (http://info.brookscole.com/
mp3e)  and  select  QMTools  Simulations : Exercise  7.1.  This  particular  Java  applet
shows  the  de  Broglie  wave  (actually,  just  the  real  part)  for  an  electron  with  energy
7.00 eV incident from the left on a square barrier 10.0 eV high and 1.0 Å wide. Compare
this waveform with the illustration of Figure 7.2a. In fact, this wave is inherently complex
valued,  with  a  modulus  and  phase  that  varies  from  point  to  point.  A  more  informative
display plots the modulus in the usual way but uses color to represent the phase of the
wave. Right-click on the waveform and select Properties . . . : Color-4-Phase : Apply to
show  the  color-for-phase  plotting  style.  Why  does  the  transmitted  wave  (to  the  right  of
the barrier) now have a uniform height? What is the signiﬁcance of this height? Follow
the  on-site  instructions  to  display  the  incident  component  of  this  scattering  wave  and
determine  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  directly  from  the  graphs.  Compare  your  result
with the prediction of Equation 7.9.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

236

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

EXAMPLE 7.2 Tunneling Current

Through an Oxide Layer

A  1.00-mA  current  of  electrons  in  one  of  the  wires  of
Example  7.1  is  incident  on  the  oxide  layer.  How  much
of this current passes through the layer to the adjacent
wire  if  the  electron  energy  is  7.00 eV  and  the  layer
thickness  is  1.00 nm?  What  becomes  of  the  remaining
current?

Solution Because each electron carries a charge equal
to e ⫽ 1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C,  an  electron  current  of  1.00 mA
represents  10⫺3/(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19) ⫽ 6.25 ⫻ 1015 electrons
per second impinging on the barrier. Of these, only the
fraction T is  transmitted,  where  T ⫽ 0.657 ⫻ 10⫺7 from
Example 7.1. Thus, the number of electrons per second
continuing on to the adjacent wire is
(6.25 ⫻ 1015)(0.657 ⫻ 10⫺7) ⫽ 4.11 ⫻ 108 electrons/s

This number represents a transmitted current of

(4.11 ⫻ 108/s)(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)⫽ 6.57 ⫻ 10⫺11 A

⫽ 65.7 pA (picoamperes)

the 

transmission  coefﬁcient.)  The 

(Notice  that  the  same  transmitted  current  would  be  ob-
tained  had  we  simply  multiplied  the  incident  current
by
remaining 
1.00 mA ⫺ 65.7 pA  is  reﬂected  at  the  layer.  It  is  impor-
tant to note that the measured conduction current in the
wire  on  the  side  of  incidence  is  the  net  of  the  incident
and reﬂected currents, or again 65.7 pA.

EXAMPLE 7.3 Transmission Resonances

Consider  a  particle  incident  from  the  left  on  a  square
barrier of width L in the case where the particle energy E
exceeds  the  barrier  height  U.  Write  the  necessary  wave-
functions  and  impose  the  proper  joining  conditions  to
obtain a formula for the transmission coefﬁcient for this
case.  Show  that  perfect  transmission  (resonance)  results
for special values of particle energy, and explain this phe-
nomenon  in  terms  of  the  interference  of  de  Broglie
waves.

Solution To the left and right of the barrier, the wave-
functions  are  the  free  particle  waves  given  by  Equations
7.1 and 7.3 (again with G ⫽ 0 to describe a purely trans-
mitted wave on the far side of the barrier):

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Aei(kx⫺␻t) ⫹ Bei(⫺kx⫺␻t)    x ⬍ 0
⌿(x, t) ⫽ Fei(kx⫺␻t)                x ⬎ L

The wavenumber k and frequency ␻ of these oscillations
derive  from  the  particle  energy  E in  the  manner  char-
acteristic  of  (nonrelativistic)  de  Broglie  waves;  that  is,
E ⫽ (បk)2/2m ⫽ ប␻. Within the barrier, the wavefunction
also is oscillatory. In effect, the decay constant ␣ of Equa-
tion 7.6 has become imaginary, since E ⬎ U. Introducing
a new wavenumber k⬘ as ␣ ⫽ ik⬘, the barrier wavefunction

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

becomes

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Cei(⫺k⬘x ⫺␻t) ⫹ Dei(k⬘x ⫺␻t)

0 ⬍ x ⬍ L

with k⬘ ⫽ [2m(E ⫺ U )/ប2]1/2 a real number.

The barrier wavefunction will join smoothly to the ex-
terior  waveforms  if  the  wavefunction  and  its  slope  are
continuous  at  the  barrier  edges  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L.  These
continuity  requirements  are  identical  to  Equations  7.8
with  the  replacement  ␣ ⫽ ik⬘ everywhere.  In  particular,
we now have

A ⫹ B ⫽ C ⫹ D

(continuity of ⌿

k A ⫺ kB ⫽ k⬘D ⫺ k⬘C

Ce⫺ik⬘L ⫹ Deik⬘L ⫽ FeikL

k⬘Deik⬘L ⫺ k⬘Ce⫺ik⬘L ⫽ kFeikL

at x ⫽ 0)

⭸⌿
⭸x

冢continuity of 
at x ⫽ 0冣

(continuity of ⌿ at

x ⫽ L)

冢continuity of 
at x ⫽ L冣

⭸⌿
⭸x

To isolate the transmission amplitude F/A, we must elimi-
nate  from  these  relations  the  unwanted  coefﬁcients  B,
C, and D. Dividing the second line by k and adding to the
ﬁrst  eliminates  B,  leaving  A in  terms  of  C and D.  In
the same  way,  dividing  the  fourth  line  by  k⬘ and  adding
the result to the third line gives D (in terms of F ), while
subtracting  the  result  from  the  third  line  gives  C (in
terms of F ). Combining the previous results ﬁnally yields
A in terms of F :

A ⫽

1
4

FeikL 冦冤2 ⫺ 冢 k⬘

k

⫹

k

k⬘ 冣冥 eik⬘L
⫹ 冤2 ⫹ 冢 k⬘

k

⫹

k

k⬘ 冣冥 e⫺ik⬘L冧

is  T ⫽ 兩F/A兩2.  Writing 
The  transmission  probability 
e⫾ik⬘L ⫽ cos k⬘L ⫾i sin k⬘L and simplifying, we obtain the
ﬁnal result

1
T

⫽ 兩 A
F 兩2

⫽

1

4 兩 2 cos k⬘L ⫺ i 冢 k⬘

k

⫹

k

k⬘ 冣 sin k⬘L兩2

⫽ 1 ⫹

1

4 冤

U 2

E(E ⫺ U )冥 sin2 k⬘L

We see  that  transmission  resonances occur  whenever
k⬘L is a multiple of ␲. Using k⬘ ⫽ [2m(E ⫺ U )/ប2]1/2, we
can express the resonance condition in terms of the par-
ticle energy E as

E ⫽ U ⫹ n2 ␲2ប2

2mL2     n ⫽ 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

 

7.1

THE SQUARE BARRIER

237

Particles  with  these  energies  are  transmitted  perfectly
(T ⫽ 1), with no chance of reﬂection (R ⫽ 0).

Resonances arise from the interference of the matter
wave  accompanying  a  particle.  The  wave  reﬂected  from
the barrier can be regarded as the superposition of mat-
ter waves reﬂected from the leading and trailing edges of
the  barrier  at  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L,  respectively.  If  these  re-
ﬂected  waves  arrive  phase  shifted  by  odd  multiples  of
180⬚ or ␲ radians, they will interfere destructively, leaving
no reﬂected wave (R ⫽ 0) and thus perfect transmission.
Now  the  wave  reﬂected  from  the  rear  of  the  barrier  at

x ⫽ L must travel the extra distance 2L before recombin-
ing  with  the  wave  reﬂected  at  the  front,  leading  to  a
phase difference of 2k⬘L. But this wave also suffers an in-
trinsic  phase  shift  of  ␲ radians,  having  been  reﬂected
from  a  medium  with  higher  optical  density.1 Thus,
the condition  for  destructive 
interference  becomes
2k⬘L ⫹ ␲ ⫽ (2n ⫹ 1)␲, or simply k⬘L ⫽ n␲, where n ⫽ 1,
2, . . . .

Perfect  transmission  also  arises  when  particles  are
scattered  by  a  potential  well,  a  phenomenon  known  as
the Ramsauer – Townsend effect (see Problem 11).

Exercise  2 Verify  that  for  E ⬎⬎ U,  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  of  Example  7.3  ap-
proaches  unity.  Why  is  this  result  expected?  What  happens  to  T in  the  limit  as  E ap-
proaches U ?

EXAMPLE 7.4 Scattering by a Potential Step

The potential step shown in Figure 7.4 may be regarded
as  a  square  barrier  in  the  special  case  where  the barrier
width L is inﬁnite. Apply the ideas of this section to dis-
cuss  the  quantum  scattering  of  particles  incident  from
the  left  on  a  potential  step,  in  the  case  where  the  step
height U exceeds the total particle energy E.

Solution The  wavefunction  everywhere  to  the  right  of
the origin is the barrier wavefunction given by Equation
7.7. To keep ⌿ from diverging for large x, we must take
D ⫽ 0, leaving only the decaying wave

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Ce⫺␣x ⫺i␻t

x ⬎ 0

This must be joined smoothly to the wavefunction on the
left of the origin, given by Equation 7.1:

⌿(x, t) ⫽ Ae ikx ⫺i␻t ⫹ Be⫺ikx ⫺i␻t

x ⬍ 0

U

E

0

0

The conditions for smooth joining at x ⫽ 0 yield

A ⫹ B ⫽ C

(continuity of ⌿)

ikA ⫺ ikB ⫽ ⫺␣C

冢continuity of 

⭸⌿

⭸x 冣

Solving  the  second  equation  for  C and  substituting  into
the ﬁrst (with ␦ ⫽ 1/␣) gives A ⫹ B ⫽ ⫺ik␦A ⫹ ik␦B, or

B
A

⫽ ⫺

(1 ⫹ ik␦)
(1 ⫺ ik␦)

The  reﬂection  coefﬁcient  is  R ⫽ 兩B/A兩2 ⫽ (B/A)(B/A)*,
or

R ⫽ 冢 (1 ⫹ ik␦)

(1 ⫺ ik␦) 冣冢 (1 ⫺ ik␦)

(1 ⫹ ik␦) 冣 ⫽ 1

Thus,  an  inﬁnitely wide  barrier  reﬂects  all  incoming
particles with energies below the barrier height, in agree-
ment with the classical prediction. Nevertheless, there is
a nonzero wave in the step region since

C
A

⫽ 1 ⫹

B
A

⫽

⫺2ik␦
1 ⫺ ik␦

⫽ 0

Figure 7.4 (Example 7.4) The potential step of height
U may  be  thought  of  as  a  square  barrier  of  the  same
height  in  the  limit  where  the  barrier  width  L becomes
inﬁnite. All particles incident on the barrier with energy
E ⬍ U are reﬂected.

But  the  wavefunction  for  x ⬎ 0, ⌿(x, t) ⫽ Ce⫺␣x ⫺i␻t,  is
not a propagating wave at all; that is, there is no net trans-
mission  of  particles  to  the  right  of  the  step.  However,
there  will  be  quantum  transmission  through  a barrier  of
ﬁnite width, no matter how wide (compare Eq. 7.9).

1This is familiar from the propagation of classical waves: A traveling wave arriving at the interface
separating  two  media  is  partially  transmitted  and  partially  reﬂected.  The  reﬂected  portion  is
phase  shifted  180⬚ only  in  the  case  where  the  wave  speed  is  lower  in  the  medium  being  pene-
trated. For matter waves, p ⫽ h/␭, and the wavelength (hence, wave speed) is largest in regions
where the kinetic energy is smallest. Thus, the matter wave reﬂected from the front of a barrier
suffers no change in phase, but that reﬂected from the rear is phase shifted 180⬚.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

238

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.5 (a) Total internal reﬂection of light waves at a glass – air boundary. An evanes-
cent wave penetrates into the space beyond the reﬂecting surface. (b) Frustrated total in-
ternal reﬂection. The evanescent wave is “picked up” by a neighboring surface, resulting
in transmission across the gap. Notice that the light beam does not appear in the gap.

The existence of a barrier wave without propagation (as in Example 7.4) is
familiar from the optical phenomenon of total internal reﬂection exploited in
the  construction  of  beam  splitters  (Figure  7.5):  Light  entering  a  right-angle
prism is completely reﬂected at the hypotenuse face, even though an electro-
magnetic wave, the evanescent wave, penetrates into the space beyond. A sec-
ond prism brought into near contact with the ﬁrst can “pick up” this evanes-
cent wave, thereby transmitting and redirecting the original beam (Fig. 7.5b).
This  phenomenon,  known  as  frustrated  total  internal  reﬂection, is  the
optical  analog  of  tunneling:  In  effect,  photons  have  tunneled  across  the  gap
separating the two prisms.

7.2 BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

In  actuality,  few  barriers  can  be  modeled  accurately  using  the  square  barrier
discussed  in  the  preceding  section.  Indeed,  the  extreme  sensitivity  to  barrier
constants found there suggests that barrier shape will be important in making
reliable  predictions  of  tunneling  probabilities.  The  transmission  coefﬁcient
for a barrier of arbitrary shape, as speciﬁed by some potential energy function
U(x),  can  be  found  from  Schrödinger’s  equation.  For  high,  wide  barriers,
where the likelihood of penetration is small, a lengthy treatment yields the ap-
proximate result

T(E ) ⬇ exp 冢⫺

2
ប

√2m冕 √U(x) ⫺ E dx冣

(7.10)

The integral in Equation 7.10 is taken over the classically forbidden region
where E ⬍ U(x).  A  simple  argument  leading  to  this  form  follows  by
representing  an  arbitrary  barrier  as  a  succession  of  square  barriers,  all  of
which  scatter  independently,  so  that  the  transmitted  wave  intensity  of

Approximate transmission
coefﬁcient of a barrier with
arbitrary shape

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

one becomes  the  incident  wave  intensity  for  the  next,  and  so  forth  (see
Problem 15).

The  use  of  Equation  7.10  is  illustrated  in  the  remainder  of  this  section,

where it is applied to several classic problems in contemporary physics.

7.2

BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

239

Cathode tip

Fluorescent

screen

Figure  7.6 Schematic  diagram
of  a  ﬁeld  emission  microscope.
The  intense  electric  ﬁeld  at  the
tip  of  the  needle-shaped  speci-
men  allows  electrons  to  tunnel
through  the  work  function  bar-
rier at the surface. Since the tun-
neling  probability  is  sensitive  to
the  exact  details  of  the  surface
where  the  electron  passes,  the
number  of  escaping  electrons
varies  from  point  to  point  with
the  surface  condition,  thus  pro-
viding  a  picture  of  the  surface
under study.

Tunneling model for ﬁeld
emission

Field Emission
In  ﬁeld  emission,  electrons  bound  to  a  metal  are  literally  torn  from  the
surface  by  the  application  of  a  strong  electric  ﬁeld.  In  this  way,  the  metal
becomes  a  source  that  may  be  conveniently  tapped  to  furnish  electrons  for
many  applications.  In  the  past,  such  cold  cathode  emission,  as  it  was  known,
was a popular way of generating electrons in vacuum tube circuits, producing
less electrical “noise” than hot ﬁlament sources, where electrons were “boiled
off” by heating the metal to a high temperature. Modern applications include
the ﬁeld emission microscope (Fig. 7.6) and a related device, the scanning
tunneling  microscope (see  the  essay  at  the  end  of  this  chapter),  both  of
which use the escaping electrons to form an image of structural details at the
emitting surface.

Field emission is a tunneling phenomenon. Figure 7.7a shows schematically
how ﬁeld emission can be obtained by placing a positively charged plate near
the source metal to form, effectively, a parallel-plate capacitor. In the gap be-
tween  the  “plates”  there  is  some  electric  ﬁeld ␧,  but  the  electric  ﬁeld  inside
the metal remains zero due to the shielding by the mobile metal electrons at-
tracted to the surface by the positively charged plate. Note that an electron in
the  bulk  is  virtually  free,  yet  still  bound  to  the  metal  by  a  potential  well  of
depth U. The total electron energy E, which includes kinetic energy, is nega-
tive to indicate a bound electron; indeed, 兩E 兩 represents the energy needed to
free this electron, a value at least equal to the work function of the metal.

Once  beyond  the  surface  (x ⬎ 0),  our  electron  is  attracted  by  the  electric
force  in  the  gap,  F ⫽ e␧,  represented  by  the  potential  energy  U(x) ⫽ ⫺e␧x.
The potential energy diagram is shown in Figure 7.7b, together with the classi-
cally allowed and forbidden regions for an electron of energy E. The intersec-
tions of E with U(x) at x 1 (⫽ 0) and x 2 (⫽ ⫺E/e␧) mark the classical turning
points, where a classical particle with this energy would be turned around to
keep it from entering the forbidden zone. Thus, from a classical viewpoint, an
electron initially conﬁned to the metal has insufﬁcient energy to surmount the
potential barrier at the surface and would remain in the bulk forever! It is only
by virtue of its wave character that the electron can tunnel through this barrier
to  emerge  on  the  other  side.  The  probability  of  such  an  occurrence  is
measured by the transmission coefﬁcient for the triangular barrier depicted in
Figure 7.7b.

To calculate T(E ) we must evaluate the integral in Equation 7.10 over the
classically  forbidden  region  from  x 1 to x 2.  Since  U(x) ⫽ ⫺e␧x in  this  region
and E ⫽ ⫺e␧x 2, we have

冕 √U(x) ⫺ E dx ⫽ √e␧冕x 2
√e␧ {x 2 ⫺ x }3/2兩x 2

⫽ ⫺

0

√x 2 ⫺ x dx

2
3

⫽

2
3

√e␧ 冢 兩 E 兩

e␧ 冣3/2

0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

240

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

Metal

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

e – with
energy
E < 0

ε

(a)

φ

0

E

–U

x

Axis normal

to metal surface

ε
U(x) = – e x

x1 = 0

x2 = – E/e

ε

(b)

Figure  7.7 (a)  Field  emission  from  a  metal  surface.  (b)  The  potential  energy  seen
by an  electron  of  the  metal.  The  electric  ﬁeld  produces  the  triangular  potential
barrier shown, through which electrons can tunnel to escape the metal. Turning points
at x 1 ⫽ 0 and x 2 ⫽ ⫺E/e␧ delineate the classically forbidden region. (Note that x 2 is
positive since E is negative.) Tunneling is greatest for the most energetic electrons, for
which 兩E 兩 is equal to the work function ␾ of the metal.

Using  this  result  in  Equation  7.10  gives  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  for  ﬁeld
emission as

Transmission coefﬁcient for
ﬁeld emission

T(E ) ⬇ exp 冢冦⫺

4√2m 兩 E 兩3/2

3e ប

␧ 冣
冧 1

(7.11)

The  strong  dependence  of  T on  electron  energy  E in  the  bulk  is  evident
from  this  expression.  It  is  also  apparent  that  the  quantity  in  curly  brackets
must have the dimensions of electric ﬁeld and represents a characteristic ﬁeld
strength — say, ␧c — for ﬁeld emission:

␧c ⫽

4√2m 兩 E 兩3/2

3e ប

(7.12)

The escape probability is largest for the most energetic electrons; these are the
ones  most  loosely  bound  and  for  which  兩E 兩 ⫽ ␾,  the  work  function  of  the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.2

BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

241

Figure 7.8 Field emission microscope image of the surface of a crystalline platinum
alloy with a magniﬁcation of 3,000,000⫻. Individual atoms can be seen on surface lay-
ers using this technique. (Manfred Kage/Peter Arnold, Inc.)

metal. For 兩E 兩 ⫽ ␾ ⫽ 4.0 eV, a typical value for many metals, we calculate the
characteristic ﬁeld strength to be ␧c ⫽ 5.5 ⫻ 1010 V/m, a strong ﬁeld by labo-
ratory  standards.  Measurable  emission  occurs  even  with  much  weaker  ﬁelds,
however,  since  the  emission  rate depends  on  the  product  of  the  transmission
coefﬁcient and the number of electrons per second that collide with the bar-
rier. This collision frequency is quite high for a bulk sample containing some-
thing like 1022 electrons per cubic centimeter, and values in excess of 1030 col-
lisions  per  second  per  square  centimeter  are  not  uncommon  (see  Problem
18)! In this way ﬁeld emission rates on the order of 1010 electrons per second
(currents of about 1 nA) can be realized with applied ﬁelds as small as ␧c/50,
or about 109 V/m.

EXAMPLE 7.5 Tunneling in a 

Parallel-Plate Capacitor

Estimate the leakage current due to tunneling that passes
across  a  parallel-plate  capacitor  charged  to  a  potential
difference  of  10 kV.  Take  the  plate  separation  to  be
d ⫽ 0.010 mm and the plate area to be A ⫽ 1.0 cm2.

Solution The number of electrons per second imping-
ing on the plate surface from the bulk is the collision fre-
quency f,  about  1030 per  second  per  square  centimeter
for most metals. Of these, only the fraction given by the
transmission coefﬁcient T can tunnel through the poten-
tial barrier in the gap to register as a current through the
device.  Thus,  the  electron  emission  rate  for  a  plate  of

area 1 cm2 is

␭ ⫽ f T(E) ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 1030 exp(⫺␧c/␧)

The  electric  ﬁeld  ␧ in  the  gap  is  10 kV/0.010 mm ⫽
1.0 ⫻ 109 V/m.  Using  this  and  ␧c ⫽ 5.5 ⫻ 1010 V/m
gives  for  the  exponential  exp{⫺55} ⫽ 1.30 ⫻ 10⫺24 and
an emission rate of ␭ ⫽ 1.30 ⫻ 106 electrons per second.
Since each electron carries a charge e ⫽ 1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C,
the tunneling current is

I ⫽ 2.1 ⫻ 10⫺13 A ⫽ 0.21 pA

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

242

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

␣ Decay
The decay of radioactive elements with the emission of ␣ particles (helium nu-
clei composed of two protons and two neutrons) was among the long-standing
puzzles to which the ﬂedgling ﬁeld of wave mechanics was ﬁrst applied shortly
after  its  inception  in  1926.  That  ␣ particles  are  a  disintegration  product  of
such species as radium, thorium, and uranium was well documented as early as
1900, but certain features of this decay remained a mystery, ﬁnally unraveled
in  1928  in  the  now-classic  works  of  George  Gamow  and  R.  W.  Gurney  and
E. U. Condon. Their contribution was to recognize that the newly discovered
tunnel effect lay behind the two most puzzling aspects of ␣ decay:

• All ␣ particles emitted from any one source have nearly the same energy
and, for all known emitters, emerge with kinetic energies in the same nar-
row range, from about 4 to 9 MeV.

• In contrast to the uniformity of energies, the half-life of the emitter (time
taken  for  half  of  the  emitting  substance  to  decay)  varies  over  an  enor-
mous  range — more  than  20  orders  of  magnitude! — according  to  the
emitting element (Table 7.1).

For  instance,  alphas  emerge  from  the  element  thorium  with  kinetic  energy
equal  to  4.05 MeV,  only  a  little  less  than  half  as  much  as  the  alphas  emitted
from  polonium  (8.95 MeV).  Yet  the  half-life  of  thorium  is  1.4 ⫻ 1010 years,
compared with only 3.0 ⫻ 10⫺7 seconds for the half-life of polonium!

Gamow  attributed  this  striking  behavior  to  a  preformed ␣ particle  rattling
around within the nucleus of the radioactive (parent) element, eventually tun-
neling  through  the  potential  barrier  to  escape  as  a  detectable  decay  product
(Fig. 7.9a). While inside the parent nucleus, the ␣ is virtually free, but nonethe-
less conﬁned to the nuclear potential well by the nuclear force. Once outside
the  nucleus,  the  ␣ particle  experiences  only  the  Coulomb  repulsion  of  the
emitting (daughter) nucleus. (The nuclear force on the ␣ outside the nucleus
is insigniﬁcant due to its extremely short range, ⬇10⫺15 m.) Figure 7.9b shows
the potential-energy diagram for the ␣ particle as a function of distance r from
the  emitting  nucleus.  The  nuclear  radius  R is  about  10⫺14 m,  or  10 fm  [note
that  1 fm  (fermi) ⫽ 10⫺15 m]  for  heavy  nuclei2;  beyond  this  there  is  only  the
energy  of  Coulomb  repulsion,  U(r) ⫽ kq 1q 2/r,  between  the doubly  charged ␣

Table 7.1 Characteristics of Some

Common ␣ Emitters

Element

␣ Energy

Half-Life*

212
84Po
240
96Cm
226
88Ra
232
90Th

8.95 MeV

6.40 MeV

4.90 MeV

4.05 MeV

2.98 ⫻ 10⫺7 s
27 days
1.60 ⫻ 103 yr
1.41 ⫻ 1010 yr

*Note that half-lives range over 24 orders of magni-
tude when ␣ energy changes by a factor of 2.

2The fermi (fm) is a unit of distance commonly used in nuclear physics.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.2

BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

243

Nucleus (+Ze)

Alpha particle (+2e)

r

R

(a)

U(r)

U(r) = 2kZe 2/r

Alpha particle
cannot escape

(classically)

0

R

Nuclear
radius

R1 = 2kZe 2/E

(b)

E

Kinetic energy

of escaping

alpha particle

r

Figure 7.9 (a) ␣ decay of a radioactive nucleus. (b) The potential energy seen by an
␣ particle  emitted  with  energy  E. R is  the  nuclear  radius,  about  10⫺14 m,  or  10 fm.
␣ particles  tunneling  through  the  potential  barrier  between  R and R 1 escape  the  nu-
cleus to be detected as radioactive decay products.

(q1 ⫽ +2e)  and  a  daughter  nucleus  with  atomic  number  Z (q 2 ⫽ ⫹Ze).  Classi-
cally, even a 9-MeV ␣ particle initially bound to the nucleus would have insufﬁ-
cient  energy  to  overcome  the  Coulomb  barrier  (⬇ 30 MeV  high)  and  escape.
But the ␣ particle, with its wave attributes, may tunnel through the barrier to ap-
pear on the outside. The total ␣ particle energy E inside the nucleus becomes
the  observed  kinetic  energy  of  the  emerging ␣ once  it  has  escaped.  It  is  the
sensitivity of the tunneling rate to small changes in particle energy that
accounts for the wide range of half-lives observed for ␣emitters.

The tunneling probability and associated decay rate are calculated in much
the same way as for ﬁeld emission, apart from the fact that the barrier shape
now  is  Coulombic,  rather  than  triangular.  The  details  of  this  calculation  are
given in Example 13.9 (Chapter 13), with the result

Tunneling through the
Coulomb barrier

T(E ) ⫽ exp 冦⫺4␲Z√ E0

E

⫹ 8√ ZR
r 0 冧

(7.13)

Transmission coefﬁcient for
␣ particles of an unstable
nucleus

In this expression, r 0 ⫽ ប2/m␣ke 2 is a kind of “Bohr” radius for the ␣ particle.
The  mass  of  the  ␣ particle  is  m␣ ⫽ 7295me,  so  r 0 has  the  value  a0/7295 ⫽
7.25 ⫻ 10⫺5 Å, or 7.25 fm. The length r 0, in turn, deﬁnes a convenient energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

244

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

unit E 0 analogous to the Rydberg in atomic physics:

E0 ⫽

ke2
2 r 0

⫽ 冢 ke2

2a0 冣冢 a0

r 0 冣 ⫽ (13.6 eV)(7295) ⫽ 0.0993 MeV

To obtain decay rates, T(E ) must be multiplied by the number of collisions
per  second  that  an  ␣ particle  makes  with  the  nuclear  barrier.  This  collision
frequency f is the reciprocal of the transit time for the ␣ particle crossing the
nucleus, or f ⫽ v/2R, where v is the speed of the ␣ particle inside the nucleus.
In  most  cases,  f is  about  1021 collisions  per  second  (see  Problem  17).  The
decay rate ␭ (the probability of ␣ emission per unit time) is then
␭ ⫽ f T(E ) ⬇ 1021 exp {⫺4␲Z√E0/E ⫹ 8√Z(R/r0)}

The reciprocal of ␭ has dimensions of time and is related to the half-life of the
emitter t1/2 as

t1/2 ⫽

ln 2
␭

⫽

0.693

␭

(7.14)

EXAMPLE 7.6 Estimating the Half-lives of

Thorium and Polonium

Using  the  tunneling  model  just  developed,  estimate  the
half-lives  for  ␣ decay  of  the  radioactive  elements  tho-
rium and polonium. The energy of the ejected alphas is
4.05 MeV  and  8.95 MeV,  respectively,  and  the  nuclear
size is about 9.00 fm in both cases.

Solution For  thorium  (Z ⫽ 90),  the  daughter  nucleus
has  atomic  number  Z ⫽ 88,  corresponding  to  the  ele-
ment  radium.  Using  E ⫽ 4.05 MeV  and  R ⫽ 9.00 fm,  we
ﬁnd for the transmission factor T(E) in Equation 7.13
exp {⫺4␲(88)√(0.0993/4.05) ⫹ 8√88(9.00/7.25)}

⫽ exp {⫺89.542} ⫽ 1.3 ⫻ 10⫺39

Taking f ⫽ 1021 Hz,  we  obtain  for  the  decay  rate  the
value ␭ ⫽ 1.29 ⫻ 10⫺18 alphas  per  second.  The  associ-
ated half-life is, from Equation 7.14,

t1/2 ⫽

0.693

1.3 ⫻ 10⫺18 ⫽ 5.4 ⫻ 1017 s ⫽ 1.7 ⫻ 1010 yr

which  compares  favorably  with  the  actual  value  for  tho-
rium, 1.4 ⫻ 1010 yr.

If  polonium  (Z ⫽ 84)  is  the  radioactive  species,  the
daughter element is lead, with Z ⫽ 82. Using for the dis-
integration energy E ⫽ 8.95 MeV, we obtain for the trans-
mission factor
exp {⫺4␲(82)√(0.0993/8.95 ⫹ 8√82(9.00/7.25)}

⫽ exp {⫺27.825} ⫽ 8.2 ⫻ 10⫺13

Assuming f is unchanged at 1021 collisions per second, we
get  for  this  case ␭ ⫽ 8.2 ⫻ 108 alphas  per  second  and  a
half-life

t1/2 ⫽

0.693
8.2 ⫻ 108 ⫽ 8.4 ⫻ 10⫺10 s

The measured half-life of polonium is 3.0 ⫻ 10⫺7 s.

Given  the  crudeness  of  our  method,  both  estimates
should  be  considered  satisfactory.  Further,  the  calcula-
tions show clearly how a factor of only 2 in disintegration
energy  leads  to  half-lives  differing  by  more  than  26  or-
ders of magnitude!

The  radioactive  decay  process  also  can  be  understood  in  terms  of
the time evolution of a nonstationary state, in this case one representing the ␣
particle initially conﬁned to the parent nucleus. Solving the Schrödinger equa-
tion for the time-dependent waveform in this instance is complicated, making
numerical studies the option of choice here. The interested reader is referred
to our companion Web site for further details and a fully quantum-mechanical

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.2

BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

245

Double oscillator
representation of the
ammonia molecule

simulation of ␣ decay from an unstable nucleus. Go to http://info.brookscole.
com/mp3e, select QMTools Simulations : Leaky Wells (Tutorial) and follow
the on-site instructions.

Ammonia Inversion
The “inversion” of the ammonia molecule is another example of tunneling,
this time for an entire atom. The equilibrium conﬁguration of the ammonia
(NH3)  molecule  is  shown  in  Figure  7.10a:  The  nitrogen  atom  is  situated  at
the  apex  of  a  pyramid  whose  base  is  the  equilateral  triangle  formed  by  the
three hydrogen atoms. But this equilibrium is not truly stable; indeed, there
is a second equilibrium position for the nitrogen atom on the opposite side
of  the  plane  formed  by  the  hydrogen  atoms.  With  its  two  equilibrium  loca-
tions,  the  nitrogen  atom  of  the  ammonia  molecule  constitutes  a  double
oscillator, which  can  be  modeled  by  using  the  potential  shown  in  Figure
7.10b.  A  nitrogen  atom  initially  located  on  one  side  of  the  symmetry  plane
will not remain there indeﬁnitely, since there is some probability that it can
tunnel through the oscillator barrier to emerge on the other side. When this
occurs, the molecule becomes inverted (Fig. 7.10c). But the process does not
stop  there;  the  nitrogen  atom,  now  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  symmetry
plane, has a probability of tunneling back through the barrier to take up its
original  position!  The  molecule  does  not  just  undergo  one  inversion,  but
flip-flops  repeatedly,  alternating  between  the  two  classical  equilibrium  con-
figurations.  The  “flopping”  frequency  is  ﬁxed  by  the  tunneling  rate  and
turns out to be quite high, on the order of 1010 Hz (microwave range of the
electromagnetic spectrum)!

We can  estimate  the  tunneling  probability  for  inversion  using  Equation
7.10. The double oscillator potential of Figure 7.10b is described by the poten-
tial energy function

H

N

H

H

(a)

U(x)

(Nitrogen atom)

–a

0

+a

Symmetry

plane

(b)

E

x

Axis normal
to symmetry

plane

H

H

H

N

(c)

Figure 7.10 (a) The ammonia molecule NH3. At equilibrium, the nitrogen atom is sit-
uated at the apex of a pyramid whose base is the equilateral triangle formed by the three
hydrogen atoms. By symmetry, a second equilibrium conﬁguration exists for the nitrogen
atom on the opposite side of the plane formed by the hydrogen atoms. (b) The potential
energy seen by the nitrogen atom along a line perpendicular to the symmetry plane. The
two equilibrium points at ⫺a and ⫹a give rise to the double oscillator potential shown. A
nitrogen  atom  with  energy  E can  tunnel  back  and  forth  through  the  barrier  from  one
equilibrium point to the other, with the result that the molecule alternates between the
normal conﬁguration in (a) and the inverted conﬁguration shown in (c).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

246

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

U(x) ⫽ 1

2 M␻2(兩 x 兩 ⫺ a)2

(7.15)

with ␻ the classical frequency of vibration for the nitrogen atom around either
of the equilibrium points x ⫽ ⫾a. We suppose the nitrogen atom possesses the
minimum energy of vibration, E ⫽ ប␻. There are four classical turning points
for  which  U(x) ⫽ E (see  Fig.  7.10b);  the  limits  for  the  tunneling  integral  are
the pair closest to x ⫽ 0, and these are given by x ⫽ ⫾(a ⫺ A), where A is the
vibration amplitude for the nitrogen atom in a single oscillator well. The vibra-
tion amplitude A is found from energy conservation by recognizing that here
all the energy is in potential form:  ប␻ ⫽ M␻2A2, or

1
2

1
2

1
2

A ⫽ √ ប

M␻

(7.16)

Since the tunneling integral is symmetric about x ⫽ 0, we may write it as

√2m冕a⫺A

⫺(a⫺A)

2
ប

4

A2 冕a⫺A

0

√U(x) ⫺ E dx ⫽

√(x ⫺ a)2 ⫺ A2 dx

where U(x)  and  E have  been  expressed  in  terms  of  A,  using  Equation  7.16.
The integral on the right can be evaluated in terms of hyperbolic functions,3
with the result

4

A2 冕a⫺A

0

√(x ⫺ a)2 ⫺ A2 dx ⫽ sinh(2y0) ⫺ 2y0

where y0 is  deﬁned  by  the  relation  cosh(y0) ⫽ a/A.  The  transmission  coefﬁ-
cient is then

T ⫽ e⫺[sinh(2y0)⫺2y0]

(7.17)

To get the tunneling rate ␭ (and its reciprocal — the tunneling time), we must
multiply T by the frequency with which the nitrogen atom collides with the po-
tential barrier. For an atom vibrating about its equilibrium position, this is the
vibration frequency f ⫽ ␻/2␲. From Equation 7.16, we see that f is related to
the vibration amplitude as f ⫽ ប/2␲MA2.

The  tunneling  rate  depends  sensitively  on  the  values  chosen  for  a and A.
For the equilibrium distance from the symmetry plane, we take a ⫽ 0.38 Å, an
experimental value obtained from x-ray diffraction measurements.4 The vibra-
tion  amplitude  A is  not  directly  observable,  but  its  value  can  be  calculated
from U(0), the height of the potential barrier at x ⫽ 0, which is known to be
0.25690 eV. Using Equations 7.15 and 7.16, and taking M ⫽ 14 u for the mass
of the nitrogen atom, we ﬁnd

A ⫽ 冢 ប2a2

2MU(0) 冣1/4

⫽ 冢

2(14)(931.50 ⫻ 103 keV/c2)(0.2569 ⫻ 10⫺3 keV) 冣1/4

(1.973 keV ⭈Å/c)2(0.38 Å)2

⫽ 0.096 Å

3Introduce a new integration variable y with the substitution x ⫺ a ⫽ ⫺A cosh (y), and use the prop-
erties of the hyperbolic cosine and sine functions, cosh (y) ⫽ (e y ⫹ e⫺y), sinh (y) ⫽ (e y ⫺ e⫺y), to
obtain the ﬁnal form.
4B. H. Bransden and C. J. Joachain, Physics of Atoms and Molecules, New York, John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., 1983, p. 456.

1
2

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

7.2

BARRIER PENETRATION: SOME APPLICATIONS

247

This underestimates the true value for A because we have (incorrectly) identi-
ﬁed M as the mass of the nitrogen atom. In fact, M should be the reduced mass
of the nitrogen – hydrogen group, about 2.47 u.5 With this correction, we ﬁnd
A ⫽ 0.148 Å and a tunneling rate ␭ ⫽ f T ⬇ 2.4 ⫻ 1012 Hz. The observed tun-
neling  rate,  2.4 ⫻ 1010 Hz,  suggests  a  somewhat  smaller  value  for  A.  By  trial
and  error,  we  ﬁnd  the  actual  tunneling  rate  is  reproduced  with A ⫽ 0.125 Å,
still  a  reasonable  ﬁgure  for  the  vibration  amplitude  of  the  nitrogen  atom  in
the ammonia molecule.

Notice that because of tunneling, the nitrogen atom on one side of
the  symmetry  plane  or  the  other  does  not constitute  a  stationary  state  of  the
ammonia  molecule,  since  the  probability  for  ﬁnding  it  there  changes  over
time.  In  fact,  the  ﬂopping  behavior  stems  from  a  simple  combination  of  two
stationary states of nearly equal energy for the nitrogen atom in this environ-
ment. Such superpositions of closely spaced (in energy) stationary states have
applications  that  transcend  this  one  example  and  are  the  subject  of  a  com-
puter-based  tutorial  available  at  our  companion  Web  site.  For  more  informa-
tion, go to http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e, select QMTools Simulations :
Two-Center Potentials (Tutorial), and follow the on-site instructions.

Since the ﬂopping frequency is in the microwave range, the ammonia mole-
cule can serve as an ampliﬁer for microwave radiation. The ammonia maser
operates on this principle. Because of the small energy difference between the
ground  and  ﬁrst  excited  states  of  the  ammonia  molecule,  ammonia  vapor  at
room  temperature  has  roughly  equal  numbers  of  molecules  in  both  states.
Having opposite electric dipole moments, these states are easily separated by
passing the vapor through a nonuniform electric ﬁeld. In this way, ammonia
vapor  can  be  produced  with  the  unusually  large  concentrations  of  excited
molecules needed to create the population inversion necessary for maser op-
eration.  A  spontaneous  deexcitation  to  the  ground  state  of  one  molecule  re-
leases a (microwave) photon, which, in turn, induces other molecules to deex-
cite. The result — much like a chain reaction — produces a photon cascade: an
intense  burst  of  coherent  microwave  radiation.  The  operation  of  masers  and
lasers  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Chapter  12  and  on  our  website  at
http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e.

Decay of Black Holes
Once  inside  the  event  horizon,  nothing — not  even  light — can  escape  the
gravitational pull of a black hole.6 That was the view held until 1974, when the
brilliant British astrophysicist Stephen Hawking proposed that black holes are
indeed  radiant  objects,  emitting  a  variety  of  particles  by  a  mechanism  involv-
ing  tunneling  through  the  (gravitational)  potential  barrier  surrounding  the
black hole. The thickness of this barrier is proportional to the size of the black
hole,  so  that  the  likelihood  of  a  tunneling  event  initially  may  be  extremely
small.  As  the  black  hole  emits  particles,  however,  its  mass  and  size  steadily

5In this mode of vibration, all three hydrogen atoms move in unison as if they were a single object
with mass 3 u. The reduced mass refers to the pair consisting of this total mass and the mass of
the nitrogen atom (14 u).
6A brief introduction to black holes is found in Clifford Will’s essay “The Renaissance of General
Relativity” on our companion Web site.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

248

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

decrease,  making  it  easier  for  more  particles  to  tunnel  out.  In  this  way  emis-
sion continues at an ever-increasing rate, until eventually the black hole radi-
ates  itself  out  of  existence  in  an  explosive  climax!  Thus,  Hawking’s  scenario
leads inexorably to the decay and eventual demise of any black hole.

Calculations indicate that a black hole with the mass of our Sun would survive
against decay by tunneling for about 1066 years. On the other hand, a black hole
with the mass of only a billion tons and roughly the size of a proton (such mini
black holes are believed to have been formed just after the Big Bang origin of
the Universe) should have almost completely evaporated in the 10 billion years
that have elapsed since the time of creation, and black holes a few times heavier
should  still  be  evaporating  strongly.  A  large  portion  of  the  energy  emitted  by
such holes would be in the form of gamma rays. Indeed, gamma rays from inter-
stellar space have been observed, but in quantities and with properties that are
readily explained in other ways. Currently there is no compelling observational
evidence of black-hole evaporation in the Universe today.

SUMMARY

For potentials representing barriers, the stationary states are not localized, but
extend  throughout  the  entire  space  in  a  manner  that  describes  particle  scat-
tering. When a matter wave encounters a potential barrier, part of the wave is
reﬂected by the barrier and part is transmitted through the barrier. In particle
language, an object colliding with the barrier does not predictably rebound or
penetrate,  but  can  only  be  assigned  probabilities  for  reﬂection  and  transmis-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

sion. These probabilities are given by the reﬂection coefﬁcient R and trans-
mission coefﬁcient T, respectively. For any particle energy E, these two scat-
tering coefﬁcients must obey the sum rule:

R(E) ⫹ T(E) ⫽ 1

(7.5)

QUESTIONS

249

expressing the fact that the particle either is reﬂected or transmitted. Due to
its wave nature, a particle has some nonzero probability of penetrating the bar-
rier  even  when  it  has  insufﬁcient  energy  to  do  so  on  classical  grounds.  This
process, called tunneling, is the basic mechanism underlying the phenomena
of ﬁeld emission, ␣ decay of radioactive nuclei, ammonia inversion, Hawk-
ing radiation from black holes, and many more. The likelihood of a particle
with mass m and energy E tunneling through a barrier of arbitrary shape U(x)
is given approximately as

(7.10)

T(E ) ⬇ exp 冢⫺

2
ប

√2m冕 √U(x) ⫺ E dx冣

The integral in Equation 7.10 is taken over the range of x where U(x) ⬎ E,
called  the  classically  forbidden  region because  a  classical  particle  in
this interval  would  have  to  have  a  negative  value  of  kinetic  energy  (an
impossibility!).

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. Many  of  the  topics  in  this  chapter  also  are  treated  at
about the same level by A. P. French and E. F. Taylor in
An Introduction to Quantum Physics, New York, W. W. Nor-
ton and Company, Inc., 1978.

2. Experimental aspects of ﬁeld emission microscopy and
related  analytical  surface  techniques  are  discussed  by
P. F. Kane  in  Chapter  6  of  Characterization  of Solid  Sur-
faces, New York, Plenum Press, 1974, pp. 133 – 146.

3. For readable accounts of tunneling from black holes, see
S.  W.  Hawking,  “The  Quantum  Mechanics  of  Black
Holes,” Sci. Am., January 1977, pp. 34 – 40; and J. D. Beck-
enstein, “Black-hole Thermodynamics,” Phys. Today, Janu-
ary 1980, pp. 24 – 31. For a fascinating historical perspec-
tive of these discoveries in the making, written by one of
the  participants,  see  K.  Thorne’s  Black  Holes  and  Time
Warps, New York, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1994.

QUESTIONS

1. Consider a particle with energy E scattered from a poten-
tial  barrier  of  height  U ⬎ E.  How  does  the  amplitude  of
the reﬂected wave change as the barrier height is reduced?
How does the amplitude of the incident wave change?

2. An electron and a proton of identical energy encounter
the  same  potential  barrier.  For  which  is  the  probability
of transmission greatest, and why?

3. In classical physics, only differences in energy have physi-
cal  signiﬁcance.  Discuss  how  this  carries  over  to the
quantum  scattering  of  particles  by  examining  how
adding a constant potential U0 everywhere affects barrier
reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients.

4. Suppose  a  particle  with  energy  E is  located  within  a
barrier whose height U is greater than E. Will this par-
ticle  be  found  to  have  a  negative  kinetic  energy?  Ex-
plain.

5. Explain how a barrier whose width is L might be consid-
ered  wide  for  penetration  by  protons,  yet  at  the  same
time narrow for penetration by electrons.

6. Discuss  the  suitability  of  portraying  wavefunctions  and
potential barriers on the same graph, as in Figure 7.2a.
Can  a  wave  whose  crest  falls  below  the  top  of  a  square
barrier ever penetrate the barrier? Explain.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

250

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

PROBLEMS

7.1 The Square Barrier

1. A  particle  incident  on  the  potential  step  of  Example
7.4 with a certain energy E ⬍ U is described by the wave

␺(x) ⫽ 1

2 {(1 ⫹ i)eikx ⫹ (1⫺i)e⫺ikx}    for x ⱕ 0

␺(x) ⫽ e⫺kx

for x ⱖ 0

(a) Verify by direct calculation that the reﬂection coef-
ﬁcient is unity in this case. (b) How must k be related
to E in  order  for ␺(x)  to  solve  Schrödinger’s  equation
in the region to the left of the step (x ⱕ 0)? to the right
of the step (x ⬎ 0)? What does this say about the ratio
E/U ?  (c)  Evaluate  the  penetration  depth  ␦ ⫽ 1/k for
10 MeV protons incident on this step.

2. Consider the step potential of Example 7.4 in the case
where E ⬎ U.  (a)  Examine  the  Schrödinger  equation
to the left of the step to ﬁnd the form of the solution in
the range x ⬍ 0. Do the same to the right of the step to
obtain the solution form for x ⬎ 0. Complete the solu-
tion  by  enforcing  whatever  boundary  and  matching
conditions may be necessary. (b) Obtain an expression
for  the  reﬂection  coefﬁcient  R in  this  case,  and  show
that it can be written in the form

R ⫽

(k 1 ⫺ k 2)2
(k 1 ⫹ k 2)2

where k1 and k2 are wavenumbers for the incident and
transmitted  waves,  respectively.  Also  write  an  expres-
sion  for  the  transmission  factor  T using  the  sum  rule
obeyed  by  these  coefﬁcients.  (c)  Evaluate  R and T in
the limiting cases of E : U and E : ⬁. Are the results
sensible?  Explain.  (This  situation  is  analogous  to  the
partial  reﬂection  and  transmission  of  light  striking  an
interface separating two different media.)

3. Use  the  results  of  the  preceding  problem  to  calculate
the  fraction  of  25-MeV  protons  reﬂected  and  the  frac-
tion  transmitted  by  a  20-MeV  step.  How  do  your  an-
swers change if the protons are replaced by electrons?

4. A  0.100-mA  electron  beam  with  kinetic  energy  54.0 eV
enters  a  sharply  deﬁned  region  of  lower potential  where
the  kinetic  energy  of  the  electrons  is  increased  by
10.0 eV. What current is reﬂected at the boundary? (This
simulates electron scattering at normal incidence from a
metal surface, as in the Davisson – Germer experiment.)

5. (a)  Tunneling  of  particles  through  barriers  that  are
high or wide (or both) is very unlikely. Show that for a
square barrier with

2mUL2

ប2 ⬎⬎ 1

and  particle  energies  well  below  the  top  of  the
barrier (E ⬍⬍ U )  the  probability  for  transmission  is

approximately

P ⬇ 16

E
U

e⫺2[√2m(U⫺E )/ប]L

(The combination UL2 is sometimes referred to as the
barrier strength.)  (b)  Give  numerical  estimates  for  the
exponential factor in P for each of the following cases:
(1) an electron with U ⫺ E ⫽ 0.01 eV and L ⫽ 0.1 nm;
(2)  an  electron  with  U ⫺ E ⫽ 1 eV  and L ⫽ 0.1 nm;
(3) an  ␣ particle  (m ⫽ 6.7 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg)  with  U ⫺ E ⫽
106 eV  and  L ⫽ 10⫺15 m;  and  (4)  a  bowling  ball 
(m ⫽ 8 kg) with U ⫺ E ⫽ 1 J and L ⫽ 2 cm (this corre-
sponds  to  the  ball’s  getting  past  a  barrier  2 cm  wide
and too high for the ball to slide over).

6. A beam of electrons is incident on a barrier 5 eV high
and  1  nm  wide.  Write  a  simple  computer  program  to
ﬁnd  what  energy  the  electrons  should  have  if  0.1%  of
them are to get through the barrier.

7. Starting  from  the  joining  conditions,  Equations  7.8,
obtain  the  result  for  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  of  a
square  barrier  given  in  Equation  7.9  (valid  when  the
particle has insufﬁcient energy to penetrate the barrier
classically: E ⬍ U ).

8.

9.

10.

Use  the  Java  applet  available  at  our  compan-
ion  Web  site  (http://info.brookscole.com/
mp3e QMTools Simulations : Problem 7.8) to investi-
gate  the  scattering  of  electrons  from  a  square  barrier
1.00 Å  thick  and  10.0 eV  high,  in  the  case  where  the
electron  energy  is  equal  to  the  barrier  height,  E ⫽ U.
What is the functional form of the wave in the barrier
region?  Determine  the  transmission  coefﬁcient  at  this
energy, and compare your result with the prediction of
Equation  7.9.  What  does  classical  physics  predict  for
the probability of transmission in this case?

Use the Java applet referenced in the preced-
ing problem to obtain transmission and reﬂec-
tion  coefﬁcients  for  a  5.00-eV  electron  incident  on  a
square  barrier  that  is  1.00 Å  thick  and  10.0 eV  high.
Verify  the  sum  rule,  Equation  7.5,  and  compare  your
result  for  T(E)  with  the  prediction  of  Equation  7.9.
What must the barrier thickness be to transmit 5.00-eV
protons with the same probability?

Scattering  resonances.  Use  the  Java  applet  avail-
able  at  our  companion  Web  site  (http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e  QMTools  Simulations : Prob-
lem 7.10) to locate the two lowest energies E giving rise
to  perfect  transmission  for  electrons  scattering  from  a
square barrier of width 1.00 Å and height 10.0 eV (look
for  zero-amplitude  reﬂections  while  varying  E ).  For
each  energy  use  the  “Trace”  feature  to  estimate  the
electron  wavelength  ␭ in  the  barrier.  (Hint:  Zoom  in
for a close-up view of the barrier waveform and greater
accuracy.) Compare ␭ with the barrier width L and dis-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

cuss your ﬁndings in terms of the interference of waves
reﬂected  from  the  leading  and  trailing  edges  of  the
barrier (see Example 7.3).

11. The  Ramsauer – Townsend  effect.  Consider  the  scattering
of  particles  from  the  potential  well  shown  in  Figure
P7.11.  (a)  Explain  why  the  waves  reﬂected  from  the
well  edges  x ⫽ 0  and  x ⫽ L will  cancel  completely  if
2L ⫽ ␭2,  where ␭2 is  the  de  Broglie  wavelength  of  the
particle in region 2. (b) Write expressions for the wave-
functions  in  regions  1,  2,  and  3.  Impose  the  necessary
continuity restrictions on ⌿ and ⭸⌿/⭸x to show explic-
itly that 2L ⫽ ␭2 leads to no reﬂected wave in region 1.
[This is a crude model for the Ramsauer – Townsend ef-
fect observed in the collisions of slow electrons with no-
ble  gas  atoms  like  argon,  krypton,  and  xenon.  Elec-
trons  with  just  the  right  energy  are  diffracted  around
these  atoms  as  if  there  were  no  obstacle  in  their  path
(perfect transmission). The effect is peculiar to the no-
ble gases because their closed-shell conﬁgurations pro-
duce atoms with abrupt outer boundaries.]

PROBLEMS

251

negative, we ﬁnd that T(E) diverges for some particular
energy E 0.  Find  this  value  E 0.  (As  it  happens,  E 0 is  the
energy of a bound state in the delta well. The calculation
illustrates a general technique, in which bound states are
sought  among  the  singularities  of  the  scattering  coefﬁ-
cients for a potential well of arbitrary shape.) (d) What
fraction of the particles incident on the well with energy
E ⫽ 兩E 0兩 is transmitted and what fraction is reﬂected?

U

L

x

L

0

U = S—
L

Figure P7.12

x

L

U      ∞

E

U

1

2

3

R(E) ⫹ T(E) ⫽ 1

13. Obtain directly an expression for the reﬂection coefﬁ-
cient R(E) for the delta well of Problem 12, and verify
the sum rule

x = 0

x = L

Figure P7.11

12. A potential model of interest for its simplicity is the delta
well. The delta well may be thought of as a square well of
width L and depth S/L in the limit L : 0 (Fig. P7.12).
The  limit  is  such  that  S,  the  product  of  the  well  depth
with  its  width,  remains  ﬁxed  at  a  ﬁnite  value  known  as
the  well  strength.  The  effect  of  a  delta  well  is  to  intro-
duce a discontinuity in the slope of the wavefunction at
the  well  site,  although  the  wave  itself  remains  continu-
ous here. In particular, it can be shown that

d␺

dx 兩0⫹

⫺

d␺

dx 兩0⫺

⫽ ⫺

2mS
ប2 ␺(0)

for a delta well of strength S situated at x ⫽ 0. (a) Solve
Schrödinger’s equation on both sides of the well (x ⬍ 0
and x ⬎ 0)  for  the  case  where  particles  are  incident
from  the  left  with  energy  E ⬎ 0.  Note  that  in  these
regions  the  particles  are  free,  so  that  U(x) ⫽ 0.
(b) Enforce the continuity of ␺ and the slope condition
at x ⫽ 0.  Solve  the  resulting  equations  to  obtain  the
transmission  coefﬁcient  T as  a  function  of  particle  en-
ergy E.  Sketch  T(E )  for  E ⱖ 0.  (c)  If  we  allow  E to  be

for all particle energies E ⬎ 0.

14. Keeping  constant  speed  0.8 m/s,  a  marble  rolls  back
inside  a  shoebox.  Make  an  order-of-
and  forth 
magnitude  estimate  of  the  probability  of  its  escaping
through  the  wall  of  the  box  by  quantum  tunneling.
State the quantities you take as data and the values you
measure or estimate for them.

7.2 Barrier Penetration
15. A  barrier  of  arbitrary  shape  can  be  approximated  as  a
succession of square barriers, as shown in Figure P7.15.
Write the transmission coefﬁcient for this barrier using
the  result  of  Equation  7.9  for  each  of  the  individual
barriers,  assuming  the  transmitted  wave  intensity  for
one becomes the incident wave intensity for the barrier
immediately  following  it  in  the  series.  Show  that  the
form  of  Equation  7.10  is  recovered  in  the  case  where
E ⬍ U and ␣L ⬎⬎ 1.

16. Consider an ␣ particle conﬁned to a thorium nucleus.
Model  the  nuclear  potential  as  a  semi-inﬁnite  square
well  with  an  inﬁnitely  high  wall  at  r ⫽ 0  and  a  wall  of
height  30.0 MeV  at  the  nuclear  radius  R ⫽ 9.00 fm.
Use  the  iterative  method  described  in  Example  6.8  to
estimate the smallest values of energy and velocity per-
mitted  for  the  ␣ particle.  What  conclusion  can  you
draw from the fact that the ejected ␣ is observed to have
a kinetic energy of 4.05 MeV?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

252

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

U(x)

19.

E

x

x1

x2

x

(a)

U(x)

∆x

(b)

Figure P7.15

20.

17. The  attempt  frequency  of  an  ␣ particle  to  escape  the
nucleus  is  the  number  of  times  per  second  it  collides
with  the  nuclear  barrier.  Estimate  this  collision  fre-
quency in the tunneling model for the ␣ decay of tho-
rium, assuming the ␣ behaves like a true particle inside
the nucleus with total energy equal to the observed ki-
netic  energy  of  decay.  The  daughter  nucleus  for  this
case (radium) has Z ⫽ 88 and a radius of 9.00 fm. Take
for  the  overall  nuclear  barrier  30.0 MeV,  measured
from  the  bottom  of  the  nuclear  well  to  the  top  of  the
Coulomb barrier (see Fig. 7.8).

18. Verify  the  claim  of  Section  7.2  that  the  electrons  of  a
metal collide with the surface at a rate of about 1030 per
second per square centimeter. Do this by estimating the
collision  frequency  of  electrons  in  a  1.00-cm  cube  of
copper metal with one face of the cube surface. Assume
that  each  copper  atom  contributes  one  conduction
electron to the metal (the chemical valence of copper is
⫹1)  and  that  these  conduction  electrons  move  freely

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

with kinetic energy equal to 7.00 eV. In fact, not all the
electrons have this energy; see Chapter 10.

Resonant  tunneling.  Heterostructures  formed
from layered semiconductors have characteris-
tics  important  to  many  modern  electronic  devices.
Here,  we  use  computer  simulation  to  study  tunneling
in a three-layer gallium arsenide/gallium aluminum ar-
senide  (GaAs – Ga1⫺xAlxAs)  sandwich.  The  GaAs  layer
constitutes a potential well between two conﬁning bar-
riers formed by the Ga1⫺xAlxAs layers. Unusually large
transmission  (resonant  tunneling)  through  the  device
occurs  when  the  energy  of  the  incident  electron  coin-
cides with that of a bound state in the central well. The
Java  applet  simulating  this  device  can  be  found  at
http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e  QMTools  Simula-
tions : Problem  7.19.  The  barriers  are  0.25 eV  high
and 5.0 nm wide, with a gap of equal width separating
them.  Note  that  electrons  in  these  materials  behave
like  free  electrons  with  an  effective  mass  m* ⫽
0.067m e,  only  a  fraction  of  the  free  electron  value.
Starting from E ⫽ 0, gradually increase the electron en-
ergy to ﬁnd the lowest value for peak transmission. In-
vestigate the width of the resonance by varying the elec-
tron  energy  further  until  T(E )  falls  to  half  of  its  peak
value.  (In  practice,  the  incident  electron  energy  is
ﬁxed and the device is “tuned” to resonance by apply-
ing  a  suitable  bias  voltage  that  alters  the  bound-state
energies of the central well.)

Ammonia  inversion.  Inversion  of  the  ammonia
molecule can be simulated using the Java applet
available at our companion Web site (http://info.brooks
cole.com/mp3e QMTools Simulations : Problem 7.20)
The potential energy is the double oscillator of Equation
7.15  with  parameter  values  chosen  to  model  the  nitro-
gen  atom  in  NH3 (as  discussed  in  the  text)  and  a  re-
duced mass of 2.47 u for the atom in this environment.
(a) Find and display the two lowest-lying stationary states
of  the  nitrogen  atom  in  the  ammonia  molecule.  De-
scribe  the  appearance  of  these  waveforms  (symmetry,
number  of  nodes,  and  so  on).  (b) Construct  an  initial
(nonstationary)  state  for  the  atom  by  mixing  together
these  two  stationary  waves  with  equal  amplitude.  De-
scribe  this  state.  What  does  it  imply  for  the  location  of
the atom initially? (c) Explore the time evolution of the
state  constructed  in  (b).  Verify  that  the  atom  ﬂip-ﬂops
between  the  two  equilibrium  positions  and  determine
the  “ﬂopping”  frequency.  Multiplying  the  ﬂopping  fre-
quency by Planck’s constant gives a characteristic energy
for  this  process.  How  does  this  characteristic  energy
compare  to  the  energy  separation  of  the  stationary
states? Explain (see Problem 6.38).

 

THE SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPE

Essay
The basic idea of quantum mechanics, that particles have properties of waves and

vice  versa,  is  among  the  strangest  found  anywhere  in  science.  Because  of  this
strangeness, and because quantum mechanics mostly deals with the very small, it
might  seem  to  have  little  practical  application.  As  we  will  show  in  this  essay,  however,
one of the basic phenomena of quantum mechanics — the tunneling of particles — is at
the heart of a very practical device that is one of the most powerful microscopes ever
built.  This  device,  the  scanning  tunneling  microscope,  or  STM,  enables  physicists  to
make highly detailed images of surfaces with resolution comparable to the size of a sin-
gle  atom.  Such  images  promise  to  revolutionize  our  understanding  of  structures  and
processes on the atomic scale.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Before discussing how the STM works, we ﬁrst look at a sample of what the STM can
do.  An  image  made  by  a  scanning  tunneling  microscope  of  the  surface  of  a  piece  of
gold is shown in Figure 1. You can easily see that the surface is not uniformly ﬂat, but is
a series of terraces separated by steps that are only one atom high. Gentle corrugations
can be seen in the terraces, caused by subtle rearrangements of the gold atoms.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Paul K. Hansma

Department of Physics,
University of California,
Santa Barbara

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

253

254

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

What makes the STM so remarkable is the ﬁneness of the detail that can be seen in
images such as Figure 1. The resolution in this image — that is, the size of the smallest
detail that can be discerned — is about 2 Å (2 ⫻ 10⫺10 m). For an ordinary microscope,
the resolution is limited by the wavelength of the waves used to make the image. Thus
an optical microscope has a resolution of no better than 2000 Å, about half the wave-
length  of  visible  light,  and  so  could  never  show  the  detail  displayed  in  Figure  1.
Electron  microscopes  can  have  a  resolution  of  2 Å  by  using  electron  waves  of  wave-
length 4 Å or shorter. From the de Broglie formula, ␭ ⫽ h/p, the electron momentum
p required  to  give  this  wavelength  is  3100 eV/c,  corresponding  to  an  electron  speed
v ⫽ p/m e ⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 106 m/s. Electrons traveling at this high speed would penetrate into
the interior of the piece of gold in Figure 1 and so would give no information about in-
dividual surface atoms.

The image in Figure 1 was made by Gerd Binnig, Heinrich Rohrer, and collabora-
tors  at  the  IBM  Research  Laboratory  in  Zurich,  Switzerland.  Binnig  and  Rohrer  in-
vented the STM and shared the 1986 Nobel prize in physics for their work. Such is the
importance of this device that unlike most Nobel prizes, which come decades after the
original  work,  Binnig  and  Rohrer  received  their  Nobel  prize  just  six  years  after  their
ﬁrst experiments with an STM.

One design for an STM is shown in Figure 2. The basic idea behind its operation is
very simple, as shown in Figure 3. A conducting probe with a very sharp tip is brought
near the surface to be studied. Because it is attracted to the positive ions in the surface,
an electron in the surface has a lower total energy than would an electron in the empty
space between surface and tip. The same thing is true for an electron in the tip. In clas-

Figure 2 One design for a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The sample to be
studied is mounted on a plate in the cylindrical dish. The probe extends beneath the
left tripod. The micrometer attached to the spring is used to position the sample.

1 cm

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

THE SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPE

255

sical Newtonian mechanics, electrons could not move between the surface and tip be-
cause they would lack the energy to escape either material. But because the electrons
obey quantum mechanics, they can “tunnel” across the barrier of empty space between
the surface and the tip. Let us explore the operation of the STM in terms of the discus-
sion of tunneling in Section 7.1.

For an electron in the apparatus of Figures 2 and 3, a plot of the energy as a func-
tion  of  position  would  look  like  Figure  7.2b.  The  horizontal  coordinate  in  this  ﬁgure
represents  electron  position.  Now  L is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  distance  between  the
surface and the tip, so that coordinates less than 0 refer to positions inside the surface
material  and  coordinates  greater  than  L refer  to  positions  inside  the  tip.  The  barrier
height U ⫽ q␾ is the potential-energy difference between an electron outside the mate-
rial and an electron in the material. That is, an electron in the surface or tip has poten-
tial energy ⫺U compared with one in vacuum. (We are assuming for the moment that
the surface and tip are made of the same material. We will comment on this assump-
tion shortly.) The kinetic energy of an electron in the surface is E, so that an amount of
energy equal to (U ⫺ E) must be given to an electron to remove it from the surface.
Thus (U ⫺ E) is the work function of an electron in the surface.

For  the  potential  energy  curve  of  Figure  7.2b,  one  could  expect  as  much  tunneling
from the surface into the tip as in the opposite direction. In a STM, the direction in which
electrons tend to cross the barrier is controlled by applying a voltage between the surface
and the tip. With preferential tunneling from the surface into the tip, the tip samples the
distribution of electrons in and above the surface. Because of this “bias” voltage, the work
functions of surface and tip are different, giving a preferred direction of tunneling. This is
also automatically the case if the surface and tip are made of different materials. In addi-
tion, the top of the barrier in Figure 7.2b will not be ﬂat but will be tilted to reﬂect the
electric ﬁeld between the surface and the tip. If the barrier energy U is large compared
with the difference between the surface and tip work functions, however, and if the bias
voltage is small compared with ␾ ⫽ U/q, we can ignore these complications in our calcula-
tions.  Then  all  the  results  for  a  square  barrier  given  in  Section  7.1  may  be  applied  to  a
STM. Detailed discussions of the effects that result when these complications are included
can be found in the article by P. K. Hansma and J. Tersoff and in the Nobel prize lecture
of Binnig and Rohrer (see Suggestions for Further Reading).

The characteristic scale of length for tunneling is set by the work function (U ⫺ E ).

For a typical value (U ⫺ E ) ⫽ 4.0 eV, this scale of length is

(a)

Material

Empty space

␺

(b)

Material Empty
space

Probe

␺

Figure  3 (a)  The  wavefunc-
tion  of  an  electron  in  the  sur-
face  of  the  material  to  be  stud-
ied.  The  wavefunction  extends
beyond  the  surface  into  the
empty region. (b) The sharp tip
of  a  conducting  probe 
is
brought  close  to  the  surface.
The  wavefunction  of  a  surface
electron penetrates into the tip,
so  that  the  electron  can  “tun-
nel”  from  surface  to  tip.  Com-
pare this ﬁgure to Figure 7.2a.

ប

␦ ⫽

√2m e(U ⫺ E )
⫽ 0.98 Å ⬇ 1.0 Å

⫽

បc

√2m ec2(U ⫺ E )

⫽

1.973 keV ⭈Å

√2(511 keV)(4.0 ⫻ 10⫺3 keV)

The probability that a given electron will tunnel across the barrier is just the transmis-
sion  coefﬁcient  T (Equation  7.9).  If  the  separation  L between  surface  and  tip  is  not
small compared with ␦, then the barrier is “wide” and we can use the approximate re-
sult of Problem 5 for T. The current of electrons tunneling across the barrier is simply
proportional to T. The tunneling current density can be shown to be

j ⫽

e 2V

4␲2L␦ប

e2L/␦

In this expression e is the charge of the electron and V is the bias voltage between sur-
face and tip.

We can see from this expression that the STM is very sensitive to the separation L
between tip and surface. This is because of the exponential dependence of the tunnel-
ing current on L (this is much more important than the 1/L dependence). As we saw
earlier,  typically  ␦ ⬇ 1.0 Å.  Hence,  increasing  the  distance  L by  just  0.01 Å  causes
the tunneling current to be multiplied by a factor e⫺2(0.01 Å)/(1.0 Å) ⬇ 0.98; that is, the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

256

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

current  decreases  by  2% — a  change  that  is  measurable.  For  distance  L greater  than
10 Å (that is, beyond a few atomic diameters), essentially no tunneling takes place. This
sensitivity to L is the basis of the operation of the STM: Monitoring the tunneling cur-
rent as the tip is scanned over the surface gives a sensitive measure of the topography
of the surface. In this way the STM can measure the height of surface features to within
0.01 Å, or approximately one one-hundredth of an atomic diameter.

The STM also has excellent lateral resolution, that is, resolution of features in the
plane of the surface. This is because the tips used are very sharp indeed, typically only
an atom or two wide at their extreme end. Thus the tip samples the surface electrons
only in a very tiny region approximately 2 Å wide and so can “see” very ﬁne detail. You
might think that making such tips would be extremely difﬁcult, but in fact it’s relatively
easy — sometimes  just  sharpening  the  tip  on  a  ﬁne  grinding  stone  (or  even  with  ﬁne
sandpaper) is enough to cause the tip atoms to rearrange by themselves into an atomi-
cally  sharp  conﬁguration.  (If  you  ﬁnd  this  surprising,  you’re  not  alone.  Binnig  and
Rohrer were no less surprised when they discovered this.)

There are two modes of operation for the STM, shown in Figure 4. In the constant
current mode (Fig. 4a), a convenient operating voltage (typically between 2 mV and 2 V)
is ﬁrst established between surface and tip. The tip is then brought close enough to the
surface to obtain measurable tunneling current. The tip is then scanned over the surface

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

THE SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPE

257

while the tunneling current I is measured. A feedback network changes the vertical posi-
tion of the tip, z, to keep the tunneling current constant, thereby keeping the separation L
between  surface  and  tip  constant.  An  image  of  the  surface  is  made  by  plotting  z versus
lateral position (x, y). The simplest scheme for plotting the image is shown in the graph
below  the  schematic  view.  The  height  z is  plotted  versus  the  scan  position  x.  An  image
consists of multiple scans displaced laterally from each other in the y direction.

The constant current mode was historically the ﬁrst to be used and has the advan-
tage that it can be used to track surfaces that are not atomically ﬂat (as in Fig. 1). The
feedback  network,  however,  requires  that  the  scanning  be  done  relatively  slowly.  As  a
result, the sample being scanned must be held ﬁxed in place for relatively long times to
prevent image distortion.

Alternatively, in the constant height mode (Fig. 4b), the tip is scanned across the
surface at constant voltage and nearly constant height while the current is monitored.
In  this  case  the  feedback  network  responds  only  rapidly  enough  to  keep  the  average
current constant, which means that the tip maintains the same average separation from
the surface. The image is then a plot of current I versus lateral position (x, y), as shown
in the graph below the schematic. Again, multiple scans along x are displayed laterally
displaced  in  the  y direction.  The  image  shows  the  substantial  variation  of  tunneling
current  as  the  tip  passes  over  surface  features  such  as  individual  atoms.  The  constant
height  mode  allows  much  faster  scanning  of  atomically  ﬂat  surfaces  (100  times  faster
than  the  constant  current  mode),  since  the  tip  does  not  have  to  be  moved  up  and
down over the surface “terrain.” This fast scanning means that making an image of a
surface  requires  only  a  short  “exposure  time.”  By  making  a  sequence  of  such  images,
researchers may be able to study in real time processes in which the surfaces rearrange
themselves — in effect making an STM “movie.”

Individual atoms have been imaged on a variety of surfaces, including those of so-
called layered materials in which atoms are naturally arranged into two-dimensional lay-
ers. Figure 5 shows an example of atoms on one of these layered materials. In this im-
age it is fascinating not only to see individual atoms but also to note that some atoms
are missing. Speciﬁcally, there are three atoms missing from Figure 5. Can you ﬁnd the
places where they belong?

Figure 5 Image of atoms on a surface of tantalum disulﬁde (TaS2) immersed in liq-
uid nitrogen; 1 nm ⫽ 10⫺9 m ⫽ 10 Å. The ﬁgure is from C. G. Slough, W. W. McNairy,
R. V. Coleman, B. Drake, and P. K. Hansma, Phys. Rev. B34:994, 1986.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

258

CHAPTER 7

TUNNELING PHENOMENA

 

Another remarkable aspect of the STM image in Figure 5 is that it was obtained with
the surface and tip immersed in liquid nitrogen. We assumed earlier in this essay that the
space between the surface and tip must be empty, but in fact electron tunneling can take
place  not  just  through  vacuum  but  also  through  gases  and  liquids — even  water.  This
seems very surprising since we think of water, especially water with salts dissolved in it, as
a conductor. But water is only an ionic conductor. For electrons, water behaves as an insu-
lator just as vacuum behaves as an insulator. Thus electrons can ﬂow through water only
by tunneling, which makes scanning tunneling microscopy possible “under water.”

As an example, Figure 6 shows individual carbon atoms on a graphite surface. It was
obtained for a surface immersed in a silver-plating solution, which is highly conductive
for ions but behaves as an insulator for electrons. (The sides of the conducting probe
were sheathed with a nonconductor, so the predominant current into the probe comes
from electrons tunneling into the exposed tip. The design of STM used to make this
particular image is the one shown in Fig. 2.) Sonnenfeld and Schardt observed atoms
on this graphite surface before plating it with silver, after “islands” of silver atoms were
plated  onto  the  surface,  and  after  the  silver  was  electrochemically  stripped  from  the
surface.  Their  work  illustrates  the  promise  of  the  scanning  tunneling  microscope  for
seeing processes that take place on an atomic scale.

The original STMs were one-of-a-kind laboratory devices, but commercial STMs have
recently  become  available.  Figure  7  is  an  image  of  a  graphite  surface  in  air  made  with
such a commercial STM. Note the high quality of this image and the recognizable rings
of carbon atoms. You may be able to see that three of the six carbon atoms in each ring
appear lower than the other three. All six atoms are in fact at the same level, but the three
that appear lower are bonded to carbon atoms lying directly beneath them in the under-
lying atomic layer. The atoms in the surface layer that appear higher do not lie directly
over subsurface atoms and hence are not bonded to carbon atoms beneath them. For the
higher-appearing atoms, some of the electron density that would have been involved in
bonding to atoms beneath the surface instead extends into the space above the surface.
This extra electron density makes these atoms appear higher in Figure 7, since what the
STM maps is the topography of the electron distribution.

The availability of commercial instruments should speed the use of scanning tunnel-
ing microscopy in a variety of applications. These include characterizing electrodes for

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ESSAY

THE SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPE

259

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

electrochemistry  (while  the  electrode  is  still  in  the  electrolyte),  characterizing  the
roughness  of  surfaces,  measuring  the  quality  of  optical  gratings,  and  even  imaging
replicas of biological structures.

Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the scanning tunneling microscope is that
its operation is based on a quantum mechanical phenomenon — tunneling — that was
well understood in the 1920s, yet the STM itself wasn’t built until the 1980s. What other
applications of quantum mechanics may yet be waiting to be discovered?

Suggestions for Further Reading

G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, Ch. Gerber, and E. Weibel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49:57, 1982. The ﬁrst

description of the operation of a scanning tunneling microscope.

G.  Binnig  and  H.  Rohrer,  Sci.  Am.,  August  1985,  p.  50.  A  popular  description  of  the

STM and its applications.

C. F. Quate, Phys. Today, August 1986, p. 26. An overview of the ﬁeld of scanning tun-

neling microscopy, including insights into how it came to be developed.

P. K. Hansma and J. Tersoff, J. Appl. Phys. 61:R1, 1987. A comprehensive review of the

“state of the art” in scanning tunneling microscopy.

G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59:615, 1987. The text of the lecture given on

the occasion of the presentation of the 1986 Nobel prize in physics.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8
Quantum Mechanics
in Three Dimensions

Chapter Outline

8.1 Particle in a Three-Dimensional

Box

8.2 Central Forces and Angular

Momentum

8.3 Space Quantization
8.4 Quantization of Angular
Momentum and Energy
(Optional)
Lz Is Sharp: The Magnetic Quantum

Number

兩L兩 Is Sharp: The Orbital Quantum

Number

E Is Sharp: The Radial Wave

Equation

8.5 Atomic Hydrogen and 

Hydrogen-like Ions
The Ground State of Hydrogen-like Atoms
Excited States of Hydrogen-like Atoms

8.6 Antihydrogen
Summary

So  far  we  have  shown  how  quantum  mechanics  can  be  used  to  describe
motion in one dimension. Although the one-dimensional case illustrates such
basic  features  of  systems  as  the  quantization  of  energy,  we  need  a  full  three-
dimensional treatment for the applications to atomic, solid-state, and nuclear
physics that we will meet in later chapters. In this chapter we extend the con-
cepts  of  quantum  mechanics  from  one  to  three  dimensions  and  explore  the
predictions of the theory for the simplest of real systems—the hydrogen atom.
With  the  introduction  of  new  degrees  of  freedom  (and  the  additional
coordinates  needed  to  describe  them)  comes  a  disproportionate  increase  in
the level of mathematical difﬁculty. To guide our inquiry, we shall rely on clas-
sical insights to help us identify the observables that are likely candidates for
quantization. These must come from the ranks of the so-called sharp observables
and, with few exceptions, are the same as the constants of the classical motion.

8.1 PARTICLE IN A THREE-DIMENSIONAL BOX

Let us explore the workings of wave mechanics in three dimensions through
the example of a particle conﬁned to a cubic “box.” The box has edge length
L and occupies the region 0 ⬍ x, y, z ⬍ L, as shown in Figure 8.1. We assume
the walls of the box are smooth, so they exert forces only perpendicular to the
surface, and that collisions with the walls are elastic. A classical particle would

260

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.1

PARTICLE IN A THREE-DIMENSIONAL BOX

261

rattle around inside such a box, colliding with the walls. At each collision, the
component  of  particle  momentum  normal  to  the  wall  is  reversed  (changes
sign),  while  the  other  two  components  of  momentum  are  unaffected  (Fig.
8.2). Thus, the collisions preserve the magnitude of each momentum compo-
nent, in addition to the total particle energy. These four quantities—兩px兩, 兩py兩,
兩pz兩, and E — then, are constants of the classical motion, and it should be possi-
ble to ﬁnd quantum states for which all of them are sharp.1

The wavefunction ⌿ in three dimensions is a function of r and t. Again the
magnitude of ⌿ determines the probability density P(r, t) ⫽ 兩⌿(r, t)兩2, which
is  now  a  probability  per  unit  volume.  Multiplication  by  the  volume  element
dV(⫽dx  dy  dz)  gives  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  particle  within  the  volume
element dV at the point r at time t.

Since our particle is conﬁned to the box, the wavefunction ⌿ must be zero
at  the  walls  and  outside.  The  wavefunction  inside  the  box  is  found  from
Schrödinger’s equation,

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2⌿ ⫹ U(r)⌿ ⫽ i ប

⭸⌿
⭸t

(8.1)

We see  that  ⭸2/⭸x 2 in  the  one-dimensional  case  is  replaced  in  three  dimen-
sions by the Laplacian,

ⵜ2 ⫽

⭸2
⭸x2 ⫹

⭸2
⭸y2 ⫹

⭸2
⭸z2

(8.2)

where U(r) is still the potential energy but is now a function of all the space
coordinates: U(r) ⫽ U(x, y, z).  Indeed,  the  Laplacian  together  with  its  multi-
plying constant is just the kinetic energy operator of Table 6.2 extended to in-
clude the contributions to kinetic energy from motion in each of three mutu-
ally perpendicular directions:

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2 ⫽ 冢⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2

⭸x2 冣 ⫹ 冢⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2

⭸y2 冣 ⫹ 冢⫺

ប2
2m

⭸2

⭸z2 冣

(8.3)

⫽ [Kx] ⫹ [Ky] ⫹ [Kz]

This  form  is  consistent  with  our  belief  that  the  Cartesian  axes  identify  inde-
pendent but logically equivalent directions in space. With this identiﬁcation of
the  kinetic  energy  operator  in  three  dimensions,  the  left-hand  side  of  Equa-
tion  8.1  is  again  the  Hamiltonian  operator  [H ]  applied  to  ⌿,  and  the  right-
hand side is the energy operator [E] applied to ⌿ (see Section 6.8). As it does
in one dimension, Schrödinger’s equation asserts the equivalence of these two
operators when applied to the wavefunction of any physical system.

Stationary states are those for which all probabilities are constant in time,

and are given by solutions to Schrödinger’s equation in the separable form,

1Recall from Section 6.7 that sharp observables are those for which there is no statistical distribu-
tion  of  measured  values.  Indeed,  quantum  wavefunctions  typically  are  labeled  by  the  sharp  ob-
servables for that state. (For example, the oscillator states of Section 6.6 are indexed by the quan-
tum number n, which speciﬁes the sharp value of particle energy E. In this case, the sharp values
of energy also are quantized, that is, limited to the discrete values (n ⫹ )ប␻. It follows that any
sharp  observable  is  constant  over  time  (unless  the  corresponding  operator  explicitly  involves
time). The converse—that quantum states exist for which all constants of the classical motion are
sharp—is not always true but occurs frequently enough that it can serve as a useful rule of thumb.

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

z

L

y

x

L

L

Figure  8.1 A  particle  con-
ﬁned to move in a cubic box of
sides L.  Inside  the  box  U ⫽ 0.
The  potential  energy  is  inﬁnite
at the walls and outside the box.

Schrödinger equation in
three dimensions

–v⊥

v′

v

v⊥

v||

v||

Figure 8.2 Change in particle
velocity  (or  momentum)  dur-
ing collision  with  a  wall  of  the
box. For  elastic  collision  with  a
smooth  wall,  the  component
normal  to  the  wall  is  reversed,
but  the  tangential  components
are unaffected.

262

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

⌿(r, t) ⫽ ␺(r)e⫺i␻t

(8.4)

With  this  time  dependence,  the  right-hand  side  of  Equation  8.1  reduces  to
ប␻⌿, leaving ␺(r) to satisfy the time-independent Schrödinger equation for
a particle whose energy is E ⫽ ប␻:

The time-independent
Schrödinger equation

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2␺(r) ⫹ U(r)␺(r) ⫽ E␺(r)

(8.5)

Since our particle is free inside the box, we take the potential energy U(r) ⫽ 0
for 0 ⬍ x, y, z ⬍ L. In this case the spatial wavefunction also is separable; that is,
solutions to Equation 8.5 with U(r) ⫽ 0 can be found in product form:

␺(r) ⫽ ␺(x, y, z) ⫽ ␺1(x)␺2(y)␺3(z)

(8.6)

Substituting  Equation  8.6  into  Equation  8.5  and  dividing  every  term  by  the
function ␺(x, y, z) gives (for U(r) ⫽ 0)

⫺

ប2

2m␺1

d 2␺1
dx2 ⫺

ប2

2m␺2

d 2␺2
dy2 ⫺

ប2

2m␺3

d 2␺3
dz2 ⫽ E

In this form the independent variables are isolated: the ﬁrst term on the left
depends  only  on  x,  the  second  only  on  y,  and  the  third  only  on  z.  To  satisfy
the equation everywhere inside the cube, each of these terms must reduce to a
constant:

⫺

⫺

⫺

ប2

2m␺1

ប2

2m␺2

ប2

2m␺3

d 2␺1
dx2 ⫽ E1
d 2␺2
dy2 ⫽ E2
d 2␺3
dz2 ⫽ E3

(8.7)

The stationary states for a particle conﬁned to a cube are obtained from these
three  separate  equations.  The  energies  E1, E2,  and  E3 are separation  con-
stants and represent the energy of motion along the three Cartesian axes x, y,
and z.  Consistent  with  this  identiﬁcation,  the  Schrödinger  equation  requires
that E1 ⫹ E2 ⫹ E3 ⫽ E.

The ﬁrst of Equations 8.7 is the same as that for the inﬁnite square well in one
dimension. Independent solutions to this equation are sin k1x and cos k1x, where
k 1 ⫽ √2m E1/ប2
is the wavenumber of oscillation. Only sin k1x satisﬁes the condi-
tion that the wavefunction must vanish at the wall x ⫽ 0, however. Requiring the
wavefunction to vanish also at the opposite wall x ⫽ L implies k 1L ⫽ n1␲, where
n1 is any positive integer. In other words, we must be able to ﬁt an integral num-
ber of half-wavelengths into our box along the direction marked by x. It follows
that the magnitude of particle momentum along this direction must be one of
the special values

兩 px 兩 ⫽ បk 1 ⫽ n 1

    n 1 ⫽ 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

␲ប

L

Identical  considerations  applied  to  the  remaining  two  equations  show  that
the magnitudes  of  particle  momentum  in  all  three  directions  are  similarly

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

quantized:

8.1

PARTICLE IN A THREE-DIMENSIONAL BOX

263

兩 px 兩 ⫽ បk 1 ⫽ n 1

兩 py 兩 ⫽ បk 2 ⫽ n 2

兩 pz 兩 ⫽ បk 3 ⫽ n 3

␲ប

L

␲ប

L

␲ប

L

n1 ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

n2 ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

(8.8)

Allowed values of
momentum components
for a particle in a box

n3 ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

Notice  that  ni ⫽ 0  is  not  allowed,  since  that  choice  leads  to  a  ␺i that  is  also
zero  and  a  wavefunction  ␺(r)  that  vanishes  everywhere.  Since  the  momenta
are restricted this way, the particle energy (all kinetic) is limited to the follow-
ing discrete values:

E ⫽

1
2m

(兩 px 兩2 ⫹ 兩 py 兩2 ⫹ 兩 pz 兩2) ⫽

␲2ប2
2mL2 {n 1

2 ⫹ n 2

2}
2 ⫹ n 3

(8.9)

Discrete energies allowed for
a particle in a box

Thus, conﬁning the particle to the cube serves to quantize its momentum and
energy according to Equations 8.8 and 8.9. Note that three quantum numbers
are needed to specify the quantum condition, corresponding to the three
independent  degrees  of  freedom  for  a  particle  in  space. These  quantum
numbers specify the values taken by the sharp observables for this system.

Collecting the previous results, we see that the stationary states for this par-

ticle are

⌿(x, y, z, t) ⫽ A sin(k1x)sin(k2y)sin(k3z)e⫺i␻t

⫽ 0

for 0 ⬍ x, y, z ⬍ L
otherwise

(8.10)

The multiplier A is chosen to satisfy the normalization requirement. Example
8.1 shows that A ⫽ (2/L)3/2 for the ground state, and this result continues to
hold for the excited states as well.

EXAMPLE 8.1 Normalizing the Box

Wavefunctions

Find the value of the multiplier A that normalizes the wave-
function of Equation 8.10 having the lowest energy.

Solution The  state  of  lowest  energy  is  described  by
n1 ⫽ n 2 ⫽ n 3 ⫽ 1,  or  k1 ⫽ k2 ⫽ k3 ⫽ ␲/L.  Since  ⌿ is
nonzero  only  for  0 ⬍ x, y, z ⬍ L,  the  probability  density
integrated over the volume of this cube must be unity:

dz 兩 ⌿(x, y, z, t) 兩2

0

0

0

1 ⫽冕L
dx 冕L
dy 冕L
 sin2(␲x/L)dx冧冦冕L
⫽ A2 冦冕L
⫻ 冦冕L
 sin2(␲z/L)dz冧

0

0

0

 sin2(␲y/L)dy冧

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Using 2 sin2 ␪ ⫽ 1 ⫺ cos 2␪ gives

冕L

0

 sin2(␲x/L)dx ⫽

L
2

⫺

L
4␲

sin(2␲x/L)兩L

0

⫽

L
2

The  same  result  is  obtained  for  the  integrations  over  y
and z. Thus, normalization requires

or

1 ⫽ A2冢 L
2 冣3

A ⫽ 冢 2

L 冣3/2

264

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

Degeneracy

None

Exercise  1 With  what  probability  will  the  particle  described  by  the  wavefunction  of
Example 8.1 be found in the volume 0 ⬍ x, y, z ⬍ L/4?

4 E 0
11––
3

E 0

3E 0

2E 0

E 0

n2

12

11

9

6

3

3

3

3

None

Figure 8.3 An energy-level di-
agram for a particle conﬁned to
a  cubic  box.  The  ground-state
is  E0 ⫽ 3␲2ប2/2mL2,
energy 
2.  Note
and n2 ⫽ n1
that  most  of  the  levels  are  de-
generate.

2 ⫹ n 3

2 ⫹ n2

Answer 0.040, or about 4%

Exercise 2 Modeling a defect trap in a crystal as a three-dimensional box with edge
length 5.00 Å, ﬁnd the values of momentum and energy for an electron bound to the
defect site, assuming the electron is in the ground state.

Answer

兩px兩 ⫽ 兩py兩 ⫽ 兩pz兩 ⫽ 1.24 keV/c; E ⫽ 4.51 eV

The ground state, for which n1 ⫽ n2 ⫽ n3 ⫽ 1, has energy

E111 ⫽

3␲2ប2
2mL2

There are three ﬁrst excited states, corresponding to the three different combi-
nations of n1, n2, and n3, whose squares sum to 6. That is, we obtain the same
energy for the three combinations n1 ⫽ 2, n 2 ⫽ 1, n3 ⫽ 1, or n1 ⫽ 1, n 2 ⫽ 2,
n3 ⫽ 1, or n1 ⫽ 1, n 2 ⫽ 1, n3 ⫽ 2. The ﬁrst excited state has energy

E211 ⫽ E121 ⫽ E112 ⫽

6␲2ប2
2mL2

Note  that  each  of  the  ﬁrst  excited  states  is  characterized  by  a  different  wave-
function: ␺211 has wavelength L along the x-axis and wavelength 2L along the
y- and z-axes, but for ␺121 and ␺112 the shortest wavelength is along the y-axis
and the z-axis, respectively.

Whenever different states have the same energy, this energy level is said to
be degenerate. In the example just described, the ﬁrst excited level is three-
fold  (or  triply)  degenerate.  This  system  has  degenerate  levels  because  of  the
high degree of symmetry associated with the cubic shape of the box. The de-
generacy would be removed, or lifted, if the sides of the box were of unequal
lengths (see Example 8.3). In fact, the extent of splitting of the originally de-
generate levels increases with the degree of asymmetry.

Figure  8.3  is  an  energy-level  diagram  showing  the  ﬁrst  ﬁve  levels  of  a
particle in a cubic box; Table 8.1 lists the quantum numbers and degenera-
cies  of  the  various  levels.  Computer-generated  plots  of  the  probability  den-
sity 兩␺(x, y, z)兩2 for the ground state and ﬁrst excited states of a particle in a
box are shown in Figure 8.4. Notice that the probabilities for the (degener-
ate)  ﬁrst  excited  states  differ  only  in  their  orientation  with  respect  to  the
coordinate  axes,  again  a  reflection  of  the  cubic  symmetry  imposed  by  the
box potential.

EXAMPLE 8.2 The Second Excited State

Determine the wavefunctions and energy for the second
excited level of a particle in a cubic box of edge L. What
is the degeneracy of this level?

n 2 ⫽ 2, n3 ⫽ 1  or  n1 ⫽ 2, n 2 ⫽ 1, n3 ⫽ 2  or  n1 ⫽ 1,
n 2 ⫽ 2, n3 ⫽ 2. The corresponding wavefunctions inside
the box are

Solution The  second  excited  level  corresponds  to
the three  combinations  of  quantum  numbers  n1 ⫽ 2,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

⌿221 ⫽ A  sin冢 2␲x

L 冣 e⫺iE221t/ប

L 冣 sin冢 2␲y

L 冣 sin冢 ␲z

 

⌿212 ⫽ A  sin冢 2␲x
⌿122 ⫽ A  sin冢 ␲x

L 冣 sin冢 ␲y
L 冣 sin冢 2␲y

L 冣 sin冢 2␲z
L 冣 sin冢 2␲z

L 冣 e⫺iE212t/ប
L 冣 e⫺iE122t/ប

8.1

PARTICLE IN A THREE-DIMENSIONAL BOX

265

The  level  is  threefold  degenerate,  since  each  of  these
wavefunctions has the same energy,

E221 ⫽ E212 ⫽ E122 ⫽

9␲2ប2
2mL2

Table 8.1 Quantum Numbers and Degeneracies

of the Energy Levels for a Particle
Conﬁned to a Cubic Box*

n1

n2

n3

1

1
1
2

1
2
2

1
1
3

2

1

1
2
1

2
1
2

1
3
1

2

1

2
1
1

2
2
1

3
1
1

2

n2

3

6
6
6

9
9
9

11
11
11

12

冧
冧
冧

Degeneracy

None

Threefold

Threefold

Threefold

None

*Note: n2 ⫽ n1

2 ⫹ n2

2 ⫹ n3
2.

Ψ1112

Ψ2112

Ψ1212

y

x

y

x

y

x

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure  8.4 Probability  density  (unnormalized)  for  a  particle  in  a  box:  (a)  ground
state, 兩⌿111兩2; (b) and (c) ﬁrst excited states, 兩⌿211兩2 and 兩⌿121兩2. Plots are for 兩⌿兩2 in
the plane z ⫽ L. In this plane, 兩⌿112兩2 (not shown) is indistinguishable from 兩⌿111兩2.

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

266

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

EXAMPLE 8.3 Quantization in a 

Rectangular Box

Obtain  a  formula  for  the  allowed  energies  of  a  particle
conﬁned  to  a  rectangular  box  with  edge  lengths  L1, L2,
and L3. What is the degeneracy of the ﬁrst excited state?

Solution For a box having edge length L1 in the x di-
rection, ␺ will  be  zero  at  the  walls  if  L1 is  an  integral
number of half-wavelengths. Thus, the magnitude of par-
ticle momentum in this direction is quantized as

兩 px 兩 ⫽ បk 1 ⫽ n 1

    n 1 ⫽ 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

␲ប
L1

Likewise, for the other two directions, we have

兩 py 兩 ⫽ បk 2 ⫽ n 2

兩 pz 兩 ⫽ បk 3 ⫽ n 3

    n 2 ⫽ 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈
    n 3 ⫽ 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

␲ប
L2

␲ប
L3

The allowed energies are

E ⫽ (兩 px 兩2 ⫹ 兩 py 兩2 ⫹ 兩 pz 兩2)/2m

⫽

␲2ប2

2m 冦冢 n 1
L1 冣2

⫹ 冢 n 2
L2 冣2

⫹ 冢 n 3

L3 冣2冧

The lowest energy occurs again for n1 ⫽ n 2 ⫽ n3 ⫽ 1. In-
creasing one of the integers by 1 gives the next-lowest, or
ﬁrst,  excited  level.  If  L1 is  the  largest  dimension,  then
n1 ⫽ 2, n2 ⫽ 1, n 3 ⫽ 1  produces  the  smallest  energy  in-
crement and describes the ﬁrst excited state. Further, so
long as both L 2 and L 3 are not equal to L 1, the ﬁrst ex-
cited  level  is  nondegenerate,  that  is,  there  is  no  other
state  with  this  energy.  If  L 2 or L 3 equals L 1,  the  level  is
doubly degenerate; if all three are equal, the level will be
triply  degenerate.  Thus,  the  higher  the  symmetry,  the
more degeneracy we ﬁnd.

8.2 CENTRAL FORCES AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

The  formulation  of  quantum  mechanics  in  Cartesian  coordinates  is  the  nat-
ural way to generalize from one to higher dimensions, but often it is not the
best suited to a given application. For instance, an atomic electron is attracted
to  the  nucleus  of  the  atom  by  the  Coulomb  force  between  opposite  charges.
This  is  an  example  of  a  central  force, that  is,  one  directed  toward  a  ﬁxed
point. The nucleus is the center of force, and the coordinates of choice here
are  spherical  coordinates  r, ␪, ␾ centered  on  the  nucleus  (Fig.  8.5).  If  the
central force is conservative, the particle energy (kinetic plus potential) stays

z

Electron

Nucleus

θ

r

z = r cos

θ

φ

r
sin

θ

x = r sin   cosθ φ

y

x

y = r sin   sinθ φ

Figure  8.5 The  central  force  on  an  atomic  electron  is  one  directed  toward  a  ﬁxed
point, the nucleus. The coordinates of choice here are the spherical coordinates r, ␪, ␾
centered on the nucleus.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.2

CENTRAL FORCES AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

267

constant and E becomes a candidate for quantization. In that case, the quan-
tum  states  are  stationary  waves ␺(r)e⫺i␻t,  with ␻ ⫽ E/ប,  where  E is  the  sharp
value of particle energy.

But for central forces, angular momentum L about the force center also
is  constant  (a  central  force  exerts  no  torque  about  the  force  center),  and
we might expect that wavefunctions can be found for which all three angu-
lar  momentum  components  take  sharp  values.  This  imposes  severe  con-
straints on the form of the wavefunction. In fact, these constraints are so se-
vere  that  it  is  impossible  to  ﬁnd  a  wavefunction  satisfying  all  of  them  at
once;  that  is,  not  all  components  of  angular  momentum  can  be  known  si-
multaneously!

The  dilemma  is  reminiscent  of  our  inability  to  specify  simultaneously  the
position  and  momentum  of  a  particle.  Indeed,  if  the  direction  of  L were
known  precisely,  the  particle  would  be  conﬁned  to  the  orbital  plane  (the
plane perpendicular to the vector L), and its coordinate in the direction nor-
mal to this plane would be accurately known (and unchanging) (Fig. 8.6). In
that  case,  however,  the  particle  could  have  no  momentum  out  of  the  orbital
plane, so that its linear momentum perpendicular to this plane also would be
known  (to  be  zero),  in  violation  of  the  uncertainty  principle.  The  argument
just given may be reﬁned to establish an uncertainty principle for angular mo-
mentum: it is impossible to specify simultaneously any two components
of  angular  momentum. Alternatively,  if  one  component  of  L is  sharp,  then
the remaining two must be “fuzzy.”2

Along with E and one component of L, then, what else might be quantized,
or  sharp,  for  central  forces?  The  answer  is  contained  in  the  following  obser-
vation:  With  only  one  component  of L sharp,  there  is  no  redundancy  in
having the magnitude 兩L兩 sharp also. In this way, E, 兩L兩, and one component of
L, say Lz, become the sharp observables subject to quantization in the central
force problem.

Wavefunctions  for  which  兩L兩 and Lz are  both  sharp  follow  directly  from
separating the variables in Schrödinger’s equation for a central force. We take
the time-independent wavefunction in spherical coordinates r, ␪, ␾ to be the
product

␺(r) ⫽ ␺(r, ␪, ␾) ⫽ R(r)⌰(␪)⌽(␾)

(8.11)

and write Schrödinger’s time-independent equation (Eq. 8.5) in these coordi-
nates using the spherical coordinate form for the Laplacian3:

L

r

v

to 

is  perpendicular 

Figure  8.6 The  angular  mo-
mentum L of  an  orbiting  parti-
cle 
the
plane  of  the  orbit.  If  the  direc-
tion of L were known precisely,
both  the  coordinate  and  mo-
mentum  in  the  direction  per-
pendicular  to  the  orbit  would
be  known,  in  violation  of  the
uncertainty principle.

Uncertainty principle for
angular momentum

Separation of variables
for the stationary state
wavefunction

ⵜ2 ⫽

⭸2

⭸r 2 ⫹ 冢 2

r 冣 ⭸

⭸r

⫹

1

r 2 冤 ⭸2

⭸␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⭸

⭸␪

⫹ csc2␪

⭸2

⭸␾2冥

2Angular  momentum  is  a  notable  exception  to  the  argument  that  constants  of  the  classical
motion  correspond  to  sharp  observables  in  quantum  mechanics.  The  failure  is  rooted  in  an-
other maxim—the uncertainty principle—that takes precedence. The only instance in which
two or more angular momentum components may be known exactly is the trivial case Lx ⫽ Ly
⫽ Lz ⫽ 0.
3The Laplacian in spherical coordinates is given in any more advanced scientiﬁc text or may be
constructed from the Cartesian form by following the arguments of Section 8.4.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

268

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

After dividing each term in Equation 8.5 by R ⌰⌽, we are left with

⫺ប2

2mR 冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥 ⫺

ប2
2m⌰

1

r 2 冤 d 2⌰

d⌰

d␪冥

d␪2 ⫹ cot␪
ប2

d 2⌽
d␾2 ⫹ U(r ) ⫽ E
Notice  that  ordinary  derivatives  now  replace  the  partials  and  that  U(r)
becomes simply U(r) for a central force seated at the origin. We can isolate the
dependence  on ␾ by  multiplying  every  term  by  r 2sin2␪ to  get,  after  some  re-
arrangement,

r 2 sin2␪

2m ⌽

⫺

1

1
⌽

d 2⌽

d␾2 ⫽ ⫺sin2␪冦 r 2

R 冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥 ⫹

1

⌰ 冤 d 2⌰

d␪2 ⫹ cot␪

d⌰

d␪冥
[E ⫺ U(r)]冧

⫹

2mr 2
ប2

(8.12)

In this form the left side is a function only of ␾ while the right side depends
only on r and ␪. Because these are independent variables, equality of the two
sides  requires  that  each  side  reduce  to  a  constant.  Following  convention,  we
2,  where  mᐉ is  the  magnetic  quantum
write  this  separation  constant  as  ⫺mᐉ
number.4

Equating the left side of Equation 8.12 to ⫺mᐉ

2 gives an equation for ⌽(␾):

d 2⌽
d␾2 ⫽ ⫺m ᐉ

2⌽(␾)

(8.13)

A solution to Equation 8.13 is ⌽(␾) ⫽ exp(imᐉ␾); this is periodic with period
2␲ if mᐉ is restricted to integer values. Periodicity is necessary here because all
physical properties that derive from the wavefunction should be unaffected by
the replacement ␾ : ␾ ⫹ 2␲, both of which describe the same point in space
(see Fig. 8.5).

Equating  the  right  side  of  Equation  8.12  to  ⫺mᐉ

2 gives,  after  some  further

rearrangement,

r 2

R 冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥 ⫹

2mr 2
ប2

[E ⫺ U(r)] ⫽ ⫺

1

⌰ 冤 d 2⌰

d␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⫹

d⌰

d␪冥

2
m ᐉ
sin2␪

(8.14)

In  this  form  the  variables  r and ␪ are  separated,  the  left  side  being  a  func-
tion only  of  r and  the  right  side  a  function  only  of ␪.  Again,  each  side  must
reduce to a constant. This furnishes two more equations, one for each of the
remaining  functions  R(r)  and  ⌰(␪),  and  introduces  a  second  separation

4This  seemingly  peculiar  way  of  writing  the  constant  multiplier  is  based  on  the  physical  signiﬁ-
cance of the function ⌽(␾) and is discussed at length in (optional) Section 8.4. The student is re-
ferred there for a concise treatment of the quantum central force problem based on the operator
methods of Section 6.8.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

8.2

CENTRAL FORCES AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

269

 

constant, which we write as ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1). Equating the right side of Equation 8.14
to ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) requires ⌰(␪) to satisfy

d 2⌰
d␪2 ⫹ cot␪

d⌰
d␪

⫺ m ᐉ

2 csc2␪⌰(␪) ⫽ ⫺ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)⌰(␪)

(8.15)

ᐉ  is  called  the  orbital  quantum  number. For ␺(r)  to  be  an  acceptable
wavefunction, ⌰(␪)  also  must  be  bounded  and  single-valued,  conditions
which are met for functions satisfying Equation 8.15 only if ᐉ is a nonnega-
tive integer, and then only if m ᐉ is limited to absolute values not larger than
ᐉ.  The  resulting  solutions  ⌰(␪)  are  polynomials  in  cos ␪ known  as  associ-
ated Legendre polynomials. A few of these polynomials are listed in Table
8.2 for easy reference. The products ⌰(␪)⌽(␾) specify the full angular de-
pendence  of  the  central  force  wavefunction  and  are  known  as  spherical
harmonics, denoted  by 
.  Some  spherical  harmonics  are  given  in
Table  8.3.  The  constant  prefactors  are  chosen  to  normalize  these
functions.5

mᐉ (␪, ␾)

Y ᐉ

Table 8.2 Some

Associated
Legendre
Polynomials
Pᐉ

mᐉ(cos ␪)

0 ⫽ 1
0 ⫽ 2 cos ␪
1 ⫽ sin ␪
0 ⫽ 4(3 cos2 ␪ ⫺ 1)
1 ⫽ 4 sin ␪ cos ␪
2 ⫽ sin2 ␪
0 ⫽ 24(5 cos3 ␪ ⫺ 3 cos ␪)
1 ⫽ 6 sin ␪(5 cos2 ␪⫺ 1)
2 ⫽ 6 sin2 ␪ cos ␪
3 ⫽ sin3 ␪

P 0
P 1
P 1
P 2
P 2
P 2
P 3
P3
P 3
P 3

Table 8.3 The Spherical Harmonics Yᐉ

mᐉ(␪, ␾)

0 ⫽

Y 0

1
2√␲

0 ⫽ 1

Y 1

⭈ cos␪

⫾1 ⫽ ⫿1

Y 1

⭈ sin␪⭈ e⫾i␾

2␲

0 ⫽ 1

Y 2

⭈ (3 cos2␪ ⫺ 1)

2␲

␲

␲

2√ 3
2√ 3
4√ 5
2√ 15
4√ 15
4√ 7
8√ 21
4√ 105
8√ 35

2␲

2␲

␲

␲

␲

⫾1

Y 2

⫾2

Y 2

⫽ ⫿1

⭈sin␪⭈ cos␪⭈ e ⫾i␾

⫽ 1

⭈ sin2␪ ⭈ e⫾2i␾

0 ⫽ 1

Y 3

⭈ (5 cos3␪ ⫺ 3 cos␪)

⫾1 ⫽ ⫿1

Y 3

⫾2 ⫽ 1

Y 3

⫾3 ⫽ ⫿1

Y 3

⭈sin␪ ⭈ (5 cos2␪ ⫺ 1) ⭈ e⫾i␾

⭈ sin2␪⭈ cos␪⭈ e⫾2i␾

⭈sin3␪⭈ e⫾3i␾

5The  normalization  is  such  that  the  integral  of 
radius is 1.

兩 Y ᐉ

mᐉ 兩2

over  the  surface  of  a  sphere  with  unit

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

270

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

Angular momentum and its z
component are quantized

In keeping with our earlier remarks, the separation constants ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) and
mᐉ should relate to the sharp observables 兩L兩, Lz, and E for central forces. The
connection is established by the more detailed arguments of Section 8.4, with
the result

兩 L 兩 ⫽ √ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប

ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . .

Lz ⫽ m ᐉប

m ᐉ ⫽ 0, ⫾1, ⫾2, . . . , ⫾ᐉ

(8.16)

We see that the limitation on the magnetic quantum number mᐉ to values be-
tween ⫺ᐉ and ⫹ᐉ, obtained on purely mathematical grounds from separating
variables, has an obvious physical interpretation: the z component of angular
momentum, Lz,  must  never  exceed  the  magnitude  of  the  vector, 兩L兩!  Notice,
too, that  ᐉ and mᐉ are quantum numbers for angular momentum only; their
connection with particle energy E must depend on the potential energy func-
tion U(r) and is prescribed along with the radial wavefunction R(r) in the ﬁnal
stage of the separation procedure.

To obtain R(r),  we  return  to  Equation  8.14  and  equate  the  left  side  to

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1). Rearranging terms once more, we ﬁnd that R(r) must satisfy

Radial wave equation

⫺

ប2

2m 冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥 ⫹

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2

2mr 2

R(r) ⫹ U(r)R(r) ⫽ ER(r)

(8.17)

This  is  the  radial  wave  equation; it  determines  the  radial  part  of  the
wavefunction ␺ and the allowed particle energies E. As the equation contains
the  orbital  quantum  number  ᐉ,  each  angular  momentum  orbital  is  expected
to  give  rise  to  a  different  radial  wave  and  a  distinct  energy.  By  contrast,  the
magnetic  quantum  number  mᐉ appears  nowhere  in  this  equation.  Thus,  the
radial wave and particle energy remain the same for different mᐉ values consis-
tent with a given value of ᐉ. In particular, for a ﬁxed ᐉ the particle energy E
is independent of mᐉ, and so is at least 2ᐉ ⴙ1-fold degenerate. Such de-
generacy—a property of all central forces—stems from the spherical symmetry
of  the  potential  and  illustrates  once  again  the  deep-seated  connection  be-
tween symmetry and the degeneracy of quantum states.

The  reduction  from  Schrödinger’s  equation  to  the  radial  wave  equation
represents enormous progress and is valid for any central force. Still, the task
of solving this equation for a speciﬁed potential U(r) is a difﬁcult one, often
requiring methods of considerable sophistication. In Section 8.5 we tackle this
task for the important case of the electron in the hydrogen atom.

EXAMPLE 8.4 Orbital Quantum Number 

for a Stone

A stone with mass 1.00 kg is whirled in a horizontal circle
of  radius  1.00 m  with  a  period  of  revolution  equal  to
1.00 s.  What  value  of  orbital  quantum  number  ᐉ de-
scribes this motion?

Solution The speed of the stone in its orbit is

v ⫽

2␲R

T

⫽

2␲(1.00 m)

1.00 s

⫽ 6.28 m/s

The corresponding angular momentum has magnitude

兩L兩 ⫽ mvR ⫽ (1.00 kg)(6.28 m/s)(1.00 m)

⫽ 6.28 kg ⭈ m2/s

But  angular  momentum  is  quantized  as 
which is approximately ᐉប when ᐉ is large. Then

√ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប,

ᐉ ⬇

兩 L 兩
ប

⫽

6.28 kg ⭈m2/s

1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34 kg ⭈m2/s

⫽ 5.96 ⫻ 1034

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Again,  we  see  that  macroscopic  objects  are  described  by
enormous quantum numbers, so that quantization is not
evident on this scale.

EXAMPLE 8.5 The Bohr Atom Revisited

Discuss  angular  momentum  quantization  in  the  Bohr
model. What orbital quantum number describes the elec-
tron in the ﬁrst Bohr orbit of hydrogen?

Solution Angular  momentum  in  the  Bohr  atom  is
quantized according to the Bohr postulate

兩L兩 ⫽ mvr ⫽ nប

with n ⫽ 1 for the ﬁrst Bohr orbit. Comparing this with the
quantum mechanical result, Equation 8.14, we see that the
two  rules  are  incompatible!  The  magnitude 兩L兩 can  never
be  an  integral  multiple  of  ប — the  smallest  nonzero  value
consistent with Equation 8.16 is 

for ᐉ ⫽ 1.

兩 L 兩 ⫽ √2 ប

8.3

SPACE QUANTIZATION

271

In  fairness  to  Bohr,  we  should  point  out  that  the
Bohr  model  makes  no  distinction  between  the  quanti-
zation  of  L and  quantization  of  its  components  along
the  coordinate  axes.  From  the  classical  viewpoint,  the
coordinate  system  can  always  be  oriented  to  align  one
of  the  axes,  say  the  z-axis,  along  the  direction  of  L.  In
that case, L may be identiﬁed with 兩Lz兩. The Bohr postu-
late  in  this  form  agrees  with  the  quantization  of  Lz in
Equation 8.16 and indicates ᐉ ⫽ 1 for the ﬁrst Bohr or-
bit!  This  conﬂicting  result  derives  from  a  false  asser-
tion,  namely,  that  we  may  orient  a  coordinate  axis
along the direction of L. The freedom to do so must be
abandoned  if  the  quantization  rules  of  Equation  8.16
are  correct!  This  stunning  conclusion  is  one  of  the
great  mysteries  of  quantum  physics  and  is  implicit  in
the notion of space quantization that we discuss in the
next section.

8.3 SPACE QUANTIZATION

For wavefunctions satisfying Equations 8.13 and 8.15, the orbital angular mo-
mentum magnitude 兩L兩, and Lz, the projection of L along the z-axis, are both
sharp and quantized according to the restrictions imposed by the orbital and
magnetic  quantum  numbers,  respectively.  Together,  ᐉ and mᐉ specify  the
orientation of the angular momentum vector L. The fact that the direction of
L is  quantized  with  respect  to  an  arbitrary  axis  (the  z-axis)  is  referred  to  as
space quantization.

Let  us  look  at  the  possible  orientations  of  L for  a  given  value  of  orbital
quantum number ᐉ. Recall that mᐉ can have values ranging from ⫺ᐉ to ⫹ᐉ. If
ᐉ ⫽ 0, then mᐉ ⫽ 0 and Lz ⫽ 0. In fact, for this case 兩L兩 ⫽ 0, so that all compo-
nents of L are 0. If ᐉ ⫽ 1, then the possible values for mᐉ are ⫺1, 0, and ⫹1, so
that Lz may be ⫺ប, 0, or ⫹ប. If ᐉ ⫽ 2, mᐉ can be ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, ⫹1, or ⫹2, corre-
sponding to Lz values of ⫺2ប, ⫺ប, 0, ⫹ប, or ⫹2ប, and so on. A classical visual-
ization  of  the  algebra  describing  space  quantization  for  the  case  ᐉ ⫽ 2  is
shown in Figure 8.7a. Note that L can never be aligned with the z-axis, since Lz
must  be  smaller  than  the  total  angular  momentum  L.  From  a  three-dimen-
sional perspective, L must lie on the surface of a cone that makes an angle ␪
with the z-axis, as shown in Figure 8.7b. From the ﬁgure, we see that ␪ also is
quantized and that its values are speciﬁed by the relation

cos␪ ⫽

Lz
兩 L 兩

⫽

m ᐉ

√ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)

(8.18)

The orientations of L are
restricted (quantized)

Classically, ␪ can take any value; that is, the angular momentum vector L can
point  in  any  direction  whatsoever.  According  to  quantum  mechanics,  the
possible  orientations  for  L are  those  consistent  with  Equation  8.18.  Further-
more,  these  special  directions  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  forces  acting  on

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

272

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

z

|L| =    6h√

Lz = 2h

Lz = h

Lz = 0

Lz = –h

Lz = –2h

z

θLz

L

Lz = 2h

Lz = h

Lz = 0

Lz = –h

Lz = –2h

ᐉ = 2

(a)

(b)

Figure  8.7 (a)  The  allowed  projections  of  the  orbital  angular  momentum  for  the
case ᐉ ⫽ 2. (b) From a three-dimensional perspective, the orbital angular momentum
vector L lies on the surface of a cone. The fuzzy character of Lx and Ly is depicted by
allowing L to  precess  about  the  z-axis,  so  that  Lx and Ly change  continually  while  Lz
maintains the ﬁxed value mᐉប.

the particle,  provided  only  that  these  forces  are  central.  Thus,  the  rule  of
Equation 8.18 does not originate with the law of force but derives from
the structure of space itself, hence the name space quantization.

Figure 8.7 is misleading in showing L with a speciﬁc direction, for which all
three  components  Lx, Ly,  and  Lz are  known  exactly.  As  we  have  mentioned,
there is no quantum state for which this condition is true. If Lz is sharp, then
Lx and Ly must be fuzzy. Accordingly, it is more proper to visualize the vector L
of  Figure  8.7b  as  precessing  around  the  z-axis  so  as  to  trace  out  a  cone  in
space.  This  allows  the  components  Lx and Ly to  change  continually,  while  Lz
maintains the ﬁxed value mᐉប.6

EXAMPLE 8.6 Space Quantization for an

Atomic Electron

Consider an atomic electron in the ᐉ ⫽ 3 state. Calculate
the  magnitude  兩L兩 of  the  total  angular  momentum  and
the allowed values of Lz and ␪.

Solution With ᐉ ⫽ 3, Equation 8.16 gives
兩 L 兩 ⫽ √3(3 ⫹ 1) ប ⫽ 2√3 ប

Finally, we obtain the allowed values of ␪ from

cos␪ ⫽

Lz
兩 L 兩

⫽

m ᐉ
2√3

Substituting the values for mᐉ gives

cos␪ ⫽ ⫾0.866, ⫾0.577, ⫾0.289,

and 0

The  allowed  values  of  Lz are mᐉប,  with  mᐉ ⫽ 0, ⫾1, ⫾2,
and ⫾3. This gives

or

Lz ⫽ ⫺3ប, ⫺2ប, ⫺ប, 0, ប, 2ប, 3ប

␪ ⫽ ⫾30⬚, ⫾54.8⬚, ⫾73.2⬚,

and 90⬚

6This precession of the classical vector to portray the inherent fuzziness in Lx and Ly is meant to
be  suggestive  only.  In  effect,  we  have  identiﬁed  the  quantum  averages  具Lx典 and 具Ly典 with  their
averages over time in a classical picture, but the two kinds of averaging in fact are quite distinct.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.4

QUANTIZATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM AND ENERGY

273

Exercise 3 Compare the minimum angles between L and the z-axis for the electron
of Example 8.6 and for the 1.00-kg stone of Example 8.4.
Answer 30⬚ for the electron but only 2.3 ⫻ 10⫺16 degrees for the stone

8.4 QUANTIZATION OF ANGULAR

MOMENTUM AND ENERGY

O P T I O N A L

We saw in Section 8.2 that angular momentum plays an essential role in the quantiza-
tion  of  systems  with  spherical  symmetry.  Here  we  develop  further  the  properties  of
angular  momentum  from  the  viewpoint  of  quantum  mechanics  and  show  in  more
detail how angular momentum considerations facilitate the solution to Schrödinger’s
equation for central forces.

Our  treatment  is  based  on  the  operator  methods  introduced  in  Section  6.8,

which the reader should review at this time. In particular, the eigenvalue condition

[Q ]⌿ ⫽ q⌿

(8.19)

used  there  as  a  test for  sharp  observables  becomes  here  a  tool  for  discovering  the
form  of  the  unknown  wavefunction  ⌿.  (Recall  that  [Q ]  denotes  the  operator  for
some observable Q and q is the sharp value of that observable when measured for a
system described by the wavefunction ⌿.) We look on Equation 8.19 now as a con-
straint imposed  on  the  wavefunction  ⌿ that  guarantees  that  the  observable  Q will
take the sharp value q in that state. The more sharp observables we can identify for
some system, the more we can learn in advance about the wavefunction describing
that system. With few exceptions, the sharp observables are just those that are
constants of the classical motion. (See footnote 1.)

Consider the particle energy. If total energy is constant, we should be able to ﬁnd
wavefunctions ⌿ for  which  E is  a  sharp  observable.  Otherwise,  repeated  measure-
ments made on identical systems would reveal a statistical distribution of values for
the particle energy, inconsistent with the idea of a quantity not changing over time.
Thus,  energy  conservation  suggests  ⌬E ⫽ 0,  which,  in  turn,  requires  ⌿ to  be  an
eigenfunction of the energy operator

[E]⌿ ⫽ E ⌿

Because  [E] ⫽ iប ⭸/⭸t this  eigenvalue  condition  is  met  by  the  stationary  waves
␺(r)e⫺i␻t, with E ⫽ ប␻ the sharp value of particle energy.

The argument for energy applies equally well to other constants of the classical
motion.7 If the only forces are central, angular momentum about the force center is
a  constant  of  the  motion.  This  is  a  vector  quantity  L ⴝ r ⴛ p, whose  rectangular
components are expressed in terms of position and momentum components as

Lz ⫽ (r ⫻ p)z ⫽ xpy ⫺ ypx

and so on. In the same way, the operators for angular momentum are found from the
coordinate and momentum operators. From Chapter 6, the operator for x is just the

7Exceptions to this rule do exist. For instance, an atomic electron cannot have all three angular
momentum  components  sharp  at  once,  even  though  in  this  case  all  components  are  constant
classically. For such incompatible observables, quantum mechanics adopts the broader interpreta-
tion of a conserved quantity as one whose average value does not change over time, no matter what
may be the initial state of the system. With this deﬁnition, all components of angular momentum
for an atomic electron remain constant, but no more than one can be sharp in a given state.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

274

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

coordinate  itself,  and  the  operator  for  momentum  in  this  direction  is  (ប/i) ⭸/⭸x.
Similar relations should apply to the directions labeled y and z,8 so that the operator
for Lz becomes

[Lz] ⫽ [x][py] ⫺ [y][px] ⫽

ប

i 冢x

⭸
⭸y

⫺ y

⭸

⭸x 冣

(8.20)

Angular  momentum  ﬁnds  its  natural  expression  in  the  spherical  coordinates
of Figure  8.5.  A  little  geometry  applied  to  Figure  8.5  shows  that  the  spherical-to-
Cartesian coordinate transformation equations are

z ⫽ r cos␪

x ⫽ r sin␪ cos␾

y ⫽ r sin␪ sin␾

(8.21)

The inverse transformations are

r ⫽ {x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2}1/2

⫽ z {x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2}⫺1/2

(8.22)

cos␪ ⫽

tan␾ ⫽

z
r
y
x

The procedure for transcribing operators such as [Lz ] from Cartesian to spherical
form is straightforward, but tedious. For instance, an application of the chain rule gives

⭸f
⭸z

⫽

⭸r
⭸z

⭸f
⭸r

⫹

⭸␪
⭸z

⭸f
⭸␪

⫹

⭸␾
⭸z

⭸f
⭸␾

for any function f. On the left we think of f expressed as a function of x, y, z, but on
the right the same function is expressed in terms of r, ␪, ␾. The partial derivatives
⭸r/⭸z, and so on, are to be taken with the aid of the transformation equations, hold-
ing x and y ﬁxed. The simplest of these is ⭸␾/⭸z. From the inverse transformations
in Equations 8.22, we see that ␾ is independent of z, so that  ⭸␾/⭸z ⫽ 0. From the
same equations we ﬁnd that

⭸r
⭸z

⫽

1
2

 {x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2}⫺1/2(2z) ⫽

z
r

⫽ cos␪

To obtain ⭸␪/⭸z we differentiate the second of Equations 8.22 implicitly to get

⫺sin␪

⭸␪
⭸z

⫽

⭸{cos␪}

⭸z

⫽ z(⫺1

2){x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2}⫺3/2(2z) ⫹ {x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2}⫺1/2

Converting the right-hand side back to spherical coordinates gives

⫺sin␪

⭸␪
⭸z

⫽ ⫺

(r cos␪)2

r 3

⫹

1
r

⫽

1 ⫺ cos2␪

r

⫽

sin2␪

r

or ⭸␪/⭸z ⫽ ⫺sin␪/r. Collecting the previous results, we have

⭸
⭸z

⫽

⭸r
⭸z

⭸
⭸r

⫹

⭸␪
⭸z

⭸

⭸␪

⫽ cos␪

⭸
⭸r

⫺

sin␪

⭸

r

⭸␪

8For the momentum operator along each axis we use the one-dimensional form from Chapter
6, ([px] ⫽ (ប/i)⭸/⭸x, etc.), consistent with the belief that Cartesian axes identify independent
but logically equivalent directions in space.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

In like fashion, we can obtain spherical representations for ⭸/⭸x, ⭸/⭸y and ulti-

mately for the angular momentum operators themselves:

8.4

QUANTIZATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM AND ENERGY

275

⭸

[Lx] ⫽ i ប冦sin␾
[Ly] ⫽ ⫺i ប冦cos␾

⭸␪

⭸

⭸␪

⫹ cot␪ cos ␾

⭸

⭸␾冧
⭸␾冧

⭸

⫺ cot␪ sin ␾

(8.23)

[Lz] ⫽ ⫺iប

⭸

⭸␾

Notice that the operators for angular momentum in spherical form do not contain
the radial coordinate r—our reward for selecting the right system of coordinates! By
insisting that angular momentum be sharp in the quantum state ⌿, and using the
differential forms (Eqs. 8.23) for the angular momentum operators, we can discover
how the wavefunction depends on the spherical angles ␪ and ␾ without knowing the
details of the central force.

Lz Is Sharp: The Magnetic Quantum Number
For Lz to  be  sharp,  our  wavefunction  ⌿ ⫽ ␺(r)e⫺i␻t must  be  an  eigenfunction  of
[L z], or

⫺i ប

⭸␺

⭸␾

⫽ Lz␺

(8.24)

with Lz the eigenvalue (a number). Equation 8.24 prescribes the functional depen-
dence of ␺ on the azimuthal angle ␾ to be

␺(r) ⫽ CeiLz␾/ប

(8.25)

with C still any function of r and ␪. The values taken by Lz must be restricted, however.
Since increasing ␾ by 2␲ radians returns us to the same place in space (see Fig. 8.5),
the  wavefunction  also  should  return  to  its  initial  value,  that  is,  the  solutions  repre-
sented by Equation 8.25 must be periodic in ␾ with period 2␲. This will be true if Lz/ប
is any integer, say, mᐉ or Lz ⫽ m ᐉប. The magnetic quantum number mᐉ indicates the
(sharp) value for the z component of angular momentum in the state described by ␺.

Because all components of L are constant for central forces, we should continue
by requiring the wavefunction of Equation 8.25 also to be an eigenfunction of the
operator  for  a  second  angular  momentum  component,  say  [Lx],  so  that  Lz and Lx
might both be sharp in the state ␺. For ␺ to be an eigenfunction of [Lx] with eigen-
value Lx requires

i ប冦sin␾

⭸␺

⭸␪

⫹ cot␪ cos ␾

⭸␺

⭸␾冧 ⫽ Lx␺

This  relation  must  hold  for  all  values  of ␪ and ␾.  In  particular,  for  ␾ ⫽ 0  the  re-
quirement is

i ប cot␪

⭸␺

⭸␾

⫽ Lx␺

Because ␺ varies exponentially with ␾ according to Equation 8.25, the indicated de-
rivative may be taken and evaluated at ␾ ⫽ 0 to get

(⫺Lz cot␪) ␺ ⫽ Lx␺

which can be satisﬁed for all ␪ only if Lx ⫽ Lz ⫽ 0 or if ␺ vanishes identically. A simi-
lar  difﬁculty  arises  if  we  attempt  to  make  Ly sharp  together  with  Lz.  Therefore,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

276

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

unless  the  angular  momentum  is  exactly  zero  (all  components),  there  is  no
wavefunction for which two or more components are simultaneously sharp!

兩L兩 Is Sharp: The Orbital Quantum Number
To make further progress, we must look to other constants of the classical motion.
In  addition  to  each  component  of  angular  momentum,  the  magnitude  兩L兩 of  the
vector also is constant and becomes a candidate for an observable that can be made
sharp  together  with  Lz.  Consider  simply  the  squared-magnitude  L2 ⫽ L ⭈ L. The
operator for L2 is

Using Equation 8.23, we ﬁnd the spherical coordinate form for [L2]:

[L]2 ⫽ [Lx]2 ⫹ [Ly]2 ⫹ [Lz]2

[L2] ⫽ ⫺ប2冦 ⭸2

⭸␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⭸

⭸␪

⫹ csc2␪

⭸2

⭸␾2冧

(8.26)

For L2 to be sharp requires 

[L2]␺ ⫽ 兩 L 兩2␺

or

⫺ប2冦 ⭸2␺

⭸␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⭸␺

⭸␪

⫹ csc2␪

⭸2␺

⭸␾2冧 ⫽ 兩 L 兩2␺

But from Equation 8.24, we see that differentiating ␺ with respect to ␾ is equivalent
to multiplication by iLz/ប ⫽ imᐉ, so that the last equation reduces to

⫺ប2冦 ⭸2␺

⭸␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⭸␺

⭸␪

2
⫺ m ᐉ

csc2␪␺冧 ⫽ 兩 L 兩2␺

(8.27)

For  wavefunctions  satisfying  Equation  8.27,  the  magnitude  of  angular  momen-
tum will be sharp at the value 兩L兩. The equation prescribes the dependence of ␺ on
the  polar  angle  ␪.  The  solutions  are  not  elementary  functions  but  can  be  investi-
gated with the help of more advanced techniques. The results of such an investiga-
tion  are  reported  in  Section  8.2  and  repeated  here  for  completeness:  Physically
兩 L 兩 ⫽ √ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) ប
acceptable  solutions  to  Equation  8.27  can  be  found  provided 
,
where ᐉ, the orbital quantum number, must be a nonnegative integer. Furthermore,
the magnetic quantum number, also appearing in Equation 8.27, must be limited as
兩m ᐉ兩 ⱕ ᐉ.  With  these  restrictions,  the  solutions  to  Equation  8.27  are  the  associated
Legendre polynomials in cos␪, denoted 
. Several of these polynomials are
listed in Table 8.2 for easy reference; you may verify by direct substitution that they
satisfy Equation 8.27 for the appropriate values of ᐉ and mᐉ.

mᐉ(cos␪)
Pᐉ

The  associated  Legendre  polynomials  may  be  multiplied  by  exp(imᐉ␾)  and  still
exp(imᐉ␾)
satisfy the orbital equation Equation 8.27. Indeed, the products 
satisfy both Equations 8.24 and 8.27; thus, they represent waves for which 兩L兩 and Lz
are  simultaneously  sharp.  Except  for  a  multiplicative  constant,  these  are  just  the
spherical harmonics 

introduced in Section 8.2.

mᐉ(cos␪)
Pᐉ

mᐉ(␪, ␾)

Y ᐉ

E Is Sharp: The Radial Wave Equation
For energy to be constant, E should be a sharp observable. The stationary state form
⌿(r, t) ⫽ ␺(r)e⫺i␻t results  from  imposing  the  eigenvalue  condition  for  the  energy
operator  [E ]—but  what  of  the  other  energy  operator  [H ] ⫽ [K ] ⫹ [U ]  (the
Hamiltonian)?  In  fact,  requiring  [H ]⌿ ⫽ E ⌿ is  equivalent  to  writing  the  time-
independent Schrödinger equation for ␺(r)

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2␺ ⫹ U(r)␺ ⫽ E␺

(8.28)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.5

ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

277

because  [U ] ⫽ U(r)  and  the  kinetic  energy  operator  [K]  in  three  dimensions  is
none other than

[K] ⫽

[px]2 ⫹ [py]2 ⫹ [pz]2

2m

⫽

(ប/i)2{(⭸/⭸x)2 ⫹ (⭸/⭸y)2 ⫹ (⭸/⭸z)2}

2m

⫽ ⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2

The  spherical  form  of  the  Laplacian  given  in  Section  8.2  may  be  used  to  write

[K ] in spherical coordinates:

[K ] ⫽ ⫺

ប2

2m 冦 ⭸2

⭸r 2 ⫹

2
r

⭸
⭸r

⫹

1

r 2 冤 ⭸2

⭸␪2 ⫹ cot␪

⭸

⭸␪

⫹ csc2␪

⭸2

⭸␾2冥冧

Comparing this with the spherical representation for [L2] from Equation 8.26 shows
that [K ] is the sum of two terms,

[K ] ⫽ [Krad] ⫹ [Korb] ⫽ [Krad] ⫹

1
2mr 2 [L2]

(8.29)

representing the separate contributions to the kinetic energy from the orbital and
radial components of motion. The comparison also furnishes the spherical form for
[Krad]:

[Krad] ⫽ ⫺

ប2

2m 冦 ⭸2

⭸r 2 ⫹

2
r

⭸

⭸r冧

(8.30)

These  expressions  for  [K ]  are  completely  general.  When  applied  to  waves
for which 兩L兩 is sharp, however, the operator [L2] may be replaced with the number
兩L兩2 ⫽ ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2. Therefore, the Schrödinger equation (Eq. 8.28) becomes

[Krad]␺(r) ⫹

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2

2mr 2

␺(r) ⫹ U(r )␺(r) ⫽ E␺(r)

(8.31)

For central forces, all terms in this equation, including U(r), involve only the spheri-
cal coordinate r: the angle variables ␪ and ␾ have been eliminated from further con-
sideration by the requirement that ␺ be an eigenfunction of [L2]! It follows that the
solutions to Equation 8.31 take the form of a radial wave R(r) multiplied by a spher-
ical harmonic:

␺(r) ⫽ R(r )Y ᐉ

mᐉ (␪, ␾)

(8.32)

The spherical harmonic may be divided out of each term in Equation 8.31, in effect
replacing ␺(r) by R(r). The result is just the radial wave equation of Section 8.2; it
determines the radial wavefunction R(r) and the allowed particle energies E, once
the potential energy function U(r) is speciﬁed.

8.5 ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

In  this  section  we  study  the  hydrogen  atom  from  the  viewpoint  of  wave
mechanics. Its simplicity makes atomic hydrogen the ideal testing ground for
comparing  theory  with  experiment.  Furthermore,  the  hydrogen  atom  is  the
prototype  system  for  the  many  complex  ions  and  atoms  of  the  heavier
elements.  Indeed,  our  study  of  the  hydrogen  atom  ultimately  will  enable  us
to understand the periodic table of the elements, one of the greatest triumphs
of quantum physics.

The  object  of  interest  is  the  orbiting  electron,  with  its  mass  m and  charge
⫺e,  bound  by  the  force  of  electrostatic  attraction  to  the  nucleus,  with  its
much larger  mass  M and  charge  ⫹Ze,  where  Z is  the  atomic  number.  The

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

278

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

choice Z ⫽ 1  describes  the  hydrogen  atom,  while  for  singly  ionized  helium
(He⫹)  and  doubly  ionized  lithium  (Li2⫹),  we  take  Z ⫽ 2  and  Z ⫽ 3,  respec-
tively,  and  so  on.  Ions  with  only  one  electron,  like  He⫹ and  Li2⫹,  are  called
hydrogen-like. Because M ⬎⬎ m,  we  will  assume  that  the  nucleus  does  not
move but simply exerts the attractive force that binds the electron. This force
is the coulomb force, with its associated potential energy

U(r) ⫽

k(⫹Ze)(⫺e)

r

⫽ ⫺

kZe2

r

(8.33)

where k is the coulomb constant.

The hydrogen atom constitutes a central force problem; according to Sec-

tion 8.2, the stationary states for any central force are

⌿(r, ␪, ␾, t) ⫽ R(r)Y ᐉ

mᐉ(␪, ␾)e⫺i␻t

(8.34)

mᐉ(␪, ␾)

Yᐉ

where 
tion R(r) is found from the radial wave equation of Section 8.2,

is a spherical harmonic from Table 8.3. The radial wavefunc-

⫺

ប2

2m 冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥 ⫹

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2

2mr 2

R(r) ⫹ U(r)R(r) ⫽ ER(r)

(8.17)

U(r) is the potential energy of Equation 8.33; the remaining terms on the left
of  Equation  8.17  are  associated  with  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  electron.  The
term proportional to ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2 ⫽ (兩L2兩) is the orbital contribution to kinetic
energy, K orb. To see this, consider a particle in circular orbit, in which all the
kinetic energy is in orbital form (since the distance from the center remains
and 兩L兩 ⫽ mvr. Eliminating the parti-
ﬁxed). For such a particle 
cle speed v, we get

Korb ⫽ 1

2 mv2

Korb ⫽

m

2 冢 兩 L 兩
mr 冣2

⫽

兩 L 兩2
2mr 2

(8.35)

Although it was derived for circular orbits, this result correctly represents the
orbital  contribution  to  kinetic  energy  of  a  mass  m in  general  motion  with
angular momentum L.9

The  derivative  terms  in  Equation  8.17  are  the  radial  contribution  to  the
kinetic  energy,  that  is,  they  represent  the  contribution  from  electron  motion
toward  or  away  from  the  nucleus.  The  leftmost  term  is  just  what  we  should
write for the kinetic energy of a matter wave ␺ ⫽ R(r) associated with motion
along the coordinate line marked by r. But what signiﬁcance should we attach
to the ﬁrst derivative term dR/dr? In fact, the presence of this term is evidence
that the effective one-dimensional matter wave is not R(r), but rR(r). In support of
this claim we note that

d 2(rR)

dr 2 ⫽ r冤 d 2R

dr 2 ⫹

2
r

dR

dr 冥

Then  the  radial  wave  equation  written  for  the  effective  one-dimensional
matter  wave  g(r) ⫽ rR(r)  takes  the  same  form  as  Schrödinger’s  equation  in

9For  any  planar  orbit  we  may  write 兩L兩 ⫽ rp⬜,  where  p⬜ is  the  component  of  momentum  in  the
orbital plane that is normal to the radius vector r. The orbital part of the kinetic energy is then
Korb ⫽ p⬜

2/2m ⫽ 兩L兩2/2mr 2.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

one dimension,

8.5

ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

279

⫺

ប2
2m

d 2g
dr 2 ⫹ Ueff(r)g (r) ⫽ Eg (r)

(8.36)

but with an effective potential energy

Ueff ⫽

兩 L 兩2
2mr 2 ⫹ U(r) ⫽

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2

2mr 2

⫹ U(r)

(8.37)

The  magnitude  of  g(r)  also  furnishes  probabilities,  as  described  later  in  this
section.

The solution of Equation 8.36 with U(r) ⫽ ⫺kZe2/r (for one-electron atoms
or ions) requires methods beyond the scope of this text. Here, as before, we
shall  present  the  results  and  leave  their  veriﬁcation  to  the  interested  reader.
Acceptable wavefunctions can be found only if the energy E is restricted to be
one of the following special values:

En ⫽ ⫺

ke2

2a0 冦 Z 2
n2 冧

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(8.38)

Allowed energies for
hydrogen-like atoms

This result is in exact agreement with that found from the simple Bohr theory
(see Chapter 4): a0 ⫽ ប2/m eke 2 is the Bohr radius, 0.529 Å, and ke 2/2a0 is the
Rydberg energy, 13.6 eV. The integer n is called the principal quantum num-
ber. Although n can be any positive integer, the orbital quantum number now
is limited to values less than n; that is, ᐉ can have only the values

ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2,  ⭈  ⭈  ⭈  , (n ⫺ 1)

(8.39)

Allowed values of ᐉ

Principal quantum number n

n ⴝ 1, 2, 3, . . .

Orbital quantum number ᐉ

ᐉ ⴝ 0, 1, 2, . . . , (n ⴚ 1)

Magnetic quantum number mᐉ

mᐉ ⴝ 0, ⴞ1, ⴞ2, . . . , ⴞᐉ

The cutoff at (n ⫺ 1) is consistent with the physical signiﬁcance of these quan-
tum numbers: The magnitude of orbital angular momentum (ﬁxed by ᐉ) can-
not become arbitrarily large for a given energy (ﬁxed by n). A semiclassical ar-
gument  expressing  this  idea  leads  to  ᐉmax ⫽ n ⫺ 1  (see  Problem  20).  In  the
same spirit, the restriction on the magnetic quantum number mᐉ to values be-
tween ⫺ᐉ and ⫹ᐉ guarantees  that  the  z component  of  angular  momentum
never exceeds the magnitude of the vector.

The radial waves R(r) for hydrogen-like atoms are products of exponentials
with polynomials in r/a 0. These radial wavefunctions are tabulated as Rnᐉ(r) in
Table 8.4 for principal quantum numbers up to and including n ⫽ 3.

For hydrogen-like atoms, then, the quantum numbers are n, ᐉ, and mᐉ, as-
sociated with the sharp observables E, 兩L兩, and Lz, respectively. Notice that the
energy E depends on n, but not at all on ᐉ or mᐉ. The energy is independent
of mᐉ because of the spherical symmetry of the atom, and this will be true for
any central force that varies only with distance r. The fact that E also is inde-
pendent of  ᐉ is a special consequence of the coulomb force, however, and is
not to be expected in heavier atoms, say, where the force on any one electron
includes the electrostatic repulsion of the remaining electrons in the atom, as
well as the coulombic attraction of the nucleus.

For  historical  reasons,  all  states  with  the  same  principal  quantum  number
n are  said  to  form  a  shell. These  shells  are  identiﬁed  by  the  letters  K, L, M,
. . . , which designate the states for which n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . . . Likewise, states

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

280

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

Table 8.4 The Radial Wavefunctions Rnᐉ(r) of

Hydrogen-like Atoms for n ⴝ 1, 2, and 3

n

1

2

2

3

3

3

ᐉ

0

0

1

0

1

2

Rnᐉ(r)

 2e⫺Zr/a0

冢 Z
a0 冣3/2
冢 Z
2a0 冣3/2 冢2 ⫺
冢 Z
2a0 冣3/2
Zr
√3 a0
冢 Z
3a0 冣3/2
 2 冤1 ⫺
3a0 冣3/2 4√2
冢 Z
3a0 冣3/2 2√2
冢 Z

3

Zr

a0 冣 e⫺Zr/2a0

e⫺Zr/2a0

2Zr
3a0

⫹

a0 冣2冥 e⫺Zr/3a0

2

27 冢 Zr
6a0 冣 e⫺Zr/3a0

Zr

Zr

a0 冢1 ⫺
a0 冣2
27√5 冢 Zr

e⫺Zr/3a0

having the same value of both n and ᐉ are said to form a subshell. The letters
s, p, d, f, . . . are used to designate the states for which ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . .10
This spectroscopic notation is summarized in Table 8.5.

The shell (and subshell) energies for several of the lowest-lying states of the
hydrogen  atom  are  illustrated  in  the  energy-level  diagram  of  Figure  8.8.  The
ﬁgure also portrays a few of the many electronic transitions possible within the
atom.  Each  such  transition  represents  a  change  of  energy  for  the  atom  and
must be compensated for by emission (or absorption) of energy in some other
form.  For  optical  transitions, photons  carry  off  the  surplus  energy,  but  not
all  energy-conserving  optical  transitions  may  occur.  As  it  happens,  photons
also carry angular momentum. To conserve total angular momentum (atom ⫹
photon) in optical transitions, the angular momentum of the electron in the

Table 8.5 Spectroscopic Notation for
Atomic Shells and Subhells

n

1
2
3
4
5
6
. . .

Shell Symbol

K
L
M
N
O
P

ᐉ

0
1
2
3
4
5
. . .

Shell Symbol

s
p
d
f
g
h

10s, p, d, f are one-letter abbreviations for sharp, principal, diffuse, and fundamental. The nomencla-
ture is a throwback to the early days of spectroscopic observations, when these terms were used
to characterize the appearance of spectral lines.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.5

ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

281

E(eV)

0
–0.8

–1.5

–3.4

4s

3s

2s

–13.6

1s

4p

3p

2p

4d

4f

3d
Forbidden

Allowed

Figure 8.8 Energy-level diagram of atomic hydrogen. Allowed photon transitions are
those obeying the selection rule ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1. The 3p : 2p transition (⌬ᐉ ⫽ 0) is said to
be forbidden, though it may still occur (but only rarely).

initial and ﬁnal states must differ by exactly one unit, that is

兩 ᐉ

f ⫺ ᐉ

i兩 ⫽ 1

or

⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1

(8.40)

Selection rule for allowed
transitions

Equation 8.40 expresses a selection rule that must be obeyed in optical transi-
tions.11 As  Figure  8.8  indicates,  the  transitions  3p : 1s and  2p : 1s are
allowed by  the  rule  (⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫺1),  but  the  3p : 2p transition  is  said  to  be
forbidden (⌬ᐉ ⫽ 0). (Such transitions can occur, but with negligible probabil-
ity  compared  with  that  of  allowed  transitions.)  Clearly,  selection  rules  play  a
vital role in the interpretation of atomic spectra.

EXAMPLE 8.7 The n ⴝ 2 Level of Hydrogen

Enumerate  all  states  of  the  hydrogen  atom  correspond-
ing  to  the  principal  quantum  number  n ⫽ 2,  giving  the
spectroscopic  designation  for  each.  Calculate  the  ener-
gies of these states.

Solution When n ⫽ 2, ᐉ can have the values 0 and 1. If
ᐉ ⫽ 0, mᐉ can only be 0. If ᐉ ⫽ 1, mᐉ can be ⫺1, 0, or ⫹1.
Hence, we have a 2s state with quantum numbers

n ⫽ 2,

ᐉ ⫽ 0,

mᐉ ⫽ 0

and three 2p states for which the quantum numbers are

n ⫽ 2,

ᐉ ⫽ 1,

mᐉ ⫽ ⫺1

n ⫽ 2,

ᐉ ⫽ 1,

mᐉ ⫽ 0

n ⫽ 2,

ᐉ ⫽ 1,

mᐉ ⫽ ⫹1

Because all of these states have the same principal quan-
tum  number,  n ⫽ 2,  they  also  have  the  same  energy,
which  can  be  calculated  from  Equation  8.38.  For  Z ⫽ 1
and n ⫽ 2, this gives

E2 ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV){12/22}⫽ ⫺3.4 eV

11⌬ᐉ ⫽ 0 also is allowed by angular momentum considerations but forbidden by parity conservation.
Further, since the angular momentum of a photon is just ⫾ប, the z component of the atom’s angu-
lar momentum cannot change by more than ⫾ប, giving rise to a second selection rule, ⌬m ᐉ ⫽ 0, ⫾1.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

282

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

Exercise  4 How many possible states are there for the n ⫽ 3 level of hydrogen? For
the n ⫽ 4 level?

Answers Nine states for n ⫽ 3, and 16 states for n ⫽ 4.

The Ground State of Hydrogen-like Atoms
The  ground  state  of  a  one-electron  atom  or  ion  with  atomic  number  Z,  for
which n ⫽ 1, ᐉ ⫽ 0, and mᐉ ⫽ 0, has energy

E1 ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV)Z 2

The wavefunction for this state is

␺100 ⫽ R10(r)Y 0

0 ⫽ ␲⫺1/2(Z/a0)3/2e⫺Zr/a0

(8.41)

(8.42)

The constants are such that ␺ is normalized. Notice that ␺100 does not depend
on angle, since it is the product of a radial wave with 
. In fact, all
the ᐉ ⫽ 0  waves  share  this  feature;  that  is, all s-state  waves  are  spherically
symmetric.

0 ⫽ 1/√4␲

Y 0

The electron described by the wavefunction of Equation 8.42 is found with

a probability per unit volume given by

兩 ␺100 兩2 ⫽

Z 3
␲a0

3 e⫺2Zr/a0

(Three-dimensional renditions of the probability per unit volume 兩␺(r)兩2 —
often  called  electron  “clouds”—are  constructed  by  making  the  shading  at
every  point  proportional  to  兩␺(r)兩2.)  The  probability  distribution  also  is
spherically symmetric, as it would be for any s-state wave; that is, the likeli-
hood for ﬁnding the electron in the atom is the same at all points equidis-
tant  from  the  center  (nucleus).  Thus,  it  is  convenient  to  deﬁne  another
probability function, called the radial probability distribution, with its as-
sociated  density  P(r),  such  that  P(r) dr is  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the
electron  anywhere  in  the  spherical  shell  of  radius  r and  thickness  dr
(Fig. 8.9). The shell volume is its surface area, 4␲r 2, multiplied by the shell
thickness, dr. Since the probability density 兩␺100兩2 is the same everywhere in
the shell, we have

or, for the hydrogen-like 1s state,

P(r)dr ⫽ 兩␺兩2 4␲r 2 dr

P1s(r) ⫽

4Z 3
3
a0

r 2e⫺2Zr/a0

(8.43)

The same result is obtained for P1s(r) from the intensity of the effective one-
dimensional matter wave g(r) ⫽ rR(r):

r

dr

Figure 8.9 P(r) dr is the prob-
ability  that  the  electron  will  be
found in the volume of a spher-
ical  shell  with  radius  r and
thickness dr.  The  shell  volume
is just 4␲r 2 dr.

The radial probability
density for any state

P(r) ⫽ 兩 g(r) 兩2 ⫽ r 2兩 R(r) 兩2

(8.44)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

In fact, Equation 8.44 gives the correct radial probability density for any state; for the
spherically  symmetric  s-states  this  is  the  same  as  4␲r 2兩␺兩2,  since  then
␺(r) ⫽ (1/√4␲)R(r)

.12

8.5

ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

283

A  plot  of  the  function  P1s(r)  is  presented  in  Figure  8.10a;  Figure  8.10b
shows  the  1s electron  “cloud”  or  probability  per  unit  volume  兩␺100兩2 from
which P1s(r) derives. P(r) may be loosely interpreted as the probability of ﬁnd-
ing the electron at distance r from the nucleus, irrespective of its angular posi-
tion. Thus, the peak of the curve in Figure 8.10a represents the most probable
distance of the 1s electron from the nucleus. Furthermore, the normalization
condition becomes

1 ⫽冕⬁

0

P(r) dr

(8.45)

where the integral is taken over all possible values of r. The average distance of
the  electron  from  the  nucleus  is  found  by  weighting  each  possible distance
with the probability that the electron will be found at that distance:

具r典 ⫽冕⬁

0

rP(r) dr

(8.46)

The average distance of an
electron from the nucleus

In  fact,  the  average  value  of  any function  of  distance  f (r )  is  obtained

P 1s

P 1s(r)

=

4Z 3
–––
a 0

3 r 2e –2Zr/a0

z

␺    2␺

100

=

Z 3
–––
3π
a 0

e –2Zr/a0

y

r = a 0/Z

(a)

x

r

(b)

Figure 8.10 (a) The curve P1s(r) representing the probability of ﬁnding the electron
as  a  function  of  distance  from  the  nucleus  in  a  1s hydrogen-like  state.  Note  that  the
probability  takes  its  maximum  value  when  r equals a0/Z.  (b)  The  spherical  electron
“cloud” for a hydrogen-like 1s state. The shading at every point is proportional to the
probability density 兩␺1s(r)兩2.

12From  its  deﬁnition,  P(r) dr always  may  be  found  by  integrating 

over  the
volume of a spherical shell having radius r and thickness dr. Since the volume element in spheri-
cal coordinates is dV ⫽ r 2dr sin␪ d␪ d␾, and the integral of 
over angle is unity (see foot-
note 5), this leaves P(r) ⫽ r 2兩R(r)兩2.

兩 ␺兩2 ⫽ 兩 R(r ) 兩2 兩Y ᐉ

兩Y ᐉ

mᐉ 兩2

mᐉ 兩2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

284

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

by weighting  the  function  value  at  every  distance  with  the  probability  at
that distance:

具 f 典 ⫽冕⬁

0

f(r)P(r) dr

(8.47)

EXAMPLE 8.8 Probabilities for the 
Electron in Hydrogen

Calculate the probability that the electron in the ground
state  of  hydrogen  will  be  found  outside  the  ﬁrst  Bohr
radius.

The  right-hand  side  is  zero  for  r ⫽ 0  and  for  r ⫽ a 0.
Since P(0) ⫽ 0, r ⫽ 0 is a minimum of P(r), not a maxi-
mum. Thus, the most probable distance is

Solution The probability is found by integrating the ra-
dial  probability  density  for  this  state,  P1s(r),  from  the
Bohr radius a0 to ⬁. Using Equation 8.43 with Z ⫽ 1 for
hydrogen gives

The  average  distance  is  obtained  from  Equation  8.46,
which in this case becomes

r ⫽ a0

3 冕⬁

0

4
a0

3 冕⬁

a0

4
a0

P ⫽

r 2e⫺2r/a0 dr

具r典 ⫽

r 3e⫺2r/a0 dr

We can put the integral in dimensionless form by chang-
ing variables from r to z ⫽ 2r/a 0. Noting that z ⫽ 2 when
r ⫽ a 0, and that dr ⫽ (a 0/2) dz, we get

1

2 冕⬁

2

P ⫽

z2e⫺z dz ⫽ ⫺

1
2

{z2 ⫹ 2z ⫹ 2}e⫺z兩⬁

2

⫽ 5e⫺2

This is about 0.677, or 67.7%.

EXAMPLE 8.9 The Electron–Proton 

Separation in Hydrogen

Calculate  the  most  probable  distance  of  the  electron
from  the  nucleus  in  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen,  and
compare this with the average distance.

Solution The most probable distance is the value of r that
makes  the  radial  probability  P(r)  a  maximum.  The  slope
here is zero, so the most probable value of r is obtained by
setting dP/dr ⫽ 0  and  solving  for  r.  Using  Equation  8.43
with Z ⫽ 1 for the 1s, or ground, state of hydrogen, we get

0 ⫽ 冢 4

3 冣 d

dr

a0

{r 2e⫺2r/a0} ⫽ 冢 4

3 冣 e⫺2r/a0 冦⫺

a0

2r 2
a0

⫹ 2r冧

Again introducing z ⫽ 2r/a 0, we obtain

具r典 ⫽

z3e⫺z dz

a0

4 冕⬁

0

The  deﬁnite  integral  on  the  right  is  one  of  a  broader
class,

冕⬁

0

zne⫺z dz ⫽ n!

whose value n! ⫽ n(n ⫺ 1) . . . (1) is established by re-
peated integration by parts. Then

具r典 ⫽

a0
4

(3!) ⫽

3
2

a0

The  average  distance  and  the  most  probable  dis-
tance  are  not  the  same,  because  the  probability  curve
P(r)  is not  symmetric  about  the  peak  distance  a0.  In-
deed,  values  of  r greater  than  a0 are  weighted  more
heavily in Equation 8.46 than values smaller than a 0, so
the  average  具r典 actually  exceeds  a 0 for  this  probability
distribution.

Excited States of Hydrogen-like Atoms
There  are  four  ﬁrst  excited  states  for  hydrogen-like  atoms:  ␺200, ␺210, ␺211,
and ␺21⫺1.  All  have  the  same  principal  quantum  number  n ⫽ 2,  hence  the
same total energy

E2 ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV)

Z 2
4

Accordingly, the ﬁrst excited level, E2, is fourfold degenerate.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8.5

ATOMIC HYDROGEN AND HYDROGEN-LIKE IONS

285

The  2s state, ␺200,  is  again  spherically  symmetric.  Plots  of  the  radial  proba-
bility density for this and several other hydrogen-like states are shown in Figure
8.11.  Note  that  the  plot  for  the  2s state  has  two  peaks.  In  this  case,  the  most
probable distance (⬃5a0/Z ) is marked by the highest peak. An electron in the
2s state would be much farther from the nucleus (on the average) than an elec-
tron in the 1s state. Likewise, the most probable distances are even greater for
an electron in any of the n ⫽ 3 states (3s, 3p, or 3d). Observations such as these
continue to support the old idea of a shell structure for the atom, even in the
face of the uncertainties inherent in the wave nature of matter.

The  remaining  three  ﬁrst  excited  states, ␺211, ␺210,  and ␺21⫺1,  have  ᐉ ⫽ 1
and make up the 2p subshell. These states are not spherically symmetric. All of
them have the same radial wavefunction R21(r), but they are multiplied by dif-
ferent spherical harmonics and thus depend differently on the angles ␪ and ␾.
For example, the wavefunction ␺211 is

␺211 ⫽ R21(r)Y 1

1 ⫽ ␲⫺1/2冢 Z

a0 冣3/2冢 Zr

8a0 冣 e⫺Zr/2a 0 sin ␪ ei␾

(8.48)

a 0––
Z 3⋅

P(r)

a 0––
Z 3⋅

P(r)

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.20

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

1s

2s

3s

4s

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

Zr/a0

2p

3p

4p

8

3d

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

Zr/a0

4f

4d

0

0

4

a 0––
Z 3⋅

P(r)

0.12

0.08

0.04

0

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

Zr/a0

Figure 8.11 The radial probability density function for several states of hydrogen-like
atoms.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

286

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

z

z

z

y

x

n = 2, ᐉ = 1, mᐉ = ±1

(a)

n = 3, ᐉ = 1, mᐉ = 0

n = 3, ᐉ = 2, mᐉ = 0

(b)

(c)

Figure 8.12 (a) The probability density 兩␺211兩2 for a hydrogen-like 2p state. Note the
axial symmetry about the z-axis. (b) and (c) The probability densities 兩␺(r)兩2 for several
other  hydrogen-like  states.  The  electron  “cloud”  is  axially  symmetric  about  the  z-axis
for all the hydrogen-like states 

.

␺nᐉmᐉ(r)

Notice,  however,  that  the  probability  density  兩␺211兩2 is  independent  of ␾ and
therefore  is  symmetric  about  the  z-axis  (Fig.  8.12a).  Since 
,  the
same is true for all the hydrogen-like states 
, as suggested by the remain-
ing illustrations in Figure 8.12.

兩 eim1␾兩2 ⫽ 1

␺nᐉmᐉ

The ␺210 state

␺210 ⫽ R21(r)Y 1

0 ⫽ ␲⫺1/2冢 Z

2a0 冣3/2冢 Zr

2a0 冣 e⫺Zr/2a0 cos␪

(8.49)

has distinct directional characteristics, as shown in Figure 8.13a, and is some-
times designated [␺2p]z to indicate the preference for the electron in this state
to be found along the z-axis. Other highly directional states can be formed by
combining the waves with mᐉ ⫽ ⫹1 and mᐉ ⫽ ⫺1. Thus, the wavefunctions

[␺2p]x ⫽

1
√2

z

{␺211 ⫹ ␺21⫺1}

(8.50a)

z

y

2pz

x

y

2px

x

y

2py

(a)

(b)

(c)

z

x

Figure 8.13 (a) Probability distribution for an electron in the hydrogenlike 2pz state,
described by the quantum numbers n ⫽ 2, ᐉ ⫽ 1, mᐉ ⫽ 0. (b) and (c) Probability distri-
butions  for  the  2px and  2py states.  The  three  distributions  2px,  2py,  and  2pz have  the
same structure, but differ in their spatial orientation.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

and

8.6

ANTIHYDROGEN

287

[␺2p]y ⫽

1
√2

{␺211 ⫺ ␺21⫺1}

(8.50b)

have large probability densities along the x- and y-axes, respectively, as shown
in Figures 8.13b and 8.13c. The wavefunctions of Equations 8.50, formed as su-
perpositions  of  ﬁrst  excited  state  waves  with  identical energies E2,  are  them-
selves stationary states with this same energy; indeed, the three wavefunctions
[␺2p]z,  [␺2p]x,  and  [␺2p]y together  constitute  an  equally  good  description  of
the 2p states for hydrogenlike atoms. Wavefunctions with a highly directional
character, such as these, play an important role in chemical bonding, the for-
mation of molecules, and chemical properties.

The next excited level, E3, is ninefold degenerate; that is, there are nine dif-
ferent wavefunctions with this energy, corresponding to all possible choices for
ᐉ and mᐉ consistent with n ⫽ 3. Together, these nine states constitute the third
shell, with subshells 3s, 3p, and 3d composed of one, three, and ﬁve states, re-
spectively. The wavefunctions for these states may be constructed from the en-
tries  in  Tables  8.3  and  8.4.  Generally,  they  are  more  complicated  than  their
second-shell  counterparts  because  of  the  increasing  number  of  nodes  in  the
radial part of the wavefunction.

The  progression  to  higher-lying  states  leads  to  still  more  degeneracy  and

wavefunctions of ever-increasing complexity. The nth shell has energy

En ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV)

Z 2
n2

and  contains  exactly  n subshells,  corresponding  to  ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, . . . ,  n ⫺ 1.
Within  the  ᐉth  subshell  there  are  2ᐉ ⫹ 1  orbitals.  Altogether,  the  nth  shell
contains  a  total  of  n2 states,  all  with  the  same  energy,  En;  that  is,  the  energy
level En is n2 degenerate. Equivalently, we say the nth shell can hold as many
as n2 electrons,  assuming  no  more  than  one  electron  can  occupy  a  given  or-
bital. This argument underestimates the actual shell capacity by a factor of 2,
owing to the existence of electron spin, as discussed in the next chapter.

8.6 ANTIHYDROGEN

The constituents of hydrogen atoms, protons and electrons, are abundant in
the  universe  and  among  the  elementary  particles  that  make  up  all  matter
around us. But each of these elementary particles has a partner, its antiparticle,
identical to the original in all respects other than carrying charge of the oppo-
site  sign.13 The  anti-electron,  or  positron,  was  discovered  in  1932  by  Carl
Anderson.14 The positron has the same mass as the electron but carries charge

13Strictly  speaking,  the  antiparticle  also  has  a  magnetic  moment  opposite  that  of  its  companion
particle. Magnetic moments are discussed in Chapter 9, and are intimately related to a new par-
ticle property called spin. The spin is the same for particle and antiparticle.

14The idea of antiparticles received a solid theoretical underpinning in 1928 with P. A. M. Dirac’s
relativistic  theory  of  the  electron.  While  furnishing  an  accurate  quantum  description  of  elec-
trons with relativistic energies, Dirac’s theory also included mysterious “negative energy” states.
Eventually Dirac realized that these “negative energy” states actually describe antiparticles with
positive  energy.  Dirac’s  conjecture  was  subsequently  conﬁrmed  with  the  discovery  of  the
positron in 1932. See Section 15.2.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

288

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

⫹e. Because it cannot be produced without a powerful particle accelerator, the
much  more  massive  antiproton  was  not  observed  until  1955.  Again,  the  an-
tiproton  has  the  same  mass  as  the  proton  but  is  oppositely  charged.  Just  as
atoms  and  ordinary  matter  are  made  up  of  particles,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  of
anti-atoms and all forms of antimatter built out of antiparticles. Indeed, on the
face of it there would be no way to tell if we lived in an antimatter world and
were ourselves composed entirely of antimatter!

The  simplest  such  anti-atom  is  antihydrogen, the  most  fundamental  neu-
tral unit of antimatter. Antihydrogen consists of a positron bound electrically
to  an  antiproton.  Many  physicists  believe  that  the  study  of  antihydrogen  can
answer  the  question  of  whether  there  is  some  fundamental,  heretofore  un-
known difference between matter and antimatter and why our Universe seems
to  be  composed  almost  exclusively  of  ordinary  matter.  For  the  reasons  out-
lined here, the production of antihydrogen is fraught with difﬁculties, and it
was  not  until  the  mid  1990s  that  two  groups,  one  at  CERN  and  the  other  at
Fermilab,  reported  success  in  producing  antihydrogen  at  high  energies.  In
2002, the CERN group reported antihydrogen production at the very low en-
ergies required for precision comparison measurements with ordinary hydro-
gen.  Trapping  the  anti-atoms  long  enough  so  that  experiments  can  be  per-
formed on them is much more difﬁcult and has not yet been achieved.

When  a  particle  and  its  antiparticle  collide,  both  disappear  in  a  burst  of
electromagnetic  energy.  This  is  pair  annihilation, the  direct  conversion  of
mass  into  energy  in  accord  with  Einstein’s  famous  relation  E ⫽ mc2.  An  elec-
tron  and  a  positron  combine  to  produce  two  (sometimes  three)  gamma-ray
photons  (one  photon  alone  cannot  conserve  both  energy  and momentum).
The  collision  of  a  proton  and  antiproton  produces  three  or  four  other  ele-
mentary particles called pions. The problem that experimentalists face is that
their  laboratories  and  measuring  instruments  are  made  of  ordinary  matter
and antiparticles will self-destruct on ﬁrst contact with the apparatus. A similar
problem arises in the containment of plasmas, which are tamed using a mag-
netic  trap,  that  is,  a  conﬁguration  of  magnetic  ﬁelds  that  exert  forces  on
charged particles of the plasma to keep them conﬁned. But neutral anti-atoms
experience only weak magnetic forces and will quickly escape the trap unless
they are moving very slowly. Thus, the antihydrogen atom must be cold if it is
to  survive  long  enough  to  be  useful  for  precision  experiments,  and  this  pre-
sents  yet  another  challenge.  While  positrons  are  readily  available  as  decay
products of naturally occurring radioactive species like 22Na, antiprotons must
be  created  artiﬁcially  in  particle  accelerators  by  bombarding  heavy  targets
(Be)  with  ultra-energetic  (⬃GeV)  protons.  The  positrons  and  antiprotons  so
produced  are  very  energetic  and  must  be  slowed  down  enormously  to  form
cold  antihydrogen.  The  slowdown  is  achieved  at  the  cost  of  lost  particles  in
what is essentially an accelerator run backwards. The CERN experiment yields
about 50,000 antihydrogen atoms starting from some 1.5 million antiprotons.
And of these, only a small fraction is actually detected.

Detecting antihydrogen is a challenge in its own right. The existence of an an-
tiproton is conﬁrmed by the decay products (pions) it produces on annihilation
with  its  antimatter  counterpart,  the  proton.  These  decay  products  leave  direc-
tional traces in the detectors that surround the anti-atom sample. From the direc-
tional traces, physicists are able to reconstruct the precise location of the annihi-
lation event. To conﬁrm the existence of antihydrogen, however, one must also

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

289

Figure  8.14 Antihydrogen  is
detected through its destruction
in  collisions  with  matter  parti-
cles. The annihilation of the an-
tiproton  produces  pions  that,
picked  up  in  the  surrounding
detectors (light colored), can be
traced  back  (four  light  colored
dashed  lines)  to  the  annihila-
tion point. Similarly, the annihi-
lation  of  the  positron  produces
a  distinctive  back-to-back  two-
photon  signature  (two  dashed
tracks  at  180⬚ to  one  another).
Overlap  of  the  two  annihilation
points signiﬁes that the positron
and  antiproton  were  bound  to-
gether in an atom of antihydro-
gen. (Adapted from Nature, 419,
456 – 459, October 3, 2002.)

record electron–positron annihilation in the same place at the same time. The
tell-tale  gamma-ray  photons  produced  in  that  annihilation  can  also  be  traced
back to a point of origination. Thus, the signature of antihydrogen is the coinci-
dence of multiple distinct detection events, as illustrated in Figure 8.14.

According to the theory presented in this chapter, the energy spectrum of
antihydrogen should be identical to that of ordinary hydrogen. The hydrogen
atom is the best known of all physical systems, and extremely precise measure-
ments of its spectrum have been made, the best of which is accurate to about 2
parts  in  1014.  Thus,  comparing  spectra  of  antihydrogen  with  ordinary  hydro-
gen would allow a stringent test of the symmetry expected between matter and
antimatter in atomic interactions. This symmetry is rooted in so-called CPT in-
variance, which states that if one were to take any lump of matter, reverse the
sign  of  all  the  elementary  charges  (C),  the  direction  of  time’s  ﬂow  (T),  and
another  property  of  particles  called  parity  (P),  the  specimen  would  obey  the
same  laws  of  physics.  CPT  invariance  is  a  very  general  consequence  of  quan-
tum theory and the covariance of quantum laws under Lorentz transformation
demanded by special relativity and is the cornerstone for every modern theory
of matter. If CPT invariance is violated, the whole of physical theory at the fun-
damental level will have to be rewritten. While nearly all physicists agree that is
very unlikely, the prospect of CPT violation holds tantalizing possibilities and
may  shed  light  on  one  of  the  most  perplexing  problems  of  modern  cosmol-
ogy:  why  there  is  now  a  preponderance  of  matter  in  the  Universe,  when  the
Big Bang theory predicts that matter and antimatter should have been created
in equal amounts. Furthermore, if antihydrogen responds differently to grav-
ity, the theory of relativity in its present form would be compromised, a devel-
opment  that  could  point  the  way  to  the  long-sought  uniﬁcation  of  relativity
and quantum theory.

SUMMARY
In  three  dimensions,  the  matter  wave  intensity  兩⌿(r, t)兩2 represents  the 
probability  per  unit  volume  for  ﬁnding  the  particle  at  r at  time  t.  Proba-
bilities  are  found  by  integrating  this  probability  density  over  the  volume 
of interest.

The wavefunction itself must satisfy the Schrödinger equation

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2⌿ ⫹ U(r)⌿ ⫽ i ប

⭸⌿
⭸t

(8.1)

Stationary states are solutions to this equation in separable form: ⌿(r, t) ⫽
␺(r)e⫺i␻t with ␺(r) satisfying

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2␺(r) ⫹ U(r)␺(r) ⫽ E␺(r)

(8.5)

This is the time-independent Schrödinger equation, from which we obtain
the  time-independent  wavefunction  ␺(r)  and  the  allowed  values  of  particle
energy E.

For a particle conﬁned to a cubic box whose sides are L, the magnitudes of
the components of particle momentum normal to the walls of the box can be
made  sharp,  as  can  the  particle  energy.  The  sharp  momentum  values  are
quantized as

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

290

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

兩 px 兩 ⫽ n 1

兩 py 兩 ⫽ n 2

兩 pz 兩 ⫽ n 3

␲ប

L

␲ប

L

␲ប

L

and the allowed energies are found to be

E ⫽

␲2ប2
2mL2 {n 1

2 ⫹ n 2

2 ⫹ n 3
2}

(8.8)

(8.9)

The  three  quantum  numbers n1, n2,  and  n3 are  all  positive  integers,  one
for  each  degree  of  freedom  of  the  particle.  Many  levels  of  this  system  are
degenerate; that  is,  there  is  more  than  one  wavefunction  with  the  same 
energy.

For  particles  acted  on  by  a  central  force, the  angular  momentum  L is  a
constant  of  the  classical  motion  and  is  quantized  along  with  particle  energy.
Wavefunctions  for  which  the  z component Lz and  magnitude  兩L兩 of  angular
mᐉ(␪, ␾)
momentum are simultaneously sharp are the spherical harmonics
in  the  spherical  coordinate  angles  ␪ and ␾.  For  any  central  force,  angular
momentum is quantized by the rules

Y ᐉ

and

兩 L 兩 ⫽ √ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) ប

Lz ⫽ mᐉប

(8.16)

The orbital quantum number ᐉ must be a nonnegative integer. For a ﬁxed
value  of  ᐉ,  the  magnetic  quantum  number mᐉ is  restricted  to  integer
values lying between ⫺ᐉ and ⫹ᐉ. Since 兩L兩 and Lz are quantized differently,
the classical freedom to orient the z-axis in the direction of L must be aban-
doned.  This  stunning  conclusion  is  the  essence  of  space  quantization.
Furthermore,  no  two  components  of  L,  such  as  Lz and Ly,  can  be  sharp
simultaneously.  This  implies  a  lower  limit  to  the  uncertainty  product 
⌬Lz ⌬Ly and  gives  rise  to  an  uncertainty  principle  for  the  components  of
angular momentum.

A central force of considerable importance is the force on the electron in a
one-electron atom or ion. This is the coulomb force, described by the poten-
tial energy U(r) ⫽ ⫺kZe 2/r, where Z is the atomic number of the nucleus. The
allowed energies for this case are given by

En ⫽ ⫺

ke2

2a0 冦 Z 2

n2 冧    n ⫽ 1, 2,  ⭈  ⭈  ⭈ 

(8.38)

This coincides exactly with the results obtained from the Bohr theory. The en-
ergy depends only on the principal quantum number n. For a ﬁxed value of
n, the orbital and magnetic quantum numbers are restricted as

ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . . , n ⫺ 1

mᐉ ⫽ 0, ⫾1, ⫾2, . . . , ⫾ᐉ

(8.39)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QUESTIONS

291

All states with the same principal quantum number n form a shell, identiﬁed
by  the  letters  K, L, M, . . . (corresponding  to  n ⫽ 1,  2,  3, . . .).  All  states
with the same values of n and ᐉ form a subshell, designated by the letters s, p,
d, f, . . . (corresponding to ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . .).

The wavefunctions for an electron in hydrogen or a hydrogen-like ion,

␺(r, ␪, ␾) ⫽ Rn ᐉ(r)Y ᐉ

mᐉ(␪, ␾)

depend  on  the  three  quantum  numbers  n, ᐉ,  and  mᐉ and  are  products  of
spherical harmonics multiplied by radial wavefunctions Rnᐉ(r). The effective
one-dimensional wavefunction g(r) ⫽ rRnᐉ(r) is analogous to the wavefunc-
tion ␺(x) in one dimension; the intensity of g(r) gives the radial probability
density,

P(r) ⫽ 兩g(r)兩2 ⫽ r 2兩Rnᐉ(r)兩2

(8.44)

P(r) dr is  the  probability  that  the  electron  will  be  found  at  a  distance
between r and r ⫹ dr from  the  nucleus.  The  most  probable  distance  is  the
one that maximizes P(r) and generally differs from the average distance 具r典,
calculated as

rP(r) dr

(8.46)

具r典 ⫽冕⬁

0

The most probable values are found to coincide with the radii of the allowed
orbits in the Bohr theory.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. For  more  on  the  use  of  angular  momentum  to  simplify
the  three-dimensional  Schrödinger  equation  in  central
force  applications,  see  Chapter  11  of  An  Introduction  to
Quantum  Physics,  by  A.  P.  French  and  Edwin  F.  Taylor,
New York, W. W. Norton and Company, Inc., 1978.

2. A discussion of the radial probability density and its use
for the lowest states of hydrogen is contained in Chapter

7  of  Modern  Physics,  2nd  ed.,  by  Kenneth  Krane,  New
York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1996.

3. Illustrations  in  perspective  of  the  electron  “cloud”
兩␺(r)兩2 for various hydrogen-like states may be found in
Quantum  Physics  of  Atoms,  Molecules,  Solids,  Nuclei,  and
Particles,  2nd  ed.,  by  R.  Eisberg  and  R.  Resnick,  New
York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1985.

QUESTIONS

1. Why  are  three  quantum  numbers  needed  to  describe

the state of a one-electron atom?

2. Compare  the  Bohr  theory  with  the  Schrödinger  treat-
ment  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  Comment  speciﬁcally  on
the total energy and orbital angular momentum.

3. How do we know whether a given 2p electron in an atom
has mᐉ ⫽ 0, ⫹1, or ⫺1? What value of mᐉ characterizes a
directed orbital such as [␺2p]x of Equation 8.50?

4. For atomic s states, the probability density 兩␺兩2 is largest
at the origin, yet the probability for ﬁnding the electron

a distance r from the nucleus, given by P(r), goes to zero
with r. Explain.

5. For  the  electron  in  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen—
as with  many  other  quantum  systems—the  kinetic
and potential energies are fuzzy observables, but their
sum,  the  total  energy,  is  sharp.  Explain  how  this  can
be so.

6. Discuss the relationship between space quantization and
Schrödinger’s equation. If the latter were invalid, would
space quantization still hold?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

292

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

 

PROBLEMS

8.1 Particle in a Three-Dimensional Box

1. A particle of mass m moves in a three-dimensional box
with edge lengths L1, L 2, and L 3. Find the energies of
the  six  lowest  states  if  L1 ⫽ L, L 2 ⫽ 2L,  and  L 3 ⫽ 2L.
Which of these energies are degenerate?

2. An electron moves in a cube whose sides have a length
of 0.2 nm. Find values for the energy of (a) the ground
state and (b) the ﬁrst excited state of the electron.

3. A particle of mass m moves in a three-dimensional box
with sides L. If the particle is in the third excited level,
corresponding  to  n2 ⫽ 11,  ﬁnd  (a)  the  energy  of  the
particle,  (b)  the  combinations  of  n1, n 2,  and  n 3 that
would  give  this  energy,  and  (c)  the  wavefunctions  for
these different states.

4. A particle of mass m moves in a two-dimensional box of
sides L.  (a)  Write  expressions  for  the  wavefunctions
and energies as a function of the quantum numbers n1
and n 2 (assuming the box is in the xy plane). (b) Find
the energies of the ground state and ﬁrst excited state.
Is either of these states degenerate? Explain.

5. Assume that the nucleus of an atom can be regarded as
a three-dimensional box of width 2 ⫻ 10⫺14 m. If a pro-
ton moves as a particle in this box, ﬁnd (a) the ground-
state energy of the proton in MeV and (b) the energies
of the ﬁrst and second excited states. (c) What are the
degeneracies of these states?

6. Obtain  the  stationary  states  for  a  free particle  in  three
dimensions by separating the variables in Schrödinger’s
equation.  Do  this  by  substituting  the  separable  form
⌿(r, t) ⫽ ␺1(x)␺2(y)␺3(z)␾(t) into the time-dependent
Schrödinger  equation  and  dividing  each  term  by
⌿(r, t).  Isolate  all  terms  depending  only  on  x from
those depending only on y, and so on, and argue that
four separate equations must result, one for each of the
unknown functions ␺1, ␺2, ␺3, and ␾. Solve the result-
ing equations. What dynamical quantities are sharp for
the states you have found?

7. For a particle conﬁned to a cubic box of dimension L,
show  that  the  normalizing  factor  is  A ⫽ (2/L)3/2,  the
same value for all the stationary states. How is this result
changed if the box has edge lengths L1, L 2, and L 3, all
of which are different?

8. Consider  a  particle  of  mass  m conﬁned  to  a  three-
dimensional  cube  of  length  L so  small  that  the  parti-
cle motion  is  relativistic.  Obtain  an  expression  for  the
allowed  particle  energies  in  this  case.  Compute  the
ground-state  energy  for  an  electron  if  L ⫽ 10 fm
(10⫺5 nm), a typical nuclear dimension.

10. Consider  an  electron  for  which  n ⫽ 4, ᐉ ⫽ 3,  and
mᐉ ⫽ 3. Calculate the numerical value of (a) the orbital
angular  momentum  and  (b)  the  z component  of  the
orbital angular momentum.

11. The orbital angular momentum of the Earth in its mo-
tion about the Sun is 4.83 ⫻ 1031 kg ⭈ m2/s. Assuming it
is  quantized  according  to  Equation  8.16,  ﬁnd  (a)  the
value  of  ᐉ corresponding  to  this  angular  momentum
and (b) the fractional change in 兩L兩 as ᐉ changes from
ᐉ to ᐉ ⫹ 1.

8.5 Atomic Hydrogen and Hydrogen-like Ions
12. The  normalized  ground-state  wavefunction  for  the

electron in the hydrogen atom is

␺(r, ␪, ␾) ⫽

1

√␲冢 1

a0 冣3/2

e⫺r/a0

where r is the radial coordinate of the electron and a0
is  the  Bohr  radius.  (a)  Sketch  the  wavefunction  versus
r.  (b)  Show  that  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  elec-
tron between  r and r ⫹ dr is  given  by  兩␺(r)兩24␲r 2 dr.
(c) Sketch  the  probability  versus  r and  from  your
sketch  ﬁnd  the  radius  at  which  the  electron  is  most
likely  to  be  found.  (d)  Show  that  the  wavefunction  as
given is normalized. (e) Find the probability of locating
the electron between r 1 ⫽ a0/2 and r 2 ⫽ 3a0/2.

13. (a) Determine the quantum numbers ᐉ and mᐉ for the
He⫹ ion in the state corresponding to n ⫽ 3. (b) What
is the energy of this state?

14. (a) Determine the quantum numbers ᐉ and mᐉ for the
Li2⫹ ion  in  the  states  for  which  n ⫽ 1  and  n ⫽ 2.
(b) What are the energies of these states?

15. In obtaining the results for hydrogen-like atoms in Sec-
tion 8.5, the atomic nucleus was assumed to be immo-
bile due to its much larger mass compared with that of
the  electron.  If  this  assumption  is  relaxed,  the  results
remain  valid  if  the  electron  mass  m is  replaced  every-
where  by  the  reduced  mass ␮ of  the  electron–nucleus
combination:

␮ ⫽

mM

m ⫹ M

Here M is  the  nuclear  mass.  (a)  Making  this  replace-
ment  in  Equation  8.38,  show  that  a  more  general  ex-
pression  for  the  allowed  energies  of  a  one-electron
atom with atomic number Z is

En ⫽ ⫺

␮k2e4

2ប2 冦 Z 2
n2 冧

8.2 Central Forces and Angular Momentum

9. If  an  electron  has  an  orbital  angular  momentum  of
4.714 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s, what is the orbital quantum number
for this state of the electron?

(b) The wavelength for the n ⫽ 3 to n ⫽ 2 transition of
the  hydrogen  atom  is  656.3 nm  (visible  red  light).
What is the wavelength of this same transition in singly
ionized  helium?  In  positronium?  (Note: Positronium  is

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

an  “atom”  consisting  of  a  bound  positron–electron
pair. A positron is a positively charged electron.)

16. Calculate the possible values of the z component of an-

gular momentum for an electron in a d subshell.

17. Calculate  the  angular  momentum  for  an  electron  in

(a) the 4d state and (b) the 6f state of hydrogen.

18. A hydrogen atom is in the 6g state. (a) What is the prin-
cipal quantum number? (b) What is the energy of the
atom? (c) What are the values for the orbital quantum
number and the magnitude of the electron’s orbital an-
gular momentum? (d) What are the possible values for
the  magnetic  quantum  number?  For  each  value,  ﬁnd
the  corresponding  z component  of  the  electron’s  or-
bital angular momentum and the angle that the orbital
angular momentum vector makes with the z-axis.

19. Prove that the nth energy level of an atom has degener-

acy equal to n2.

20. For ﬁxed electron energy, the orbital quantum number
ᐉ is  limited  to  n ⫺ 1.  We  can  obtain  this  result  from  a
semiclassical  argument  using  the  fact  that  the  largest
angular momentum describes circular orbits, where all
the kinetic energy is in orbital form. For hydrogen-like
atoms, U(r) ⫽ ⫺Zke 2/r,  and  the  energy  in  circular  or-
bits becomes

E ⫽

兩 L 兩2
2mr 2 ⫺

Zke 2

r

Quantize this relation using the rules of Equations 8.16
and 8.38, together with the Bohr result for the allowed
values  of  r,  to  show  that  the  largest  integer  value  of  ᐉ
consistent with the total energy is ᐉmax ⫽ n ⫺ 1.

21. Suppose that a hydrogen atom is in the 2s state. Taking
r ⫽ a0,  calculate  values  for  (a)  ␺2s(a0),  (b)  兩␺2s(a0)兩2,
and (c) P2s(a0).

22. The  radial  part  of  the  wavefunction  for  the  hydrogen

atom in the 2p state is given by

R2p(r) ⫽ Are⫺r/2a0

where A is a constant and a 0 is the Bohr radius. Using
this  expression,  calculate  the  average  value  of  r for  an
electron in this state.

23. A  dimensionless  number  that  often  appears  in  atomic

physics is the ﬁne-structure constant ␣, given by

␣ ⫽

ke2
បc

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

293

where k is the Coulomb constant. (a) Obtain a numerical
value for 1/␣. (b) In scattering experiments, the “size” of
the  electron  is  the  classical  electron  radius, r 0 ⫽ ke 2/mec 2.
In  terms  of  ␣,  what  is  the  ratio  of  the  Compton  wave-
length, ␭ ⫽ h/mec, to the classical electron radius? (c) In
terms of ␣, what is the ratio of the Bohr radius, a 0, to the
Compton wavelength? (d) In terms of ␣, what is the ratio
of the Rydberg wavelength, 1/R, to the Bohr radius?

24. Calculate the average potential and kinetic energies for

the electron in the ground state of hydrogen.

25. Compare  the  most  probable  distances  of  the  electron
from the proton in the hydrogen 2s and 2p states with
the radius of the second Bohr orbit in hydrogen, 4a0.

26. Compute the probability that a 2s electron of hydrogen
will be found inside the Bohr radius for this state, 4a0.
Compare this with the probability of ﬁnding a 2p elec-
tron in the same region.

27.

28.

Use the Java applet available at our companion
Web  site  (http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e
: QMTools  Simulations : Problem  8.27)  to  display
the  radial  waveforms  for  the  n ⫽ 3  level  of  atomic
hydrogen. Locate the most probable distance from the
nucleus for an electron in the 3s state. Do the same for
an electron in the 3p and 3d states. What does the sim-
ple Bohr theory predict for this case?

Angular  Variation  of  Hydrogen  Wavefunctions.
Use  the  Java  applet  of  the  preceding  problem
to  display  the  electron  clouds  for  the  n ⫽ 4  states  of
atomic  hydrogen.  Observe  the  distinctly  different  sym-
metries of the s, p, d, and f orbitals in the case mᐉ ⫽ 0.
Which  of  these  orbitals  is  most  extended,  that  is,  in
which orbital is the electron likely to be found furthest
away from the nucleus? Explore the effect of the mag-
netic  quantum  number  mᐉ on  the  overall  appearance
and  properties  of  the  n ⫽ 4  orbitals.  Can  you  identify
any trends?

29. As  shown  in  Example  8.9,  the  average  distance  of  the
electron from the proton in the hydrogen ground state
is 1.5 bohrs. For this case, calculate ⌬r, the uncertainty
in  distance  about  the  average  value,  and  compare  it
with the average itself. Comment on the signiﬁcance of
your result.

30. Calculate  the  uncertainty  product  ⌬r⌬p for  the  1s elec-
tron  of  a  hydrogen-like  atom  with  atomic  number  Z.
(Hint: Use 具p典 ⫽ 0  by  symmetry  and  deduce  具p2典 from
the average kinetic energy, calculated as in Problem 24.)

31. An electron outside a dielectric is attracted to the surface
by a force F ⫽ ⫺A/x 2, where x is the perpendicular dis-
tance  from  the  electron  to  the  surface  and  A is  a  con-
stant. Electrons are prevented from crossing the surface,
since  there  are  no  quantum  states  in  the  dielectric  for

them to occupy. Assume that the surface is inﬁnite in ex-
tent,  so  that  the  problem  is  effectively  one-dimensional.
Write  the  Schrödinger  equation  for  an  electron  outside
the surface x ⬎ 0. What is the appropriate boundary con-
dition at x ⫽ 0? Obtain a formula for the allowed energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

294

CHAPTER 8

QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THREE DIMENSIONS

32.

levels in this case. (Hint: Compare the equation for ␺(x)
with that satisﬁed by the effective one-dimensional wave-
function g(r ) ⫽ rR(r ) for hydrogen-like atoms.)

The  Spherical  Well.  The  three-dimensional
analog  of  the  square  well  in  one  dimension,
the spherical well is commonly used to model the po-
tential  energy  of  nucleons  (protons,  neutrons)  in  an
atomic nucleus. It is deﬁned by a potential U(r ) that
is  zero  everywhere  inside  a  sphere  and  takes  a  large
(possibly  inﬁnite)  positive  value  outside  this  sphere.
Use  the  Java  applet  available  at  our  companion  Web
site  (http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e : QMTools
Simulations : Problem  8.32)  to  ﬁnd  the  ground-
state energy for a proton bound to a spherical well of
radius  9.00 fm  and  height  30.0 MeV.  Is  the  ground
state an s state? Explain. Also report the most proba-
ble  distance  from  the  center  of  the  well  for  this
nucleon.

33.

Use the Java applet of Problem 32 to ﬁnd the
ﬁrst  three  excited-state  energy  levels  for  the
spherical  well  described  there.  What  orbital  quantum
numbers ᐉ describe these states? Determine the degen-
eracy  of  each  excited  level  and  display  the  probability
clouds for the degenerate wavefunctions.

34. Example  8.9  found  the  most  probable  value  and  the
average value for the distance of the electron from the
proton  in  the  ground  state  of  a  hydrogen  atom.  For
comparison, ﬁnd the median value as follows. (a) Derive
an  expression  for  the  probability,  as  a  function  of  r,
that  the  electron  in  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen  will
be found outside a sphere of radius r centered on the
nucleus. (b) Find the value of r for which the probabil-
ity of ﬁnding the electron outside a sphere of radius r is
equal  to  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  electron  inside
this  sphere.  (You  will  need  to  solve  a  transcendental
equation numerically.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9
Atomic Structure

Chapter Outline

9.1 Orbital Magnetism and 

the Normal Zeeman Effect

9.2 The Spinning Electron
9.3 The Spin – Orbit Interaction and

Other Magnetic Effects

9.5 Electron Interactions and

Screening Effects (Optional)

9.6 The Periodic Table
9.7 X-ray Spectra and 

Moseley’s Law

9.4 Exchange Symmetry and the

Summary

Exclusion Principle

Much  of  what  we  have  learned  about  the  hydrogen  atom  with  its  single
electron  can  be  used  directly  to  describe  such  single-electron  ions  as
He⫹ and  Li2⫹,  which  are  hydrogen-like  in  their  electronic  structure.  Mul-
tielectron  atoms,  however,  such  as  neutral  helium  and  lithium,  introduce
extra  complications  that  stem  from  the  interactions  among  the  atomic
electrons.  Thus,  the  study  of  the  atom  inevitably  involves  us  in  the  com-
plexities of systems consisting of many interacting electrons. In this chapter
we  will  learn  some  of  the  basic  principles  needed  to  treat  such  systems
effectively  and  apply  these  principles  to  describe  the  physics  of  electrons
in atoms.

Being  of  like  charge  and  conﬁned  to  a  small  space,  the  electrons  of  an
atom  repel  one  another  strongly  through  the  Coulomb  force.  In  addition,
we shall discover that the atomic electrons behave like tiny bar magnets, in-
teracting  magnetically  with  one  another  as  well  as  with  any  external  mag-
netic  ﬁeld  applied  to  the  atom.  These  magnetic  properties  derive  in  part
from a new concept — electron spin — which will be explored at some length
in this chapter.

Another  new  physical  idea,  known  as  the  exclusion  principle,  is  also  pre-
sented in this chapter. This principle is extremely important in understanding
the properties of multielectron atoms and the periodic table. In fact, the im-
plications of the exclusion principle are almost as far-reaching as those of the
Schrödinger equation itself.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

295

296

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

9.1 ORBITAL MAGNETISM AND THE

NORMAL ZEEMAN EFFECT

An electron orbiting the nucleus of an atom should give rise to magnetic effects,
much  like  those  arising  from  an  electric  current  circulating  in  a  wire  loop.  In
particular, the motion of charge generates a magnetic ﬁeld within the atom, and
the atom as a whole is subject to forces and torques when it is placed in an exter-
nal magnetic ﬁeld. These magnetic interactions can all be described in terms of
a single property of the atom — the magnetic dipole moment.

To calculate  the  magnetic  moment  of  an  orbiting  charge,  we  reason  by
analogy  with  a  current-carrying  loop  of  wire.  The  moment ␮ of  such  a  loop
has magnitude 兩␮兩 ⫽ iA, where i is the current and A is the area bounded by
the  loop.  The  direction  of  this  moment  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the
loop, and its sense is given by a right-hand rule, as shown in Figure 9.1a. This
characterization  of  a  current  loop  as  a  magnetic  dipole  implies  that  its  mag-
netic  behavior  is  similar  to  that  of  a  bar  magnet  with  its  north-south  axis  di-
rected along ␮ (Fig. 9.1b).

For  a  circulating  charge  q,  the  (time-averaged)  current  is  simply  q/T,
where T is  the  orbital  period.  Furthermore,  A/T is  just  the  area  swept  out
per  unit  time  and  equals  the  magnitude  of  the  angular  momentum  兩L兩 of
the  orbiting  charge  divided  by  twice  the  particle  mass  m.1 This  relation  is

µ

i

(a)

N

S

(b)

L

r

v

µ

(c)

Figure 9.1 (a) The magnetic ﬁeld in the space surrounding a current-carrying wire
loop  is  that  of  a  magnetic  dipole  with  moment  ␮ perpendicular  to  the  plane  of the
loop. The vector ␮ points in the direction of the thumb if the ﬁngers of the right hand
are curled in the sense of the current i (right-hand rule). (b) The magnetic ﬁeld in the
space surrounding a bar magnet is also that of a magnetic dipole. The dipole moment
vector ␮ points from the south to the north pole of the magnet. (c) The magnetic mo-
ment ␮ of an orbiting electron with angular momentum L. Since the electron is nega-
tively charged, ␮ and L point in opposite directions.

1This is one of Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, later shown by Newton to be a consequence of
any central force.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

easily veriﬁed for circular orbits, where 兩L兩 ⫽ mvr, v ⫽ 2␲r/T, and A ⫽ ␲r 2,
so that

9.1

ORBITAL MAGNETISM AND THE NORMAL ZEEMAN EFFECT

297

兩 L 兩 ⫽ m 冢 2␲r

T 冣r ⫽ 2m 冢 ␲r 2

T 冣 ⫽ 2m 冢 A

T 冣    or    A

T

⫽

兩 L 兩
2m

The same result holds for orbital motion of any kind (see Problem 2), so that
兩␮兩 ⫽ iA becomes

␮ ⫽

q
2m

L

(9.1)

Magnetic moment of an
orbiting charge

for  the  magnetic  moment  of  an  orbiting  charge  q.  Since L is  perpen-
dicular to  the  orbital  plane,  so  too  is  ␮.  You  may  verify  that  the  sense
of
the vector  described  by  Equation  9.1  is  consistent  with  that  ex-
pected from  the  right-hand  rule.  Thus,  the  magnetic  moment  vector  is
directed  along  the  angular  momentum  vector,  and  its  magnitude  is  ﬁxed
by the  proportionality  constant q/2m,  called  the  gyromagnetic  ratio. For
electrons, q ⫽ ⫺e so  the  direction  of  ␮ is opposite the  direction  of L
(Fig. 9.1c).

On the atomic scale, the elemental unit of angular momentum is ប. It fol-
lows  that  the  natural  unit  for  atomic  moments  is  the  quantity  e ប/2me,  called
the Bohr  magneton  and  designated  by  the  symbol  ␮B.  Its  value  in  SI  units
( joules/tesla) is

␮B ⫽

e ប
2me

⫽ 9.274 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T

(9.2)

Bohr magneton

Because ␮ is proportional to L, the orbital magnetic moment is subject to
space quantization, as illustrated in Figure 9.2. In particular, the z component
of the orbital magnetic moment is ﬁxed by the value of the magnetic quantum
number mᐉ as

␮z ⫽ ⫺

e

2me

Lz ⫽ ⫺

e ប
2me

m ᐉ ⫽ ⫺␮Bm ᐉ

(9.3)

Just  as  with  angular  momentum,  the  magnetic  moment  vector  can  be  visual-
ized  as  precessing  about  the  z-axis,  thereby  preserving  this  sharp  value  of ␮z
while depicting the remaining components ␮x and ␮y as fuzzy.

The interaction of an atom with an applied magnetic ﬁeld depends on the
size  and  orientation  of  the  atom’s  magnetic  moment.  Suppose  an  external
ﬁeld B is  applied  along  the  z-axis  of  an  atom.  According  to  classical  electro-
magnetism, the atom experiences a torque

␶ ⫽ ␮ ⫻ B

(9.4)

A magnetic moment
precesses in a magnetic ﬁeld

that  tends  to  align  its  moment  with  the  applied  ﬁeld.  Instead  of  aligning
itself with B, however, the moment actually precesses around the ﬁeld direc-
tion!  This  unexpected  precession  arises  because  ␮ is  proportional  to  the
angular  momentum  L.  The  motion  is  analogous  to  that  of  a  spinning
top precessing  in  the  Earth’s  gravitational  ﬁeld.  The  gravitational  torque
acting  to  tip  it  over  instead  results  in  precession  because  of  the  angular

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

298

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

µ
z

µ
2 B

µ
B

0

µ
– B

µ
–2 B

ᐉ = 2

µ

 = 

=

µ
B

(  + 1)
ᐉ ᐉ
µ
B

6

B

θ

µ

Figure  9.2 The  orientations  in  space  and  z components  of  the  orbital  mag-
netic moment  for  the  case  ᐉ ⫽ 2.  There  are  2ᐉ ⫹ 1 ⫽ 5  different  possible  orien-
tations.

momentum  possessed  by  the  spinning  top.  Returning  to  the  atomic  case,
because ␶ ⫽ dL/dt,  we  see  from  Equation  9.4  that  the  change  in  angular
momentum, dL, is always perpendicular to both L and B. Figure 9.3 depicts
the  motion  (precession)  that  results.  For  atoms  in  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  this  is
known as Larmor precession.

From the geometry of Figure 9.3, we see that in a time dt the precession an-

L

gle increases by d␾, where

θ

i n

L s

φ

d

dL

But Equations 9.1 and 9.4 can be combined to give

L sin ␪⭈ d␾ ⫽ 兩 dL 兩

兩 dL 兩 ⫽ 兩 ␶兩 dt ⫽ 兩

q

2me

LB sin␪兩 dt

Figure 9.3 Larmor precession
of  the  orbital  moment  ␮ in  an
applied magnetic ﬁeld B. Since
␮ is  proportional  to  L,  the
torque  of  the  applied  ﬁeld
causes  the  moment  vector ␮ to
precess around the direction of
B with frequency ␻L ⫽ eB/2me.

For electrons we take q ⫽ ⫺e and the frequency of precession, or Larmor fre-
quency ␻L, becomes

␻L ⫽

d␾
dt

⫽

1

兩 dL 兩

L sin␪

dt

⫽

e

2me

B

(9.5)

It  is  useful  to  introduce  the  quantum  of  energy  ប␻L associated  with  the
Larmor frequency ␻L. This energy is related to the work required to reorient
the atomic moment against the torque of the applied ﬁeld. Remembering that

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.1

ORBITAL MAGNETISM AND THE NORMAL ZEEMAN EFFECT

299

The energy of a magnetic
moment depends on its
orientation in a magnetic ﬁeld

the work of a torque ␶ to produce an angular displacement d␪ is dW ⫽ ␶ d␪, we
have from Equation 9.4

dW ⫽ ⫺␮B sin␪ d␪ ⫽ d(␮B cos␪) ⫽ d(␮⭈ B)

The minus sign signiﬁes that the external torque must oppose that produced by
the  magnetic  ﬁeld  B. The  work  done  is  stored  as  orientational  potential  en-
ergy of the dipole in the ﬁeld. Writing dW ⫽ ⫺dU, we identify the magnetic
potential energy U as

U ⫽ ⫺␮⭈B

(9.6)

Equation  9.6  expresses  the  fact  that  the  energy  of  a  magnetic  dipole  in
an  external  magnetic  ﬁeld B depends  on  its  orientation  in  this  ﬁeld.  The
magnetic energy is minimal when ␮ and B are aligned; therefore, this align-
ment  is  the  preferred  orientation.  Because  the  possible  orientations  for ␮
are  restricted  by  space  quantization,  the  magnetic  energy  is  quantized
accordingly.  Taking  the  z-axis  along  B,  and  combining  Equations  9.1,  9.3,
and 9.6, we ﬁnd

U ⫽

e

2me

L ⭈B ⫽

eB
2me

Lz ⫽ ប␻Lm ᐉ

(9.7)

From Equation 9.7 we see that the magnetic energy of an atomic electron de-
pends on the magnetic quantum number mᐉ (so named for this dependence!)
and, therefore, is quantized. The total energy of this electron is the sum of its
magnetic  energy  U plus  whatever  energy  it  had  in  the  absence  of  an  applied
field — say, E0. Therefore,

E ⫽ E0 ⫹ ប␻Lmᐉ

(9.8)

For atomic hydrogen, E 0 depends only on the principal quantum number n;
in  more  complex  atoms,  the  atomic  energy  also  varies  according  to  the  sub-
shell label ᐉ, as discussed further in Section 9.5.

Unlike  energies,  the  wavefunctions  of  atomic  electrons  are  unaffected
by the application of a magnetic ﬁeld. This somewhat surprising result can be
partly understood by recognizing that according to classical physics, the only
effect of the ﬁeld is to cause (Larmor) precession around the direction of B.
For atomic electrons, this translates into precession of L about the z-axis. How-
ever, such a precession is already implicit in our semiclassical picture of elec-
tron orbits in the absence of external ﬁelds, as required by the sharpness of Lz
while Lx and Ly remain fuzzy.  From  this  viewpoint,  the  introduction  of  an
applied magnetic ﬁeld merely transforms this virtual precession2 into a real one
at the Larmor frequency!

2In  zero  magnetic  ﬁeld,  the  precession  of  the  classical  vector  may  be  termed  virtual  (not  real)
since even though the same value may not be obtained for Lx (or Ly) in successive measurements,
the average value 具Lx典 (or 具Ly典) does not change over time. With B nonzero, however, it can be
2 具Lx典 (and similarly for 具Ly典), indicating that 具Lx典 (and 具Ly典) oscil-
shown that (d 2/dt 2) 具Lx典 ⫽ ⫺␻L
lates at the Larmor frequency ␻L.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

300

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

EXAMPLE 9.1 Magnetic Energy of the 

Electron in Hydrogen

Calculate the magnetic energy and Larmor frequency for
an electron in the n ⫽ 2 state of hydrogen, assuming the
atom is in a magnetic ﬁeld of strength B ⫽ 1.00 T.

Solution Taking  the  z-axis  along  B,  we  calculate  the
magnetic energy from Equation 9.7 as

U ⫽

eB
2me

Lz ⫽

e ប
2me

Bm ᐉ ⫽ ប␻Lm ᐉ

For a 1.00 T ﬁeld, the energy quantum ប␻L has the value

ប␻L ⫽

e ប
2me

B ⫽ ␮BB ⫽ (9.27 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T)(1.00 T)

⫽ 9.27 ⫻ 10⫺24 J ⫽ 5.79 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV

With n ⫽ 2, ᐉ can be 0 or 1, and mᐉ is 0(twice) and ⫾1.
Thus, the magnetic energy U can be 0, ⫹ប␻L, or ⫺ប␻L.
In  such  applications,  the  energy  quantum  ប␻L is  called
the Zeeman energy. This Zeeman energy divided by ប is
the Larmor frequency:

␻L ⫽

5.79 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV

6.58 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈s

⫽ 8.80 ⫻ 1010 rad/s

Evidence  for  the  existence  of  atomic  moments  is  the  appearance  of  extra
lines in the spectrum of an atom that is placed in a magnetic ﬁeld. Consider a
hydrogen atom in its ﬁrst excited (n ⫽ 2) state. For n ⫽ 2, ᐉ can have values 0
and  1.  The  magnetic  ﬁeld  has  no  effect  on  the  state  for  which  ᐉ ⫽ 0,  since
then mᐉ ⫽ 0. For  ᐉ ⫽ 1, however, mᐉ can take values of 1, 0, and ⫺1, and the
ﬁrst  excited  level  is  split  into  three  levels  by  the  magnetic  ﬁeld  (Figure  9.4).

No magnetic field

Magnetic field present

n  =  2,     =  1

ᐉ

h

ω
0

n  =  1,     =  0

ᐉ

ω
(   
h 0

    –     

ω
  )
h L

ω
0

ω
ω
(       –       )
L
0

ω ω
0

(       +       )

ω
L

0

ᐉm   =  1
ᐉm   =  0
ᐉm   =  –1

ω
(  
h 0

ω
    +         )
h L

ω
h 0

ᐉm   =  0

Spectrum without 

magnetic field

Spectrum with magnetic

field present

Figure  9.4 Level  splittings  for  the  ground  and  ﬁrst  excited  states  of  a  hydrogen
atom immersed in a magnetic ﬁeld B. An electron in one of the excited states decays
to the ground state with the emission of a photon, giving rise to emission lines at ␻0,
␻0 ⫹ ␻L,  and ␻0 ⫺ ␻L.  This  is  the  normal  Zeeman  effect.  When B ⫽ 0,  only  the  line
at ␻0 is observed.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.1

ORBITAL MAGNETISM AND THE NORMAL ZEEMAN EFFECT

301

The original (Lyman) emission line is replaced by the three lines depicted in
Figure 9.4. The central line appears at the same frequency ␻0 as it would with-
out a magnetic ﬁeld. This is ﬂanked on both sides by new lines at frequencies
␻0 ⫾ ␻L.  Therefore,  the  magnetic  ﬁeld  splits  the  original  emission  line  into
three lines. Because ␻L is proportional to B, the amount of splitting increases
linearly  with  the  strength  of  the  applied  ﬁeld.  This  effect  of  spectral  line
splitting by a magnetic ﬁeld is known as the normal Zeeman effect after
its discoverer, Pieter Zeeman.

Zeeman spectra of atoms excited to higher states should be more complex,
because  many  more  level  splittings  are  involved.  For  electrons  excited  to  the
n ⫽ 3 state of hydrogen, the expected Zeeman lines and the atomic transitions
that give rise to them are shown in Figure 9.5. Accompanying each hydrogen
line  are  anywhere  from  two  to  six  satellites  at  frequencies  removed  from  the
original by multiples of the Larmor frequency. But the observed Zeeman spec-
trum is not this complicated, owing to selection rules that limit the transitions

The normal Zeeman effect

n  =  3

n  =  2

ᐉm
+ 2
+ 1
0
– 1
– 2

+ 1
0
– 1

l  =  2

l  =  1

n  =  1

0

l  =  0

ω
–3 L

ω
+3 L

ω ω
– L
L

ω
–2 L

ω
+2 L

ω

3,2

ω

2,1

ω

3,1

Spectrum

Figure 9.5 Zeeman spectral lines and the underlying atomic transitions that give rise
to  them  for  an  electron  excited  to  the  n ⫽ 3  state  of  hydrogen.  Because  of  selection
rules,  only  the  transitions  drawn  in  color  actually  occur.  Transitions  from  the  n ⫽ 3,
l ⫽ 1 orbitals (not shown) to the n ⫽ 1 state give rise to the colored lines in the illustra-
tion at the bottom right.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

302

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

to those for which ᐉ changes by 1 and mᐉ changes by 0, ⫹1, or ⫺1. The result
is  that  satellites  appear  at  the  Larmor  frequency  only and  not  at  multiples  of
this  frequency.  The  selection  rules  express  conservation  of  angular  momen-
tum for the system, taking into account the angular momentum of the emitted
photon. (See Section 8.5.)

Finally, even the splitting of an emission line into a triplet of equally spaced
lines as predicted here, called the normal Zeeman effect, frequently is not ob-
served.  More  commonly,  splittings  into  four,  six,  or  even  more  unequally
spaced lines are seen. This is the anomalous Zeeman effect, which has its roots
in the existence of electron spin.

9.2 THE SPINNING ELECTRON

The  anomalous  Zeeman  splittings  are  only  one  of  several  phenomena  not
explained  by  the  magnetic  interactions  discussed  thus  far.  Another  is  the
observed  doubling  of  many  spectral  lines  referred  to  as  ﬁne  structure. Both
effects  are  attributed  to  the  existence  of  a  new  magnetic  moment — the  spin
moment — that arises from the electron spinning on its axis.

We  have  seen  that  the  orbital  motion  of  charge  gives  rise  to  magnetic
effects that can be described in terms of the orbital magnetic moment ␮ given
by  Equation  9.1.  Similarly,  a  charged  object  in  rotation  produces  magnetic
effects  related  to  the  spin  magnetic  moment ␮s.  The  spin  moment  is  found
by noting  that  a  rotating  body  of  charge  can  be  viewed  as  a  collection  of
charge elements ⌬q with mass ⌬m all rotating in circular orbits about a ﬁxed
line, the axis of rotation (Fig. 9.6). To each of these we should apply Equation
9.1  with L replaced  by  Li,  the  orbital  angular  momentum  of  the  ith  charge
element  (Fig.  9.6b).  If  the  charge-to-mass  ratio  is  uniform  throughout  the

z

S

∆q

y

x

(a)

x

L
i

z

r

i

y

p

i

∆q

(b)

Figure 9.6 (a) A spinning charge q may be viewed as a collection of charge elements
⌬q orbiting a ﬁxed line, the axis of rotation. (b) The circular path followed by one such
charge element. The angular momentum of this charge element Li ⫽ ri ⫻ pi lies along
the axis of rotation. The magnetic moments accompanying these orbiting charge ele-
ments  are  summed  to  give  the  total  magnetic  moment  of  rotation,  or  spin  magnetic
moment, of the charge q.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.2

THE SPINNING ELECTRON

303

Otto  Stern  was  one  of  the

ﬁnest experimental physicists
of  the  20th  century.  Born
and  educated  in  Germany  (Ph.D.  in
physical chemistry in 1912), he at ﬁrst
worked  with  Einstein  on  theoretical
issues in molecular theory, in particu-
lar  applying  the  new  quantum  ideas
to  theories  of  the  speciﬁc  heat  of
solids.  From  about  1920,  Stern  de-
voted  himself  to  his  real  life’s  work,
the  development  of  the  molecular
beam method, which enabled him to
investigate  the  properties  of  free  or
isolated  atoms  and  culminated  in  a
Nobel prize in 1945. In this method, a
thin  stream  of  atoms  is  introduced
into  a  high-vacuum  chamber  where
the  atoms  are  free,  and  hence  the
properties  of  individual  atoms  may
be investigated  by  applying  external
ﬁelds or by some other technique.

Stern  ﬁrst  used  this  method  to
conﬁrm  that  silver  atoms  obey  the
Maxwell  speed  distribution.  Shortly
after,  in  a  series  of  elegant  and  difﬁ-
cult experiments with Walter Gerlach,
Stern  showed  that  silver  atoms  obey
space  quantization  and  succeeded  in
measuring  the  magnetic  moment  of
the  silver  atom.  In  the  period  from
1923  to  1933,  Stern  directed  a  re-
markably productive molecular beam
laboratory  at  the  University  of  Ham-
burg.  With  his  students  and  cowork-
ers he directly demonstrated the wave

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

OTTO STERN

(1888 – 1969)

nature  of  helium  atoms  and  mea-
sured the magnetic moments of many
atoms. Finally, with a great deal of ef-
fort,  he  succeeded  in  measuring  the
very  small  magnetic  moments  of  the
proton  and  deuteron.  For  these  last
important 
fundamental  measure-
ments  he  was  awarded  the  Nobel
prize.  In  connection  with  the  mea-
surement  of  the  proton’s  magnetic
moment,  an  interesting  story  is  told
by  Victor  Weisskopf,  which  should
gladden  the  hearts  of  experimental-
ists everywhere:

“There  was  a  seminar  held  by  the
theoretical  group  in  Göttingen,  and
Stern  came  down  and  gave  a  talk  on

the  measurements  he  was  about  to
ﬁnish of the magnetic moment of the
proton.  He  explained  his  apparatus,
but  he  did  not  tell  us  the  result.  He
took  a  piece  of  paper  and  went  to
each  of  us  saying,  ‘What  is  your  pre-
diction  of  the  magnetic  moment  of
the  proton?’  Every  theoretician  from
Max  Born  down  to  Victor  Weisskopf
said, ‘Well, of course, the great thing
about  the  Dirac  equation  is  that  it
predicts  a  magnetic  moment  of  one
Bohr magneton for a particle of spin
one-half!’  Then  he  asked  us  to  write
down the prediction; everybody wrote
‘one  magneton.’  Then,  two  months
later,  he  came  to  give  again  a  talk
about the ﬁnished experiment, which
showed that the value was 2.8 magne-
tons.  He  then  projected  the  paper
with our predictions on the screen. It
was a sobering experience.”*

In protest over Nazi dismissals of
some of his closest coworkers, Stern
resigned  his  post  in  Hamburg  and
came  to  the  Carnegie  Institute  of
Technology  in  the  United  States  in
1933. Here he worked on molecular
beam  research  until  his  retirement
in 1946.

*From  Victor  F.  Weisskopf,  Physics  in  the
Twentieth  Century;  Selected  Essays:  My  Life
as  a  Physicist,  Cambridge,  MA,  The  MIT
Press, 1972.

body, then ⌬q/⌬m is the ratio of total charge q to total mass me and we get for
the spin moment

⫽

␮s

q

2m e

兺 Li

⫽

q

2m e

S

(9.9)

A rotating charge gives rise
to a spin magnetic moment

where S,  the  spin angular  momentum,  is  the  total  angular  momentum  of
rotation.  The  spin  angular  momentum  S points  along  the  axis  of  rotation
according to a right-hand rule, as shown in Figure 9.6; its magnitude depends
on  the  size  and  shape  of  the  object,  as  well  as  its  speed  of  rotation.  If  the
charge-to-mass  ratio  is  not  uniform,  the  gyromagnetic  ratio  in  Equation  9.9,
q/2me,  must  be  multiplied  by  a  dimensionless  constant,  the  g  factor, whose
value  reﬂects  the  detailed  charge-to-mass  distribution  within  the  body.  Note
that g factors  different  from  unity  imply  a  distribution  of  charge  that  is  not

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

304

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

tightly  linked  to  the  distribution  of  mass,  an  unusual  circumstance  but  one
that cannot be excluded.3

The existence of a spin magnetic moment for the electron was ﬁrst demon-
strated  in  1921  in  a  classic  experiment  performed  by  Otto  Stern  and  Walter
Gerlach.  Electron  spin  was  unknown  at  that  time;  the  Stern – Gerlach  experi-
ment  was  originally  conceived  to  demonstrate  the  space  quantization  associ-
ated  with  orbiting  electrons  in  atoms.  In  their  experiment,  a  beam  of  silver
atoms was passed through a nonuniform magnetic ﬁeld created in the gap be-
tween the pole faces of a large magnet. The beam was then detected by being
deposited  on  a  glass  collector  plate  (Fig.  9.7).  A  nonuniform  ﬁeld  exerts  a
force on any magnetic moment, so that each atom is deﬂected in the gap by
an amount governed by the orientation of its moment with respect to the di-
rection of inhomogeneity (the z-axis), as illustrated in Figure 9.7b. If the mo-
ment directions are restricted by space quantization as in Figure 9.2, so too are
the deﬂections. Thus, the atomic beam should split into a number of discrete
components, one for each distinct moment orientation present in the beam.
This is contrary to the classical expectation that any moment orientation (and
hence any beam deﬂection) is possible, and all would combine to produce a
continuous fanning of the atomic beam (Fig. 9.7c).

The  Stern – Gerlach  experiment  produced  a  staggering  result:  The  silver
atomic beam was clearly split — but into only two components, not the odd num-
ber (2ᐉ ⫹ 1) expected from the space quantization of orbital moments! This is
all the more remarkable when we realize that silver atoms in their ground state
have no orbital angular momentum (ᐉ ⫽ 0), because the outermost electron in
silver  normally  would  be  in  an  s state.  The  result  was  so  surprising  that  the
experiment was repeated in 1927 by T. E. Phipps and J. B. Taylor with a beam of
hydrogen  atoms  replacing  silver,  thereby  eliminating  any  uncertainties  arising
from  the  use  of  the  more  complex  silver  atoms.  The  results,  however,  were
unchanged.  From  these  experiments,  we  are  forced  to  conclude  that  there  is
some  contribution  to  the  atomic  magnetic  moment  other  than  the  orbital
motion of electrons and that this moment is subject to space quantization.

Our  present  understanding  of  the  situation  dates  to  the  1925  paper
of Samuel  Goudsmit  and  George  Uhlenbeck,  then  graduate  students  at
the University  of  Leiden.  Goudsmit  and  Uhlenbeck  believed  that  the
unknown  moment  had  its  origin  in  the  spinning  motion  of  atomic
electrons, with the spin angular momentum obeying the same quantization
rules  as  orbital  angular  momentum.  The  magnetic  moment  seen  in
the Stern – Gerlach  experiment  is  attributed  to  the  spin  of  the  outermost
electron  in  silver.  Because  all  allowed  orientations  of  the  spin  moment
should be represented in the atomic beam, the observed splitting presents a
dramatic  conﬁrmation  of  space  quantization  as  applied  to  electron  spin,
with  the  number  of  components  (2s ⫹ 1)  indicating  the  value  of  the  spin
quantum number s.

The spin magnetic moment suggests that the electron can be viewed as a
charge  in  rotation,  although  the  classical  picture  of  a  spinning  body  of

3It is only fair to caution the reader at this point not to take the classical view of an electron as a
tiny charged ball spinning on its axis too literally. Although such a picture is useful in ﬁrst intro-
ducing and visualizing electron spin, it is not technically correct. Several shortcomings of the clas-
sical picture are discussed in detail on pp. 306 and 307.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.2

THE SPINNING ELECTRON

305

Beam of

silver atoms

Oven

N

S

Inhomogeneous
magnetic field

Glass
plate

Classical
pattern
Actual
pattern

(c)

Properties of electron spin

S

N

Magnet

Collimator

Oven

(a)

Collector plate

S

B(z 2)

B(z1)

F

N

S

S

F

F

F

N

N

S

F

B(z 2) > B(z 1)

N

(b)

Figure 9.7 The Stern – Gerlach experiment to detect space quantization. (a) A beam
of  silver  atoms  is  passed  through  a  nonuniform  magnetic  ﬁeld  and  detected  on  a
collector plate. (b) The atoms, with their magnetic moment, are equivalent to tiny bar
magnets.  In  a  nonuniform  ﬁeld,  each  atomic  magnet  experiences  a  net  force  that
depends on its orientation. (c) If any moment orientation were possible, a continuous
fanning  of  the  beam  would  be  seen  at  the  collector.  For  space  quantization,  the
fanning is replaced by a set of discrete lines, one for each distinct moment orientation
present in the beam.

charge  must  be  adjusted  to  accommodate  the  wave  properties  of  matter.
The  resulting  semiclassical  model  of  electron  spin  can  be  summarized  as
follows:

• The spin quantum number s for the electron is  ! This value is dictated
by  the  observation  that  an  atomic  beam  passing  through  the  Stern –
Gerlach  magnet  is  split  into  just  two  components  (⫽ 2s ⫹ 1).  Accord-
ingly,  there  are  exactly  two  orientations  possible  for  the  spin  axis,
described  as  the  “spin-up”  and  “spin-down”  states  of  the  electron.  This
is space  quantization  again,  according  to  the  quantization  rules  for
1
angular momentum4 as applied to a spin of  :
2

1
2

Sz ⫽ ms ប

where 

ms ⫽ 1
2

or 

⫺1
2

(9.10)

The  two  values  ⫾ប/2  for  Sz correspond  to  the  two  possible  orientations
for S shown in Figure 9.8. The value ms ⫽ ⫹ refers to the spin-up case,
sometimes  designated  with  an  up  arrow  (q)  or  simply  a  plus  sign  (⫹).
Likewise, ms ⫽ ⫺ is the spin-down case, (p) or (⫺). The fact that s has a
nonintegral value suggests that spin is not merely another manifestation
of orbital motion, as the classical picture implies.

1
2

1
2

4For integer angular momentum quantum numbers, the z component is quantized as ms ⫽ 0, ⫾1, . . .
⫾s, which can also be written as ms ⫽ s, s ⫺1, . . . , ⫺s. For s ⫽ , the latter implies ms ⫽ or

1
2

1
2

.⫺1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

306

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

Figure 9.8 The spin angular mo-
mentum  also  exhibits  space  quan-
tization. This ﬁgure shows the two
allowed  orientations  of  the  spin
vector S for a spin  particle, such
as the electron.

1
2

Sz

1
2

h

ms =

1
2

0

S =

 3
2

h

–1
2

h

ms = – 1
2

Spin up

Spin down

• The magnitude of the spin angular momentum is

The spin angular momentum
of an electron

兩 S 兩 ⫽ √s(s ⫹ 1) ប ⫽

√3
2

ប

(9.11)

and never  changes! This  angular  momentum  of  rotation  cannot  be
changed in any way, but is an intrinsic property of the electron, like
its mass or charge. The notion that 兩S兩 is ﬁxed contradicts classical laws,
where  a  rotating  charge  would  be  slowed  down  by  the  application  of  a
magnetic ﬁeld owing to the Faraday emf that accompanies the changing
magnetic  ﬁeld  (the  diamagnetic  effect).  Furthermore,  if  the  electron
were viewed as a spinning ball with angular momentum 
subject to
classical  laws,  parts  of  the  ball  near  its  surface  would  be  rotating  with
velocities in excess of the speed of light!5 All of this is taken to mean that
the  classical  picture  of  the  electron  as  a  charge  in  rotation  must  not  be
pressed too far; ultimately, the spinning electron is a quantum entity defy-
ing any simple classical description.

ប√3/2

• The spin magnetic moment is given by Equation 9.9 with a  g  factor  of  2;
that is, the moment is twice as large as would be expected for a body with

5This follows from the extremely small size of the electron. The exact size of the electron is un-
known,  but  an  upper  limit  of  10⫺6 Å  is  deduced  from  experiments  in  which  electrons  are  scat-
tered from other electrons. According to some current theories, the electron may be a true point
object, that is, a particle with zero size!

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.2

THE SPINNING ELECTRON

307

spin  angular  momentum  given  by  Equation  9.10.  The  value  g ⫽ 2  is
required  by  the  amount  of  beam  deﬂection  produced  by  the  Stern –
Gerlach magnet; the larger the magnetic moment, the greater will be the
deﬂection of the atomic beam. As already mentioned, any g factor other
than unity implies a nonuniform charge-to-mass ratio in the classical pic-
ture.  The  g factor  of  2  can  be  realized  classically  but  suggests  a  bizarre
picture that cannot be taken seriously (see Problem 8). The correct g fac-
tor of 2 is predicted by the relativistic quantum theory of the electron put
forth by Paul Dirac in 1929.6

With  the  recognition  of  electron  spin  we  see  that  an  additional  quantum
number,  ms,  is  needed  to  specify  the  internal,  or  spin,  state  of  an  electron.
Therefore, the state of an electron in hydrogen must be described by the four
quantum numbers n, ᐉ, mᐉ, and ms. Furthermore, the total magnetic moment
now has orbital and spin contributions:

␮ ⫽ ␮0 ⫹ ␮s ⫽

⫺e
2me

{L ⫹ g S}

(9.12)

The total magnetic moment
of an electron

Because of the electron g factor, the total moment ␮ is no longer in the same
direction as the total (orbital plus spin) angular momentum J ⫽ L ⫹ S. The
component of the total moment ␮ along J is sometimes referred to as the ef-
fective moment. When the magnetic ﬁeld B applied to an atom is weak, the
effective moment determines the magnetic energy of atomic electrons accord-
ing to Equation 9.6. As we shall discover in Section 9.3, the number of possible
orientations  for  J (and,  hence,  for  the  effective  moment)  is  even,  leading  to
the even number of spectral lines seen in the anomalous Zeeman effect.

EXAMPLE 9.2 Semiclassical Model for

Electron Spin

Calculate the angles between the z-axis and the spin angu-
lar momentum S of the electron in the up and down spin
states. How should we portray the fuzziness inherent in the
x and y components of the spin angular momentum?

Solution For  the  electron,  the  magnitude  of  the  spin
angular  momentum  is 
,  and  the  z compo-
nent  of  spin  is  Sz ⫽ ⫾ប/2.  Thus,  the  spin  vector S is  in-
clined from the z-axis at angles given by

兩 S 兩 ⫽ ប√3/2

cos ␪ ⫽

Sz
兩 S 兩

⫽ ⫾

1
√3

For  the  up  spin  state,  we  take  the  plus  sign  and  get
cos␪ ⫽ 0.577, or ␪ ⫽ 54.7°. The down spin orientation is
described by the minus sign and gives cos␪ ⫽ ⫺0.577, or
␪ ⫽ 125.3°.  Because  the  axis  of  rotation  coincides  with
the direction of the spin vector, these are the angles the
rotation axis makes with the z-axis.

While Sz is sharp in either the up or down spin orien-
tation, both Sx and Sy are fuzzy. This fuzziness may be de-
picted  by  allowing  the  spin  vector  to  precess  about  the 
z-axis,  as  we  did  for  the  orbital  angular  momentum  in
Chapter 8.

6The g factor for the electron is not exactly 2. The best value to date is g ⫽ 2.00232. The discrep-
ancy between Dirac’s predicted value and the observed value is attributed to the electron inter-
acting with the “vacuum.” Such effects are the subject of quantum electrodynamics, developed by
Richard Feynman in the early 1950s.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

308

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

Exercise 1 The photon is a spin 1 particle, that is, s ⫽ 1 for the photon. Calculate the
possible angles between the z-axis and the spin vector of the photon.

Answer 45⬚, 90⬚, and 135⬚

EXAMPLE 9.3 Zeeman Spectrum of Hydrogen

Including Spin

Examine  the  Zeeman  spectrum  produced  by  hydrogen
atoms  initially  in  the  n ⫽ 2  state  when  electron  spin  is
taken  into  account,  assuming  the  atoms  to  be  in  a  mag-
netic ﬁeld of magnitude B ⫽ 1.00 T.

Solution The  electron  energies  now  have  a  magnetic
contribution  from  both  the  orbital  and  spin  motions.
Choosing the z-axis along the direction of B, we calculate
the magnetic energy from Equations 9.6 and 9.12:

U ⫽ ⫺␮⭈B ⫽

e

2me

B{Lz ⫹ gSz} ⫽

e ប
2me

B(m ᐉ ⫹ gms)

The energy (e ប/2me)B is the Zeeman energy ␮BB or ប␻L;
its value in this example is

␮BB ⫽ (9.27 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T)(1.00 T) ⫽ 9.27 ⫻ 10⫺24 J
⫽ 5.79 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV

For  the  n ⫽ 2  state  of  hydrogen,  the  shell  energy  is
E 2 ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV)/22 ⫽ ⫺3.40 eV.  Because  mᐉ takes  the

values 0 (twice) and ⫾1, there is an orbital contribution
to the magnetic energy U0 ⫽ mᐉប␻L that introduces new
levels at E2 ⫾ ប␻L, as discussed in Example 9.1. The pres-
ence  of  electron  spin  splits  each  of  these  into  a  pair  of
levels,  the  additional  (spin)  contribution  to  the  energy
being Us ⫽ (gms)ប␻L (Fig.  9.9).  Because  g ⫽ 2  and  ms is
⫾ for  the  electron,  the  spin  energy  in  the  ﬁeld  兩Us兩 is
again the Zeeman energy ប␻L. Therefore, an electron in
this shell can have any one of the energies

1
2

E2,

E2 ⫾ ប␻L,

E2 ⫾ 2ប␻L

In making a downward transition to the n ⫽ 1 shell with
energy E1 ⫽ ⫺13.6 eV, the ﬁnal state of the electron may
have  energy  E1 ⫹ ប␻L or E1 ⫺ ប␻L,  depending  on  the
orientation of its spin in the applied ﬁeld. Therefore, the
energy of transition may be any one of the following pos-
sibilities:

⌬E 2,1,

⌬E 2,1 ⫾ ប␻L,

⌬E 2,1 ⫾ 2ប␻L,

⌬E 2,1 ⫾ 3ប␻L

Without spin

With spin

n  =  2, m =

ᐉ

+1
0
–1

n  =  1, m =  0

ᐉ

ᐉ

m =  1, ms  =  1/2
m =  0, ms  =  1/2
m = ⫾1, ms  = ⫿1/2
m =  0, ms  =  –1/2
m =  –1, ms  =  –1/2

ᐉ

ᐉ

ᐉ

ᐉ

l  =  1

m =  0, ms  =  1/2

ᐉ

m =  0, ms  =  –1/2

ᐉ

l  =  0

ω
– L

ω
+ L

ω
–3 L

ω
+3 L

ω

2,1

ω

2,1

Spectrum without spin

Spectrum with spin

Figure  9.9 (Example  9.3)  Predicted  Zeeman  pattern  and  underlying  atomic  transi-
tions  for  an  electron  excited  to  the  n ⫽ 2  state  of  hydrogen,  when  electron  spin  is
taken  into  account.  Again,  selection  rules  prohibit  all  but  the  colored  transitions.
Because of the neglect of the spin – orbit interaction, the effect shown here (called the
Paschen – Back effect) is observed only in very intense applied magnetic ﬁelds.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.3

THE SPIN – ORBIT INTERACTION AND OTHER MAGNETIC EFFECTS

309

Photons emitted with these energies have frequencies

␻2,1,

␻2,1 ⫾ ␻L,

␻2,1 ⫾ 2␻L,

␻2,1 ⫾ 3␻L

Therefore  the  spectrum  should  consist  of the  original
line  at ␻2,1 ﬂanked  on  both  sides  by satellite  lines  sepa-
rated  from  the  original  by  the  Larmor  frequency,  twice
the  Larmor  frequency,  and  three  times  this  frequency.
Notice that the lines at ␻2,1 ⫾ 2␻L and ␻2,1 ⫾ 3␻L appear
solely because of electron spin.

Again,  however,  the  observed  pattern  is  not  the
predicted  one.  Selection  rules  inhibit  transitions  unless
mᐉ ⫹ ms changes  by  0,  ⫹1,  or  ⫺1.  This  has  the  effect  of

eliminating the satellites at ␻2,1 ⫾ 3␻L. Furthermore, the
spin  moment  and  the  orbital  moment  of  the  electron
interact with each other, a circumstance not recognized in
our  calculation.  Only  when  this  spin–orbit  interaction
energy is small compared with the Zeeman energy,  ប␻L,
do  we  observe  the  spectral  lines  predicted  here.  This  is
the  case  for  the  Paschen – Back  effect, in  which  the
magnetic ﬁeld applied to the atom is intense enough to
make ប␻L the dominant energy. Typically, to observe the
Paschen–Back effect requires magnetic ﬁelds in excess of
several tesla.

9.3 THE SPIN – ORBIT INTERACTION AND

OTHER MAGNETIC EFFECTS

The existence of both spin and orbital magnetic moments for the electron in-
evitably  leads  to  their  mutual  interaction.  This  so-called spin – orbit  interac-
tion is best understood from the vantage point of the orbiting electron, which
“sees” the atomic nucleus circling it (Fig. 9.10). The apparent orbital motion
of the nucleus generates a magnetic ﬁeld at the electron site, and the electron
spin moment acquires magnetic energy in this ﬁeld according to Equation 9.6.
This can be thought of as an internal Zeeman effect, with B arising from the
orbital motion of the electron itself. The electron has a higher energy when its
spin is up, or aligned with B, than when its spin is down, or aligned opposite
to B (Fig. 9.10b).

The  energy  difference  between  the  two  spin  orientations  is  responsible
for the ﬁne structure doubling of many atomic spectral lines. For example,
the 2p : 1s transition in hydrogen is split into two lines because the 2p level
is actually a spin doublet with a level spacing of about 5 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV (Fig. 9.11),
while  the  1s level  remains  unsplit  (there  is  no  orbital  ﬁeld  in  a  state  with
zero orbital  angular  momentum).  Similarly,  the  spin – orbit  doubling  of  the
sodium  3p level  gives  rise  to  the  well-known  sodium  D  lines  to  be  discussed
in Example 9.4.

The coupling of spin and orbital moments implies that neither orbital an-
gular momentum nor spin angular momentum is conserved separately.
But total angular momentum J ⫽ L ⫹ S is conserved, so long as no external
torques  are  present.  Consequently,  quantum  states  exist  for  which 兩 J兩 and Jz
are sharp observables quantized in the manner we have come to expect for an-
gular momentum:

兩 J 兩 ⫽ √j( j ⫹ 1) ប
Jz ⫽ mjប

with mj ⫽ j, j ⫺ 1, . . . , ⫺j

(9.13)

Permissible values for the total angular momentum quantum number j are

j ⫽ ᐉ ⫹ s,

ᐉ ⫹ s ⫺ 1, . . . , 兩 ᐉ ⫺ s兩

(9.14)

in terms of the orbital (ᐉ) and spin (s) quantum numbers. For an atomic elec-
tron s ⫽ and ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . . , so j ⫽ (for ᐉ ⫽ 0) and j ⫽ ᐉ ⫾ (for ᐉ ⬎ 0).

1
2

1
2

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

310

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

S

r

 

L

Nucleus

S

r

i

Electron

(a)

B

µs

(b)

the  electron 

Figure  9.10 (a) Left: An  elec-
tron  with  angular  momentum L
orbiting the nucleus of an atom.
In the spin-up orientation shown
here,  the  spin  angular  momen-
tum S of 
is
“aligned” with L. Right: From the
viewpoint  of  the  orbiting  elec-
tron,  the  nucleus  circulates  as
shown. (b) The apparently circu-
lating  nuclear  charge  is  repre-
sented  by  the  current  i and
causes  a  magnetic  ﬁeld B at  the
site  of  the  electron.  In  the  pres-
ence  of B,
the  electron  spin
moment ␮s acquires  magnetic
energy U ⫽ ⫺␮s ⭈ B. The  spin
moment ␮s is  opposite  the  spin
vector S for 
the  negatively
charged  electron.  The  direction
of B is  given  by  a  right-hand
rule: With the thumb of the right
hand pointing in the direction of
the current i, the ﬁngers give the
sense in which the B ﬁeld circu-
lates  about  the  orbit  path.  The
magnetic  energy  is  highest  for
the  case  shown,  where  S and L
are “aligned.”

2P3/2

2P1/2

L

µ
+  B

∆E

µ
–  B

L

S

µ

µ

S

∆E ≅  2 B  =  5 ×  10–5  eV

µ

2p

1s

Figure 9.11 The 2p level of hydrogen is split by the spin – orbit effect into a doublet
separated  by  the  spin–orbit  energy  ⌬E ⫽ 5 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV.  The  higher  energy  state  is  the
one for which the spin angular momentum of the electron is “aligned” with its orbital
angular  momentum.  The  1s level  is  unaffected,  since  no  magnetic  ﬁeld  arises  for  or-
bital motion with zero angular momentum.

1
2

These results can be deduced from the vector addition model shown in Figure
9.12a. With j ⫽ , there are only two possibilities for mj, namely mj ⫽ ⫾ . For
j ⫽ ᐉ ⫾ ,  the  number  of  possibilities  (2j ⫹ 1)  for  mj becomes  either  2ᐉ or
2ᐉ ⫹ 2. Notice that the number of mj values is always even for a single electron,
leading  to  an  even  number  of  orientations  in  the  semiclassical  model  for  J

1
2

1
2

S

L

J

S

J

j  =     + s

ᐉ

j  =     – s

ᐉ

L

(a)

Jz

3–
h
2

1–
h
2
0
1–
h
2

–

–

3–
h
2

J

Jz

1–
h
2

0

–

1–
h
2

J

j = 3–
2

j = 1–
2

(b)

Figure  9.12 (a)  A  vector  model  for  determining  the  total  angular  momentum
J ⫽ L ⫹ S of a single electron. (b) The allowed orientations of the total angular mo-
mentum J for the states j ⫽ and j ⫽ . Notice that there are now an even number
of  orientations  possible,  not  the  odd  number  familiar  from  the  space  quantization
of L alone.

1
2

3
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

(Fig.  9.12b),  rather  than  the  odd  number  predicted  for  the  orbital  angular
momentum L alone.

9.3

THE SPIN – ORBIT INTERACTION AND OTHER MAGNETIC EFFECTS

311

A  common  spectroscopic  notation  is  to  use  a  subscript  after  a  letter  to
designate  the  total  angular  momentum  of  an  atomic  electron,  where  the  let-
ter itself  (now  uppercase)  describes  its  orbital  angular  momentum.  For
example,  the  notation  1S1/2 describes  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen,
1
where the  1  indicates  n ⫽ 1,  the  S tells  us  that  ᐉ ⫽ 0,  and  the  subscript 
2
denotes j ⫽ .  Likewise,  the  spectroscopic  notations  for  the  n ⫽ 2  states  of
hydrogen are 2S1/2(ᐉ ⫽ 0, j ⫽ ), 2P3/2(ᐉ ⫽ 1, j ⫽ ), and 2P1/2(ᐉ ⫽ 1, j ⫽ ).
Again,  the  spin – orbit  interaction  splits  the  latter  two  states  in  energy  by
about 5 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV.

1
2

1
2

1
2

3
2

Spectroscopic notation
extended to include spin

EXAMPLE 9.4 The Sodium Doublet

The  famed  sodium  doublet  arises  from  the  spin – orbit
splitting  of  the  sodium  3p level,  and  consists  of  the
closely  spaced  pair  of  spectral  lines  at  wavelengths  of
588.995 nm and 589.592 nm. Show on an energy-level di-
agram the electronic transitions giving rise to these lines,
labeling the participating atomic states with their proper
spectroscopic  designations.  From  the  doublet  spacing,
determine the magnitude of the spin – orbit energy.

Solution The  outer  electron  in  sodium  is  the  ﬁrst
electron to occupy the n ⫽ 3 shell, and it would go into
the  lowest-energy  subshell,  the  3s or  3S1/2
level.
The next-highest  levels  belong  to  the  3p subshell.  The
2(2ᐉ ⫹ 1) ⫽ 6  states  of  this  subshell  are  grouped  into
the 3P1/2 level with two states, and the 3P3/2 level with
four  states.  The  spin – orbit  effect  splits  these  levels
by the  spin – orbit  energy.  The  outer  electron,  once  it
is excited to either of these levels by some means (such
as  an  electric  discharge  in  the  sodium  vapor  lamp),
returns  to  the  3S1/2 level  with  the  emission  of  a  pho-
ton. The  two  possible  transitions  3P3/2 : 3S1/2 and
3P1/2 : 3S1/2 are  shown  in  Figure  9.13.  The  emitted
photons  have  nearly  the  same  energy  but  differ  by
the small amount ⌬E representing the spin – orbit split-
ting  of  the  initial  levels.  Since  E ⫽ hc/␭ for  photons,
⌬E is found as

⌬E ⫽

hc
␭1

⫺

hc
␭2

⫽

hc(␭2 ⫺ ␭1)

␭1␭2

For the sodium doublet, the observed wavelength differ-
ence is

␭2 ⫺ ␭1 ⫽ 589.592 nm ⫺ 588.995 nm ⫽ 0.597 nm

Using this with hc ⫽ 1240 eV ⭈ nm gives

⌬E ⫽

(1240 eV ⭈nm)(0.597 nm)
(589.592 nm)(588.995 nm)

⫽ 2.13 ⫻ 10⫺3 eV

3p

∆E

3P 3/2

3P 1/2

588.995 nm 589.592 nm

3s

3S 1/2

Figure 9.13 (Example 9.4). The transitions 3P3/2 : 3S1/2
and 3P1/2 : 3S1/2 that give rise to the sodium doublet. The
3p level of sodium is split by the spin–orbit effect, but the 3s
level  is  unaffected.  In  the  sodium  vapor  lamp,  electrons
normally  in  the  3s level  are  excited  to  the  3p levels  by  an
electric discharge.

Exercise 2 Using the spin – orbit interaction energy calculated in Example 9.4, calcu-
late  the  magnitude  of  the  magnetic  ﬁeld  at  the  site  of  the  orbiting  3p electron  in
sodium.

Answer B ⫽ 18.38 T, a large ﬁeld by laboratory standards.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

312

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

9.4 EXCHANGE SYMMETRY AND THE

EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE

As mentioned earlier, the existence of spin requires that the state of an atomic
electron  be  speciﬁed  with  four  quantum  numbers.  In  the  absence  of  spin –
orbit  effects  these  could  be  n, ᐉ, mᐉ,  and  ms;  if  the  spin – orbit  interaction  is
taken  into  account,  mᐉ and ms are  replaced  by  j and mj.  In  either  case,  four
quantum numbers are required, one for each of the four degrees of freedom
possessed by a single electron.

In  those  systems  where  two  or  more  electrons  are  present,  we  might
expect to describe each electronic state by giving the appropriate set of four
quantum  numbers.  In  this  connection  an  interesting  question  arises,
namely, “How many electrons in an atom can have the same four quantum
numbers,  that  is,  be  in  the  same  state?”  This  important  question  was
answered  by  Wolfgang  Pauli  in  1925  in  a  powerful  statement  known  as
the exclusion  principle.  The  exclusion  principle  states  that no  two

important  contributions 

Wolfgang  Pauli  was  an  ex-

tremely  talented  Austrian
theoretical  physicist  who
made 
in
many areas of modern physics. At the
age of 21, Pauli gained public recog-
nition with a masterful review article
on relativity, which is still considered
to be one of the ﬁnest and most com-
prehensive  introductions  to  the  sub-
ject. Other major contributions were
the discovery of the exclusion princi-
ple,  the  explanation  of  the  connec-
tion  between  particle  spin  and  statis-
tics,  theories  of  relativistic  quantum
electrodynamics,  the  neutrino  hy-
pothesis,  and  the  hypothesis  of  nu-
clear  spin.  An  article  entitled  “The
Fundamental Principles of Quantum
Mechanics,”  written  by  Pauli  in  1933
for the  Handbuch  der  Physik, is widely
acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  best
treatments  of  quantum  physics  ever
written.  Pauli  was  a  forceful  and  col-
orful  character,  well  known  for  his
witty  and  often  caustic  remarks  di-
rected  at  those  who  presented  new
theories in a less than perfectly clear
manner.  Pauli  exerted  great  inﬂu-
ence  on  his  students  and  colleagues
by  forcing  them  with  his  sharp  criti-
cism  to  a  deeper  and  clearer  under-

I  opened  the  door,  and  here  was
Pauli—it was a very big ofﬁce—at the
other  side  of  the  room,  at  his  desk,
writing and writing. He said, “Who is
this?  First  I  must  ﬁnish  calculating.”
Again  he  let  me  wait  for  about  ﬁve
minutes  and  then:  “Who  is  that?”  “I
am  Weisskopf.”  “Uhh,  Weisskopf,  ja,
you  are  my  new  assistant.”  Then  he
looked at me and said, “Now, you see
I  wanted  to  take  Bethe,  but  Bethe
works  now  on  the  solid  state.  Solid
state I don’t like, although I started it.
This  is  why  I  took  you.”  Then  I  said,
“What  can  I  do  for  you,  sir?”  and  he
said  “I  shall  give  you  right  away  a
problem.”  He  gave  me  a  problem,
some  calculation,  and  then  he  said,
“Go  and  work.”  So  I  went,  and  after
10  days  or  so,  he  came  and  said,
“Well, show me what you have done.”
And  I  showed  him.  He  looked  at  it
and  exclaimed:  “I  should  have  taken
Bethe!”*

*From  Victor  F.  Weisskopf,  Physics  in  the
Twentieth  Century:  Selected  Essays:  My  Life
as  a  Physicist. Cambridge,  MA,  The  MIT
Press, 1972, p. 10.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

WOLFGANG PAULI

(1900 – 1958)

standing.  Victor  Weisskopf,  one  of
Pauli’s  famous  students,  has  aptly
described  him  as  “the  conscience  of
theoretical  physics.”  Pauli’s  sharp
sense  of  humor  was  also  nicely  cap-
tured  by  Weisskopf  in  the  following
anecdote:

“In a few weeks, Pauli asked me to
come  to  Zurich.  I  came  to  the  big
door of his ofﬁce, I knocked, and no
answer.  I  knocked  again  and  no  an-
swer. After about ﬁve minutes he said,
rather roughly, “Who is it? Come in!”

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.4

EXCHANGE SYMMETRY AND THE EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE

313

electrons  in  an  atom  can  have  the  same  set  of  quantum  numbers. We
should point out that if this principle were not valid, every electron would
occupy the 1s atomic state (this being the state of lowest energy), the chem-
ical  behavior  of  the  elements  would  be  drastically  different,  and  nature  as
we know it would not exist!

The exclusion principle follows from our belief that electrons are identical
particles — that it is impossible to distinguish one electron from another. This
seemingly innocuous statement takes on added importance in view of the wave
nature of matter, and has far-reaching consequences. To gain an appreciation
for  this  point,  let  us  consider  a  collision  between  two  electrons,  as  shown  in
Figure 9.14. Figures 9.14a and 9.14b depict two distinct events, the scattering
effect  being  much  stronger  in  the  latter  where  the  electrons  are  turned
through  a  larger  angle.  Each  event,  however,  arises  from  the  same  initial
condition  and  leads  to  the  same  outcome — both  electrons  are  scattered
and emerge at angles ␪ relative to the axis of incidence. Had we not followed
their paths, we could not decide which of the two collisions actually occurred,
and  the  separate  identities  of  the  electrons  would  have  been  lost  in  the
process of collision.

But  paths  are  classical  concepts,  blurred  by  the  wave  properties  of  matter
according to the uncertainty principle. That is, there is an inherent fuzziness
to these paths, which blends them inextricably in the collision region, where
the  electrons  may  be  separated  by  only  a  few  de  Broglie  wavelengths.  The
quantum viewpoint is better portrayed in Figure 9.14c, where the two distinct
possibilities  (from  a  classical  standpoint)  merge  into  a  single  quantum
event — the  scattering  of  two  electrons  through  an  angle  ␪.  Note  that  indis-
tinguishability  plays  no  role  in  classical  physics:  All  particles,  even  identical
ones,  are  distinguishable  classically  through  their  paths! With  our  acceptance
of  matter  waves,  we  must  conclude  that identical  particles  cannot  be  told

1

θ

a

b

a

2

(a)

2

(b)

1

θ

b

a

π  – θ

b

?

(c)

Figure  9.14 The scattering of two electrons as a result of their mutual repulsion.
The  events  depicted  in  (a)  and  (b)  produce  the  same  outcome  for  identical
electrons  but  are  nonetheless  distinguishable  classically  because  the  path  taken
by each  electron  is  different  in  the  two  cases.  In  this  way,  the  electrons  retain
their separate  identities  during  collision.  (c)  According  to  quantum  mechanics,
the paths  taken  by  the  electrons  are  blurred  by  the  wave  properties  of  matter.
In consequence,  once  they  have  interacted,  the  electrons  cannot  be  told  apart  in
any way!

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

314

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

Electrons are truly
indistinguishable

apart  in  any  way — they  are  truly  indistinguishable. Incorporating  this
remarkable  fact  into  the  quantum  theory  leads  to  the  exclusion  principle
discovered by Pauli.

Let  us  see  how  indistinguishability  affects  our  mathematical  description
of  a  two-electron  system,  say,  the  helium  atom.  Each  electron  has  kinetic
energy  and  the  atom  has  electrostatic  potential  energy  associated  with  the
interaction  of  the  two  electrons  with  the  doubly  charged  helium  nucleus.
These  contributions  are  represented  in  Schrödinger’s  equation  for  one
electron by terms

⫺

ប2
2m e

2␺ ⫹

ⵜ1

k(2e)(⫺e)

r1

␺

2 is  the  Laplacian  in  this  electron’s  coordinate, r1.  For  brevity,  let  us
where ⵜ1
write the sum of both terms simply as h(1)␺, with the label 1 referring to r1.
For the second electron, we write the same expression, except that r1 must be
replaced everywhere by r2, the coordinate of the second electron. The station-
ary  states  for  our  two-electron  system  satisfy  Schrödinger’s  time-independent
equation,

h(1)␺ ⫹ h(2)␺ ⫽ E␺

(9.15)

The fact that h(1) and h(2) are the same but for their arguments reﬂects the
indistinguishability of the two electrons.

Equation  9.15  accounts  for  the  electrons’  kinetic  energy  and  the  atom’s
potential  energy,  but  ignores  the  interaction  between  the  two  electrons.  In
fact, the electrons repel each other through the Coulomb force, leading to an
interaction energy that must be added to the left-hand side of Equation 9.15.
For simplicity, we shall ignore this interaction and treat the electrons as inde-
pendent  objects,  each  unaffected  by  the  other’s  presence.  In  Section  9.5  we
show how this independent particle approximation can be improved to give a bet-
ter description of reality.

The  two-electron  wavefunction  depends  on  the  coordinates  of  both  parti-
cles, ␺ ⫽ ␺(r1, r2),  with  兩␺(r1, r2)兩2 representing  the  probability  density  for
ﬁnding one electron at r1 and the other at r2. The indistinguishability of elec-
trons  requires  that  a  formal  interchange  of  particles  produce  no  observable
effects. In particular, all probabilities are unaffected by the interchange, so the
wavefunction ␺ must be one for which

兩␺(r1, r2)兩2 ⫽ 兩␺(r2, r1)兩2

We say that such a wavefunction exhibits exchange symmetry. The wavefunc-
tion itself may be either even or odd under particle exchange. The former is
characterized by the property

Exchange symmetry
for bosons

␺(r1, r2) ⫽ ␺(r2, r1)

(9.16)

and describes a class of particles called bosons. Photons belong to this class, as
do some more exotic particles such as pions. Electrons, as well as protons and
neutrons, are examples of fermions, for which

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.4

EXCHANGE SYMMETRY AND THE EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE

315

␺(r1, r2) ⫽ ⫺␺(r2, r1)

(9.17)

Exchange symmetry
for fermions

Therefore, our two-electron helium wavefunction must obey Equation 9.17 to
account for the indistinguishability of electrons.7

To recover  the  Pauli  principle,  we  must  examine  the  wavefunction  more
closely.  For  independent  electrons,  solutions  to  Equation  9.15  are  easily
found.  Because  each  electron  “sees”  only  the  helium  nucleus,  the  wavefunc-
tion  in  each  coordinate  must  be  an  atomic  function  of  the  type  discussed  in
Chapter 8. We denote these atomic functions by ␺a, where a is a collective la-
bel  for  the  four  quantum  numbers  n, ᐉ, mᐉ,  and  ms (or n, ᐉ, j,  and  mj if
spin – orbit  effects  are  included).  The  products ␺a(r1)␺b(r2)  satisfy  our  equa-
tion, because

h(1)␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫽ Ea␺a(r1)␺b(r2)

h(2)␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫽ Eb␺a(r1)␺b(r2)

Ea and Eb are  hydrogen-like  energies  for  the  states  labeled  a and b (see  Eq.
8.38). Therefore,

[h(1) ⫹ h(2)]␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫽ (Ea ⫹ Eb)␺a(r1)␺b(r2)

(9.18)

and E ⫽ Ea ⫹ Eb is the total energy of this two-electron state.

Notice that the one-electron energies are simply additive, as we might have
anticipated for independent particles. Furthermore, the solution ␺a(r1)␺b(r2)
describes one electron occupying the atomic state labeled a and the other the
state  labeled  b.  But  this  product  is  not odd  under  particle  exchange,  as
required for identical fermions. However, you can verify that ␺a(r2)␺b(r1) also
is a solution to Equation 9.15 with energy E ⫽ Ea ⫹ Eb, corresponding to our
two  electrons  having  exchanged  states.  The  antisymmetric  combination  of
these two

␺ab(r1, r2) ⫽ ␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫺ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1)

(9.19)

does display the correct exchange symmetry, that is,

␺ab(r2, r1) ⫽ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1) ⫺ ␺a(r1)␺b(r2)

⫽ ⫺␺ab(r1, r2)

Therefore,  Equation  9.19  furnishes  an  acceptable  description  of  the  system.
Notice,  however,  that  it  is  now  impossible  to  decide  which  electron  occupies
which state — as it should be for identical electrons! Finally, we see that when
a and b label the same state (a ⫽ b), ␺ab is identically zero — the theory allows
no  solution  (description)  in  this  case,  in  agreement  with  the  familiar  state-
ment of the exclusion principle.

7It is an experimental fact that integer spin particles are bosons, but half-integer spin particles are
fermions. This connection between spin and symmetry under particle exchange can be shown to
have a theoretical basis when the quantum theory is formulated so as to conform to the require-
ments of special relativity.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

316

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

EXAMPLE 9.5 Ground State of the 

Helium Atom

Construct  explicitly  the  two-electron  ground-state  wave-
function  for  the  helium  atom  in  the  independent  parti-
cle  approximation,  using  the  prescription  of  Equation
9.19. Compare the predicted energy of this state with the
measured value, and account in a qualitative way for any
discrepancy.

Solution In  the  independent-particle  approximation,
each helium electron “sees” only the doubly charged he-
lium nucleus. Accordingly, the ground-state wavefunction
of the helium atom is constructed from the lowest-energy
hydrogen-like  wavefunctions,  with  atomic  number  Z ⫽ 2
for helium. These are states for which n ⫽ 1, ᐉ ⫽ 0, and
mᐉ ⫽ 0. Referring to Equation 8.42 of Chapter 8, we ﬁnd
(with Z ⫽ 2)

␺1 0 0(r) ⫽ ␲⫺1/2(2/a0)3/2e⫺2r/a0

To this  orbital  function  we  must  attach  a  spin  label  (⫾)
indicating the direction of electron spin. Thus, the one-
electron state labels a and b in this example are given by
a ⫽ (1,  0,  0,  ⫹), b ⫽ (1,  0,  0,  ⫺).  Because  there  is  no
orbital  ﬁeld  to  interact  with  the  electron  spin,  the  ener-
gies  of  these  two  states  are  identical  and  are  just  the
hydrogen-like  levels  of  Equation  8.38  with  n ⫽ 1  and
Z ⫽ 2:

Ea ⫽ Eb ⫽ ⫺(22/12)(13.6 eV) ⫽ ⫺54.4 eV

The  antisymmetric  two-electron  wavefunction  for  the
ground state of helium is then

␺(r1, r2) ⫽ ␺1 0 0⫹(r1)␺1 0 0⫺(r2) ⫺ ␺1 0 0⫺(r1)␺1 0 0⫹(r2)

Both terms have the same spatial dependence but differ
as to their spin. The ﬁrst term of the antisymmetric wave

describes electron 1 as having spin up and electron 2 as
having  spin  down.  These  spin  directions  are  reversed  in
the  second  term.  If  we  introduce  the  notation  兩⫹⫺典 to
describe the two electron spins in the ﬁrst term, then the
second  term  becomes  兩⫺⫹典,  and  the  total  two-electron
wavefunction for the helium ground state can be written

␺(r1, r2) ⫽ ␲⫺1(2/a0)3 e⫺2(r1⫹r2)/a0 {兩 ⫹⫺典 ⫺ 兩 ⫺⫹典}

The  equal  admixture  of  the  spin  states  兩⫹⫺典 and 兩⫺⫹典
means the spin of any one of the helium electrons is just
as likely to be up as it is to be down. Notice, however, that
the spin of the remaining electron is always opposite the
ﬁrst. Such spin–spin correlations are a direct consequence
of the exclusion principle. (The valence electrons in dif-
ferent orbitals of many higher-Z atoms tend to align their
spins.  This  tendency — known  as  Hund’s  rule — is  an-
other example of spin – spin correlations induced by the
exclusion principle.)

The total electronic energy of the helium atom in this
approximation is the sum of the one-electron energies Ea
and Eb:

E ⫽ Ea ⫹ Eb ⫽ ⫺54.4 eV ⫺ 54.4 eV ⫽ ⫺108.8 eV

The  magnitude  of  this  number,  108.8 eV,  represents  the
energy  (work)  required  to  remove  both  electrons  from
the helium atom in the independent particle model. The
measured  value  is  substantially  lower,  about  79.0 eV,
because  of  the  mutual  repulsion  of  the  two  elec-
trons. Speciﬁcally,  it  requires  less  energy — only  about
24.6 eV — to  remove  the  ﬁrst  electron  from  the  atom,
because  the  electron  left  behind  screens the  nuclear
charge, making it appear less positive than a bare helium
nucleus.

O P T I O N A L

9.5 ELECTRON INTERACTIONS AND

SCREENING EFFECTS

The preceding discussion of the helium atom exposes an issue that arises whenever
we treat a system with two or more electrons, namely, how to handle the effects of
electron – electron repulsion. Electrons conﬁned to the small space of an atom are
expected to exert strong repulsive electrical forces on one another. To ignore these
altogether,  as  in  the  independent-particle  model,  is  simply  too  crude;  to  include
them exactly is unmanageable, since precise descriptions even for the classical mo-
tion in this case are unknown except through numerical computation. Accordingly,
some  workable  approximation  scheme  is  needed.  A  most  fruitful  approach  to  this
problem begins with the notion of an effective ﬁeld.

Any one atomic electron is subject to the Coulomb attraction of the nucleus as
well as the Coulomb repulsion of every other electron in the atom. These inﬂuences
largely cancel each other, leaving a net effective ﬁeld with potential energy Ueff(r).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

9.5

ELECTRON INTERACTIONS AND SCREENING EFFECTS

317

Ueff may not be Coulombic — or even spherically symmetric — and may be different
for  each  atomic  electron.  The  success  of  this  approach  hinges  on  how  simply  and
accurately we can model the effective potential. A few of the more obvious possibili-
ties are outlined here.

The outermost, or valence, electrons of an atom “see” not the bare nucleus, but
one  shielded,  or  screened,  by  the  intervening  electrons.  The  attraction  is  more  like
that arising from a nucleus with an effective atomic number Z eff somewhat less than
the actual number Z and would be described by

Ueff(r) ⫽

k(Zeffe)(⫺e)

r

(9.20)

For  a  Z-electron  atom,  Zeff ⫽ Z would  represent  no  screening  whatever;  at
the  opposite  extreme  is  perfect  screening  by  the  Z ⫺ 1  other  electrons,  giving
Z eff ⫽ Z ⫺ (Z ⫺ 1) ⫽ 1. The best choice for Z eff need not even be integral, and use-
ful values may be deduced from measurements of atomic ionization potentials (see
Example 9.6). Furthermore, the degree of screening depends on how much time an
electron spends near the nucleus, and we should expect Z eff to vary with the shell
and  subshell  labels  of  the  electron  in  question.  In  particular,  a  4s electron  is
screened  more  effectively  than  a  3s electron,  since  its  average  distance  from  the
nucleus is greater. Similarly, a 3d electron is better screened than a 3s, or even a 3p
electron  (lower  angular  momentum  implies  more  eccentric  classical  orbits,  with
greater penetration into the nuclear region). The use of a Z eff for valence electrons
is  appropriate  whenever  a  clear  distinction  exists  between  these  and  inner  (core)
electrons of the atom, as in the alkali metals.

EXAMPLE 9.6 Zeff for the 3s Electron in Sodium
The outer electron of the sodium atom occupies the 3s atomic level. The observed
value for the ionization energy of this electron is 5.14 eV. From this information, de-
duce a value of Z eff for the 3s electron in sodium.

Solution Since the ionization energy, 5.14 eV, represents the amount of energy
that  must  be  expended  to  remove  the  3s electron  from  the  atom,  we  infer  that
the  energy  of  the  3s electron  in  sodium  is  E ⫽ ⫺5.14 eV.  This  should  be
compared  with  the  energy  of  a  3s electron  in  a  hydrogen-like  atom  with  atomic
number Z eff, or

E ⫽ ⫺

2

Z eff
32

(13.6 eV)

Equating this to ⫺5.14 eV and solving for Z eff gives

Zeff ⫽ 3√ 5.14

13.6

⫽ 1.84

In  principle,  nuclear  shielding  can  be  better  described  by  allowing  Z eff to  vary
continuously throughout the atom in a way that mimics the tighter binding accom-
panying  electron  penetration  into  the  core.  Two  functional  forms  commonly  are
used for this purpose. For Thomas – Fermi screening we write

Zeff(r ) ⫽ Z e⫺r/aTF

(9.21)

The Thomas – Fermi atom

where a TF is the Thomas – Fermi screening length. According to Equation 9.21, Z eff
is very nearly Z close to the nucleus (r ⬇ 0) but drops off quickly in the outer region,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

318

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

becoming  essentially  zero  for  r ⬎⬎ a TF.  In  this  way,  a TF becomes  an  indicator  of
atomic  size.  The  Thomas – Fermi  model  prescribes  aTF proportional  to  Z ⫺1/3;  the
weak variation with Z suggests that all atoms are essentially the same size, regardless
of how many electrons they may have. Because the Thomas – Fermi potential is not
Coulombic, the one-electron energies that result from the use of Equation 9.21 vary
within a given shell; that is, they depend on the principal (n) and orbital (ᐉ) quan-
tum  numbers.  The  study  of  these  energies  and  their  associated  wavefunctions
requires  numerical  methods,  or  further  approximation.  The Thomas – Fermi
approximation  improves  with  larger  values  of  Z and  so  is  especially  well  suited  to
describe the outer electronic structure of the heavier elements.

In  another  approach,  called  the  quantum-defect  method,  nuclear  shielding  is

described by

Zeff(r ) ⫽ 1 ⫹

b
r

(9.22)

where b is  again  a  kind  of  screening  length.  This  form  is  appropriate  to  the  alkali
metals, where a lone outer electron is responsible for the chemical properties of the
atom. From Equation 9.22, this electron “sees” Z eff ⬇ 1 for r ⬎⬎ b and larger values
in the core. The special virtue of Equation 9.22 is that it leads to one-electron ener-
gies and wavefunctions that can be found without further approximation. In particu-
lar, the energy levels that follow from Equation 9.22 can be shown to be

Quantum defects

En ⫽

ke2
2a0

 {n ⫺ D(ᐉ)}⫺2

(9.23)

where D(ᐉ)  is  termed  the  quantum  defect, since  it  measures  the  departure  from
the  simple  hydrogen-atom  level  structure.  As  the  notation  suggests,  the  quantum
defect  for  an  s electron  differs  from  that  for  a  p or d electron,  but  all  s electrons
have  the  same  quantum  defect,  regardless  of  their  shell  label.  Table  9.1  lists  some
quantum  defects  deduced  experimentally  for  the  sodium  atom.  Taking b ⫽ 0  in
Equation 9.22 causes all quantum defects to vanish, returning us to the hydrogen-
like level structure discussed in Chapter 8.

The use of a simple Zeff, or the more complicated forms of the Thomas – Fermi
or quantum-defect method, still results in a Ueff with spherical symmetry; that is,
the electrons move in a central ﬁeld. The Hartree theory discards even this fea-
ture  in  order  to  achieve  more  accurate  results.  According  to  Hartree,  the  elec-
tron  “cloud”  in  the  atom  should  be  treated  as  a  classical  body  of  charge  distrib-
uted  with  some  volume  charge  density  ␳(r).  The  potential  energy  of  any  one
atomic electron is then

⫺冕 ke 冤 ␳(r⬘)

兩 r ⫺ r⬘ 兩冥 dV ⬘

Ueff(r) ⫽

kZe2

r

(9.24)

The ﬁrst term is the attractive energy of the nucleus, and the second term is the re-
pulsive  energy  of  all  other  atomic  electrons.  This  Ueff gives  rise  to  a  one-electron
Schrödinger  equation  for  the  energies  Ei and  wavefunctions ␺i of  this,  say  the  ith,
atomic electron.

Table 9.1 Some Quantum Defects 

for the Sodium Atom

Subshell

s

p

d

D(ᐉ)

1.35

0.86

0.01

f

⬃0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

But  the  Hartree  theory  is  self-consistent.  That  is,  the  charge  density  ␳(r)  due
to the  other  atomic  electrons  is  itself  calculated  from  the  electron  wavefunc-
tions as

␳(r) ⫽ ⫺e

兺

兩␺j(r)兩2

(9.25)

Hartree’s self-consistent
ﬁelds

9.6

THE PERIODIC TABLE

319

The  sum  in  Equation  9.25  includes  all  occupied  electron  states  ␺j except  the  ith
state.  In  this  way  the  mathematical  problem  posed  by Ueff is  turned  back  on  itself:
We must solve not one Schrödinger equation, but N of them in a single stroke, one
for  each  of  the  N electrons  in  the  atom!  This  is  accomplished  using  numerical
methods  in  an  iterative  solution  scheme.  An  educated  guess  is  made  initially  for
each of the N ground-state electron waves. Starting with this guess, the ␳ and Ueff for
every electron can be computed and all N Schrödinger equations solved. The result-
ing wavefunctions are compared with the initial guesses; if discrepancies appear, the
calculation is repeated with the new set of electron wavefunctions replacing the old
ones.  After  several  such  iterations,  agreement  is  attained  between  the  starting
and calculated wavefunctions. The resulting N electron wavefunctions are said to be
fully  self-consistent.  Implementation  of  the  Hartree  method  is  laborious  and
demands  considerable  skill,  but  the  results  for  atomic  electrons  are  among  the
best available.  Indeed,  the  Hartree  and  closely  related  Hartree – Fock methods
are the  ones  frequently  used  today  when  accurate  atomic  energy  levels  and  wave-
functions are required.

9.6 THE PERIODIC TABLE

In  principle,  it  is  possible  to  predict  the  properties  of  all  the  elements  by
applying the procedures of wave mechanics to each one. Because of the large
number of interactions possible in multielectron atoms, however, approxima-
tions must be used for all atoms except hydrogen. Nevertheless, the electronic
structure  of  even  the  most  complex  atoms  can  be  viewed  as  a  succession  of
ﬁlled  levels  increasing  in  energy,  with  the  outermost  electrons  primarily
responsible for the chemical properties of the element.

In  the  central  ﬁeld  approximation,  the  atomic  levels  can  be  labeled  by
the quantum numbers n and ᐉ. From the exclusion principle, the maximum
number  of  electrons  in  one  such  subshell  level  is  2(2ᐉ ⫹ 1).  The  energy
of an  electron  in  this  level  depends  primarily  on  the  quantum  number  n,
and  to  a  lesser  extent  on  ᐉ.  The  levels  can  be  grouped  according  to  the
value of n (the shell label), and all those within a group have energies that
increase  with  increasing  ᐉ.  The  order  of  ﬁlling  the  subshell  levels  with
electrons is as follows: Once a subshell is ﬁlled, the next electron goes into
the  vacant  level  that  is  lowest  in  energy.  This  minimum  energy  principle
can  be  understood  by  noting  that  if  the  electron  were  to  occupy  a  higher
level,  it  would  spontaneously  decay  to  a  lower  one  with  the  emission  of
energy.

The chemical properties of atoms are determined predominantly by the
least tightly bound, or valence, electrons, which are in the subshell of high-
est  energy.  The  most  important  factors  are  the  occupancy  of  this  subshell
and  the  energy  separation  between  this  and  the  next-higher  (empty)  sub-
shell.  For  example,  an  atom  tends  to  be  chemically  inert  if  its  highest 
subshell  is  full  and  there  is  an  appreciable  energy  gap  to  the  next-higher
subshell,  since  then  electrons  are  not  readily  shared  with  other  atoms  to

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

320

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

form  a molecule.  The  quasi-periodic  recurrence  of  similar  highest-shell
structures as Z increases is responsible for the periodic system of the chemi-
cal elements.

The speciﬁcation of n and ᐉ for each atomic electron is called the electron
conﬁguration of that atom. We are now in a position to describe the electron
conﬁguration of any atom in its ground state:

Hydrogen has  only  one  electron,  which,  in  its  ground-state,  is  described  by
the  quantum  numbers  n ⫽ 1, ᐉ ⫽ 0.  Hence,  its  electron  conﬁguration  is
designated as 1s1.
Helium, with its two electrons, has a ground-state electron conﬁguration of
1s 2.  That  is,  both  electrons  are  in  the  same  (lowest-energy)  1s subshell.
Since two is the maximum occupancy for an s subshell, the subshell (and in
this case also the shell) is said to be closed, and helium is inert.
Lithium has  three  electrons.  Two  of  these  are  assigned  to  the  1s subshell,
and the third must be assigned to the 2s subshell, because this subshell has
slightly  lower  energy  than  the  2p subshell.  Hence,  the  electron  conﬁgura-
tion of lithium is 1s22s1.
With  the  addition  of  another  electron  to  make  beryllium,  the  2s subshell  is
closed.  The  electron  conﬁguration  of  beryllium,  with  four  electrons  alto-
gether, is 1s22s2. (Beryllium is not inert, however, because the energy gap sepa-
rating the 2s level from the next available level — the 2p—is not very large.)
Boron has  a  conﬁguration  of  1s22s22p1.  (With  spin – orbit  doubling,  the  2p
electron  in  boron  actually  occupies  the  2P1/2 sublevel,  corresponding  to
n ⫽ 2, ᐉ ⫽ 1, and j ⫽ .)
Carbon has six electrons, and a question arises of how to assign the two 2p
electrons.  Do  they  go  into  the  same  orbital  with  paired  spins  (qp),  or
do  they  occupy  different  orbitals  with  unpaired  spins  (qq)?  Experi-
ments show that the energetically preferred conﬁguration is the latter, in
which  the  spins  are  aligned.  This  is  one  illustration  of  Hund’s  rule,
which  states  that  electrons  usually  ﬁll  different  orbitals  with  unpaired
spins, rather than the same orbital with paired spins. Hund’s rule can be
partly understood by noting that electrons in the same orbital tend to be
closer together, where their mutual repulsion contributes to a higher en-
ergy than if they were separated in different orbitals. Some exceptions to
this rule do occur in those elements with subshells that are nearly ﬁlled
or half-ﬁlled. The progressive ﬁlling of the 2p subshell illustrating Hund’s
rule  is  shown  schematically  in  Figure  9.15.  With  neon,  the  2p subshell  is
also  closed.  The  neon  atom  has  ten  electrons  in  the  conﬁguration
1s22s22p6.  Because  the  energy  gap  separating  the  2p level  from  the  next
available level — the 3s — is quite large, the neon conﬁguration is excep-
tionally stable and the atom is chemically inert.

1
2

A  complete  list  of  electron  conﬁgurations  for  all  the  known  elements  is
given in Table 9.2. Note that beginning with potassium (Z ⫽ 19), the 4s sub-
shell starts to ﬁll while the 3d level remains empty. Only after the 4s subshell
is closed to form calcium does the 3d subshell begin to ﬁll. We infer that the
3d level  has  a  higher  energy  than  the  4s level,  even  though  it  belongs  to  a
lower-indexed  shell.  This  should  come  as  no  surprise,  because  the  energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Atom

1s

2s

2p

Electron
configuration

9.6

THE PERIODIC TABLE

321

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

N

1s22s1

1s22s2

1s22s22p1

1s22s22p2

1s22s22p3

1s22s22p4

1s22s22p5

1s22s22p6

Figure  9.15 Electronic  conﬁgurations  of  successive  elements  from  lithium  to  neon.
The ﬁlling of electronic states must obey the Pauli exclusion principle and Hund’s rule.

separating  consecutive  shells  becomes  smaller  with  increasing  n (see  the
hydrogen-like spectrum), but the energy separating subshells is more nearly
constant  because  of  the  screening  discussed  in  Section  9.5.  (In  fact,  the
energy  separating  the  3d and  4s levels  is  very  small,  as  evidenced  by  the
electron  conﬁguration  of  chromium,  in  which  the  3d subshell  temporarily
regains  an  electron  from  the  4s.)  The  same  phenomenon  occurs  again
with rubidium (Z ⫽ 37), in which the 5s subshell begins to ﬁll at the expense
of  the  4d and  4f subshells.  Energetically,  the  electron  conﬁgurations
shown in the table imply the following ordering of subshells with respect to
energy:

1s ⬍ 2s ⬍ 2p ⬍ 3s ⬍ 3p ⬍ 4s ⬃ 3d ⬍ 4p ⬍ 5s ⬍ 4d ⬍ 5p ⬍ 6s ⬍ 4f ⬃ 5d

⬍ 6p ⬍ 7s ⬍ 6d ⬃ 5f . . .

The  elements  from  scandium (Z ⫽ 21)  to  zinc  (Z ⫽ 30)  form  the  ﬁrst
transition  series. These  transition  elements  are  characterized  by  progres-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Ordering of subshells
by energy

322

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

Table 9.2 Electronic Conﬁgurations of the Elements

Z

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Symbol

Ground
Conﬁguration

Ionization
Energy (eV)

H
He
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
K
Ca
Sc
Ti
V
Cr
Mn
Fe

1s1
1s 2
[He] 2s1
2s 2
2s 22p1
2s 22p 2
2s 22p 3
2s 22p 4
2s 22p 5
2s 22p 6
[Ne] 3s1
3s 2
3s 23p1
3s 23p 2
3s 23p 3
3s 23p 4
3s 23p 5
3s 23p 6
[Ar] 4s1
4s 2
3d4s 2
3d 24s 2
3d 34s 2
3d 54s
3d 54s 2
3d 64s 2

13.595
24.581
5.390
9.320
8.296
11.256
14.545
13.614
17.418
21.559
5.138
7.644
5.984
8.149
10.484
10.357
13.01
15.755
4.339
6.111
6.54
6.83
6.74
6.76
7.432
7.87

Symbol

Ground
Conﬁguration

Ionization
Energy (eV)

Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
Ga
Ge
As
Se
Br
Kr
Rb
Sr
Y
Zr
Nb
Mo
Tc
Ru
Rh
Pd
Ag
Cd
In
Sn
Sb
Te

3d 74s 2
3d 84s 2
3d 104s1
3d 104s 2
3d 104s 24p1
3d 104s 24p2
3d 104s 24p 3
3d 104s 24p 4
3d 104s 24p 5
3d 104s 24p 6
[Kr] 5s1
5s 2
4d5s 2
4d 25s 2
4d 45s1
4d 55s1
4d 55s 2
4d 75s1
4d 85s1
4d 10
4d 105s1
4d 105s 2
4d 105s 25p1
4d 105s 25p 2
4d 105s 25p 3
4d 105s 25p 4

7.86
7.633
7.724
9.391
6.00
7.88
9.81
9.75
11.84
13.996
4.176
5.692
6.377
6.835
6.881
7.10
7.228
7.365
7.461
8.33
7.574
8.991
5.785
7.342
8.639
9.01

Z

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

sive  ﬁlling  of  the  3d subshell  while  the  outer  electron  conﬁguration  is
unchanged at 4s2 (except in the case of copper). Consequently, all the tran-
sition elements exhibit similar chemical properties. This belated occupancy
of inner d subshells is encountered again in the second and third transition
series, marked by the progressive ﬁlling of the 4d and 5d subshells, respec-
tively.  The  second  transition  series  includes  the  elements  yttrium (Z ⫽ 39)
to cadmium (Z ⫽ 48);  the  third  contains  the  elements  lutetium (Z ⫽ 71)  to
mercury (Z ⫽ 80).

Related behavior is also seen as the 4f and 5f subshells are ﬁlled. The lan-
thanide series, stretching from lanthanum (Z ⫽ 57) to ytterbium (Z ⫽ 70), is
marked  by  a  common  6s2 valence  conﬁguration,  with  the  added  electrons
completing  the  4f subshell  (the  nearby  5d levels  also  are  occupied  in  some
instances).  The  lanthanide  elements,  or  lanthanides,  also  are  known  as  the
rare earths because of their low natural abundance. Cerium (Z ⫽ 58), which
forms  0.00031%  by  weight  of  the  Earth’s  crust,  is  the  most  abundant  of  the
lanthanides.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Table 9.2 Electronic Conﬁgurations of the Elements

Z

Symbol

Ground
Conﬁguration

Ionization
Energy (eV)

53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78

I
Xe
Cs
Ba
La
Ce
Pr
Nd
Pm
Fm
Eu
Gd
Tb
Dy
Ho
Er
Tm
Yb
Lu
Hf
Ta
W
Re
Os
Ir
Pt

4d 105s 25p 5
4d 105s 25p 6
[Xe] 6s1
6s 2
5d6s 2
4f 5d6s 2
4f 36s 2
4f 46s 2
4f 56s 2
4f 66s 2
4f 76s 2
4f 75d6s 2
4f 96s 2
4f 106s 2
4f 116s 2
4f 126s 2
4f136s2
4f 146s 2
4f 145d6s 2
4f 145d 26s 2
4f 145d 36s 2
4f 145d 46s 2
4f 145d 56s 2
4f 145d 66s 2
4f 145d 76s 2
4f 145d 86s 2

10.454
12.127
3.893
5.210
5.61
6.54
5.48
5.51
5.60
5.644
5.67
6.16
6.74
6.82
6.022
6.108
6.185
6.22
6.15
6.83
7.88
7.98
7.87
8.71
9.12
8.88

Z

79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104

9.6

THE PERIODIC TABLE

323

Symbol

Ground
Conﬁguration

Ionization
Energy (eV)

Au
Hg
Tl
Pb
Bi
Po
At
Rn
Fr
Ra
Ac
Th
Pa
U
Np
Pu
Am
Cm
Bk
Cf
Es
Fm
Mv
No
Lw
Ku

[Xe, 4f 145d 10] 6s1
6s 2
6s 26p1
6s 26p2
6s 26p 3
6s 26p 4
6s 26p 5
6s 26p 6
[Rn] 7s1
7s 2
6d7s 2
6d 27s 2
5f 26d7s 2
5f 36d 7s 2
5f 46d7s 2
5f 67s 2
5f 77s 2
5f 76d 7s 2
5f 86d 7s 2
5f 107s 2
5f 117s 2
5f 127s1
5f 137s 2
5f 147s 2
5f 146d 7s 2
5f 146d 27s 2

9.22

10.434
6.106
7.415
7.287
8.43
9.54

10.745

3.94
5.277
5.17
6.08
5.89
6.194
6.266
6.061
5.99
6.02
6.23
6.30
6.42
6.50
6.58
6.65

Note: The bracket notation is used as a shorthand method to avoid repetition in indicating inner-shell electrons. Thus, [He] represents
1s 2, [Ne] represents 1s 22s 22p6, [Ar] represents 1s 22s 22p63s 23p6, and so on.

In  the  actinide  series from actinium (Z ⫽ 89)  to  nobelium (Z ⫽ 102),  the
valence conﬁguration remains 7s2, as the 5f subshell progressively ﬁlls (along
with occasional occupancy of the nearby 6d level).

Table 9.2 also lists the ionization energies of the elements. The ionization
energy  for  each  element  is  plotted  against  its  atomic  number  Z in  Figure
9.16a.  This  plot  shows  that  the  ionization  energy  tends  to  increase  within  a
shell, then drops dramatically as the ﬁlling of a new shell begins. The behavior
repeats,  and  it  is  from  this  recurring  pattern  that  the  periodic  table  gets  its
name. A similar repetitive pattern is observed in a plot of the atomic volume
per atom versus atomic number (see Fig. 9.16b).

The primary features of these plots can be understood from simple argu-
ments.  First,  the  larger  nuclear  charge  that  accompanies  higher  values  of
Z tends  to  pull  the  electrons  closer  to  the  nucleus  and  binds  them  more
tightly.  Were  this  the  only  effect,  the  ionization  energy  would  increase
and the  atomic  volume  would  decrease  steadily  with  increasing  Z.  But  the
innermost,  or  core,  electrons  screen  the  nuclear  charge,  making  it  less
effective  in  binding  the  outer  electrons.  The  screening  effect  varies  in  a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

324

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

25

He

Ne

)
V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
o
I

20

15

10

5

Ar

Kr

Li

Na

K

Rb

8

8

18

18

Xe

Cs

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Atomic number, Z

(a)

Hg

Rn

Tl

32

70

80

90

)
e
l
o
m
/
L
m
(
 
e
m
u
o
v
 
c
i
m
o
t
A

l

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

Cs

8

8

18

18

32

Rb

Rn

K

Xe

Kr

Na Ar

Ne

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Atomic number, Z

(b)

Figure 9.16 (a) Ionization energy of the elements versus atomic number Z. (b) Atomic
volume of the elements versus atomic number Z. The recurring pattern with increasing
atomic number exempliﬁes the behavior from which the periodic table gets its name.

complicated  way  from  one  element  to  the  next,  but  it  is  most  pronounced
for a lone electron outside a closed shell, as in the alkali metals (Li, Na, K,
Rb,  Cs,  and  Fr).  For  these  conﬁgurations  the  ionization  energy  drops
sharply, only to rise again as the nuclear charge intensiﬁes at higher Z. The
variation in ionization energy is mirrored by the behavior of atomic volume,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

which peaks at the alkali conﬁgurations and becomes smaller as the screen-
ing effect subsides.

9.7

X-RAY SPECTRA AND MOSELEY’S LAW

325

9.7 X-RAY SPECTRA AND MOSELEY’S LAW

Electronic  transitions  within  the  inner  shells  of  heavier  atoms  are  accompa-
nied by large energy transfers. If the excess energy is carried off by a photon,
x rays are emitted at speciﬁc wavelengths peculiar to the emitting atom. This
explains why discrete x-ray lines are produced when energetic electrons bom-
bard a metal target, as discussed earlier in Section 3.5.

The inner electrons of high Z elements are bound tightly to the atom, be-
cause they see a nuclear charge essentially unscreened by the remaining elec-
trons.  Consider  the  case  of  molybdenum  (Mo),  with  atomic  number  Z ⫽ 42
(see  Table  9.2).  The  innermost,  or  K shell,  electrons  have  n ⫽ 1  and  energy
(from Equation 8.38)

E1 ⫽ ⫺

ke 2

2a0 冦 Z 2

12 冧 ⫽ ⫺(13.6 eV)(42)2 ⫽ ⫺23990.4 eV

Nα Nβ

Mαα

M γγ

Mββ

Lα

Lγ

Lβ

Lδ

O

N

M

L

K

K αα

K γγ

K ββ

K δδ

K εε

n = 5

n = 4

n = 3

n = 2

n = 1

Figure  9.17 Origin  of  x-ray  spectra.  The  K  series  (K␣, K␤, K␥,  . . .)  originates  with
electrons in higher-lying shells making a downward transition to ﬁll a vacancy in the K
shell. In the same way, the ﬁlling of vacancies created in higher shells produces the L
series, the M series, and so on.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

326

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

Thus, approximately 24 keV must be supplied to dislodge a K shell electron
from the Mo atom.8 Energies of this magnitude are routinely delivered via
electron  impact:  electrons  accelerated  to  kilovolt  energies  collide  with
atoms of a molybdenum target, giving up most or all of their energy to one
atom  in  a  single  collision.  If  large  enough,  the  collision  energy  may  excite
one of the K shell electrons to a higher vacant level or free it from the atom
altogether. (Recall there are two electrons in a ﬁlled K shell.) In either case,
a  vacancy,  or  hole,  is  left  behind.  This  hole  is  quickly  ﬁlled  by  another,
higher-lying  atomic  electron,  with  the  energy  of  transition  released  in  the
form of a photon. The exact energy (and wavelength) of the escaping pho-
ton depends on the energy of the electron ﬁlling the vacancy, giving rise to
an  entire  K  series  of  emission  lines  denoted  in  order  of  increasing  energy
(decreasing  wavelength)  by  K␣,  K␤,  K␥, . . . .  In  the  same  way,  the  ﬁlling  of
vacancies left in higher shells produces the L series, the M series, and so on,
as illustrated in Figure 9.17.

Henry G. J. Moseley (1887 – 1915) discovered a direct way to measure Z, the atomic
number,  from  the  characteristic  x-ray  wavelength  emitted  by  an  element.  Moseley’s
work  not  only  established  the  correct  sequence  of  elements  in  the  periodic  table
but also provided another confirmation of the Bohr model of the atom, in this case
at  x-ray  energies.  One  wonders  what  other  major  discoveries  Moseley  would
have made if he had not been killed in action at the age of 27 in Turkey in the first
world war. (University of Oxford, Museum of the History of Science/Courtesy AIP Niels Bohr
Library)

8In contrast, only 7.10 eV (the ionization energy from Table 9.2) is required to free the outermost,
or 5s, electron.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

8

6 5

4

3

2

1.5

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

Wavelength ( × 10–10 m)

9.7

X-RAY SPECTRA AND MOSELEY’S LAW

327

r
e
b
m
u
n
 
c
i
m
o
t
A

79 Au
78 Pt
77 Ir
76 Os
75
74 W
73 Ta
72 Lu
71 Yb
70 TmII
69 Tm I
68 Er
67 Dy
66 Ho
65 Tb
64 Gd
63 Eu
62 Sm
61
60 Nd
59 Pr
58 Ce
57 La
56 Ba
55 Cs
54 Xe
53 I
52 Te
51 Sb
50 Sn
49 In
48 Cd
47 Ag
46 Pd
45 Rh
44 Ru
43
42 Mo
41 Nb
40 Zr
39 Y
38 Sr
37 Rb
36 Kr
35 Br
34 Se
33 As
32 Ge
31 Ga
30 Zn
29 Cu
28 Ni
27 Co
26 Fe
25 Mn
24 Cr
23 V
22 Ti
21 Sc
20 Ca
19 K
18 Ar
17 Cl
16 S
15 P
14 Si
13 Al

Lα

L series

αK

K series

Kβ

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Square root of frequency ( × 108 Hz)1/2

Figure  9.18 The  original  data  of  Moseley  showing  the  relationship  between  atomic
number Z and the characteristic x-ray frequencies. The gaps at Z ⫽ 43, 61, and 75 rep-
resent elements unknown at the time of Moseley’s work. (There are also several errors
in the atomic number designations for the elements.) (© From H. G. J. Moseley, Philos.
Mag. (6), 27:703, 1914)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

328

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

The energy of the longest-wavelength photons in a series can be estimated
from simple screening arguments. For the K␣ line, the K shell vacancy is ﬁlled
by an electron from the L shell (n ⫽ 2). But an electron in the L shell is par-
tially screened from the nucleus by the one remaining K shell electron and so
sees a nuclear charge of only Z ⫺ 1. Thus, the energy of the K␣ photon can be
approximated as an n ⫽ 2 to n ⫽ 1 transition in a one-electron atom with an
effective nuclear charge of Z ⫺ 1:

E[K␣] ⫽ ⫺

ke 2
2a0

(Z ⫺ 1)2

22

⫹

ke 2
2a0

(Z ⫺ 1)2

12

⫽

ke 2
2a0

3(Z ⫺ 1)2

4

(9.26)

For  molybdenum  (Z ⫽ 42),  this  is  E[K␣] ⫽ 17.146 keV,  corresponding  to  a
wavelength

␭[K␣] ⫽

hc

E[K␣]

⫽

12.4 keV ⭈Å
17.146 keV

⫽ 0.723 Å

For  comparison,  the  observed  K␣ line  of  molybdenum  has  wavelength
0.7095 Å, in reasonable agreement with our calculation.

In a series of careful experiments conducted from 1913 to 1914, the British
physicist H. G. J. Moseley measured the wavelength of K␣ lines for numerous
elements  and  conﬁrmed  the  validity  of  Equation  9.26,  known  as  Moseley’s
law. According to Moseley’s law, a plot of the square root of photon frequency
(E/h)1/2 versus atomic number Z should yield a straight line. Such a Moseley
plot, as it is called, is reproduced here as Figure 9.18. Before Moseley’s work,
atomic  numbers  were  mere  placeholders  for  the  elements  appearing  in  the
periodic  table,  the  elements  being  ordered  according  to  their  mass.  By  mea-
suring their K␣ lines, Moseley was able to establish the correct sequence of ele-
ments  in  the  periodic  table,  a  sequence  properly  based  on  atomic  number
rather than atomic mass. The gaps in Moseley’s data at Z ⫽ 43, 61, and 75 rep-
resent elements unknown at the time of his work.

SUMMARY

The magnetic behavior of atoms is characterized by their magnetic moment.
The orbital moment of an atomic electron is proportional to its orbital angu-
lar momentum:

␮ ⫽

⫺e
2m e

L

(9.1)

The  constant  of  proportionality,  ⫺e/2me,  is  called  the  gyromagnetic  ratio.
Since L is  subject  to  space  quantization,  so  too  is  the  atomic  moment  ␮.
Atomic  moments  are  measured  in  Bohr  magnetons, ␮B ⫽ e ប/2me;  the  SI
value of ␮B is 9.27 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T.

An  atom  subjected  to  an  external  magnetic  ﬁeld B experiences  a  mag-
netic torque, which results in precession of the moment vector ␮ about the
field  vector  B.  The  frequency  of  precession  is  the  Larmor  frequency ␻L
given by

␻L ⫽

eB
2m e

(9.5)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

329

Associated with the Larmor frequency is the energy quantum ប␻L ⫽ ␮BB. The
ᐉth subshell level of an atom placed in a magnetic ﬁeld is split by the ﬁeld into
2ᐉ ⫹ 1  sublevels  separated  by  the  Larmor  energy  ប␻L.  This  is  the  Zeeman
effect, and ប␻L is also known as the Zeeman energy. The magnetic contribu-
tion to the energy of the atom is

U ⫽ ប␻Lmᐉ

(9.7)

where mᐉ is  the  same  magnetic  quantum  number  discussed  in  Chapter  8.
Equation 9.7 is a special case of the more general result

U ⫽ ⫺␮⭈ B

(9.6)

for the magnetic potential energy U of any magnetic moment ␮ in an applied
ﬁeld B.

In addition to any orbital magnetic moment, the electron possesses an in-
trinsic  magnetic  moment  called  the  spin  moment, ␮s.  In  a  classical  picture,
the spin moment arises from the rotation of the electron on its axis and is pro-
portional to the angular momentum of rotation, or spin, S. The magnitude of
the spin angular momentum is

兩 S 兩 ⫽

√3
2

ប

(9.11)

corresponding  to  a  spin  quantum  number s ⫽ ,  analogous  to  the  orbital
quantum number ᐉ. The z component of S is quantized as

1
2

Sz ⫽ msប

(9.10)

where  the  spin  magnetic  quantum  number ms is  the  analog  of  the  orbital
⫺1
magnetic quantum number m ᐉ. For the electron, ms can be either 
,
2
which describes the spin-up and spin-down states, respectively. Equations 9.10
and 9.11 imply that electron spin also is subject to space quantization. This was
conﬁrmed experimentally by Stern and Gerlach, who observed that a beam of
silver  atoms  passed  through  a  nonuniform  magnetic  ﬁeld  was  split  into  two
distinct components. The same experiment shows that the spin moment is re-
lated to the spin angular momentum by

⫹1
2

or 

␮s ⫽ ⫺

e
m e

S

This is twice as large as the orbital moment for the same angular momentum.
The  anomalous  factor  of  2  is  called  the  g  factor of  the  electron.  With  the
recognition  of  spin,  four  quantum  numbers — n, ᐉ, m ᐉ,  and  ms — are  needed
to specify the state of an atomic electron.

The spin moment of the electron interacts with the magnetic ﬁeld arising
from its orbital motion. The energy difference between the two spin orienta-
tions  in  this  orbital  ﬁeld  is  responsible  for  the  ﬁne  structure  doubling of
atomic  spectral  lines.  With  the  spin – orbit  interaction,  atomic  states  are
labeled  by  a  quantum  number  j for  the  total angular  momentum  J ⫽ L ⫹ S.
The  value  of  j is  included  as  a  subscript  in  the  spectroscopic  notation  of
atomic states. For example, 3P1/2 speciﬁes a state for which n ⫽ 3, ᐉ ⫽ 1, and
j ⫽ . For each value of j, there are 2j ⫹ 1 possibilities for the total magnetic
quantum number mj.

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

330

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

The exclusion  principle states  that  no  two  electrons  can  be  in  the  same
quantum state; that is, no two electrons can have the same four quantum num-
bers. The exclusion principle derives from the notion that electrons are identi-
cal  particles  called  fermions. Fermions  are  described  by  wavefunctions  that
are antisymmetric in the electron coordinates. Wavefunctions that are symmet-
ric in the particle coordinates describe another class of objects called bosons,
to which no exclusion principle applies. All known particles are either fermi-
ons or bosons. An example of a boson is the photon.

Using  the  exclusion  principle  and  the  principle  of  minimum  energy,  one
can determine the electronic conﬁgurations of the elements. This serves as a
basis for understanding atomic structure and the physical and chemical prop-
erties of the elements.

One can catalog the discrete x-ray line spectra emitted by different metals
in terms of electronic transitions within inner shells. When electron bombard-
ment creates a vacancy in an inner K or L shell, a higher-lying atomic electron
quickly ﬁlls the vacancy, giving up its excess energy as an x-ray photon. Accord-
ing to Moseley’s law, the square root of this photon frequency should be pro-
portional to the atomic number of the emitting atom.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. A classic work on the physics of atoms is H. E. White, Intro-

duction to Atomic Spectra, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1934.

The  following  sources  contain  more  extensive  discussions
of the topics found in this chapter:

2. A. P. French and E. F. Taylor, An Introduction to Quantum
Physics,  New  York,  W.  W.  Norton  and  Company,  Inc.,
1978.

QUESTIONS

3. R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Mol-
ecules,  Solids,  Nuclei,  and  Particles,  2nd  ed.,  New  York,
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1985.

4. B. H. Bransden and C. J. Joachain, Physics of Atoms and

Molecules, New York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1990.

1. Why  is  the  direction  of  the  orbital  angular  momen-
tum of an electron opposite that of its magnetic mo-
ment?

8. Although electrons, protons, and neutrons obey the ex-
clusion  principle,  some  particles  that  have  integral
spin, such as photons (spin ⫽ 1), do not. Explain.

2. Why  is  an  inhomogeneous  magnetic  ﬁeld  used  in  the

9. How do we know that a photon has a spin of 1?

Stern – Gerlach experiment?

3. Could  the  Stern – Gerlach  experiment  be  performed

with ions rather than neutral atoms? Explain.

4. Describe  some  experiments  that  would  support  the
conclusion  that  the  spin  quantum  number  for  elec-
trons can have only the values 

.

⫾1
2

5. Discuss  some  of  the  consequences  of  the  exclusion

principle.

6. Why do lithium, potassium, and sodium exhibit similar

chemical properties?

7. From  Table  9.2,  we  ﬁnd  that  the  ionization  energies
for  Li,  Na,  K,  Rb,  and  Cs  are  5.390,  5.138,  4.339,
4.176,  and  3.893  eV,  respectively.  Explain  why  these
values  are  to  be  expected  in  terms  of  the  atomic
structures.

10. An  energy  of  about  21  eV  is  required  to  excite  an
electron in a helium atom from the 1s state to the 2s
state.  The  same  transition  for  the  He⫹ ion  requires
about twice as much energy. Explain why this is so.

11. Discuss degeneracy as it applies to a multielectron atom.

Can a one-electron atom have degeneracy? Explain.

12. The absorption or emission spectrum of a gas consists
of lines that broaden as the density of gas molecules in-
creases. Why do you suppose this occurs?

13. For  a  one-electron  atom  or  ion,  spin – orbit  coupling
splits  all  states  except  s states  into  doublets.  Why  are  s
states exceptions to this rule?

14. Why is it approximately correct to neglect the screening
effect of outer-shell electrons (for example, electrons in
the M and N shells) on an electron in the L shell?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PROBLEMS

9.1 Orbital Magnetism and the Normal
Zeeman Effect

⫾1
2

1. In  the  technique  known  as  electron  spin  resonance
(ESR),  a  sample  containing  unpaired  electrons  is
placed in a magnetic ﬁeld. Consider the simplest situa-
tion, that in which there is only one electron and there-
fore  only  two  possible  energy  states,  corresponding  to
ms ⫽ . In ESR, the electron’s spin magnetic moment
is  “ﬂipped”  from  a  lower  energy  state  to  a  higher  en-
ergy  state  by  the  absorption  of  a  photon.  (The  lower
energy state corresponds to the case in which the mag-
netic  moment  ␮s is  aligned  with  the  magnetic  ﬁeld,
and  the  higher  energy  state  corresponds  to  the  case
where ␮s is aligned against the ﬁeld.) What is the pho-
ton frequency required to excite an ESR transition in a
magnetic ﬁeld of 0.35 T?

2. Show  that  for  a  mass  m in  orbit  with  angular  momen-
tum L the rate at which area is swept out by the orbit-
ing particle is

dA
dt

⫽

兩 L 兩
2m

(Hint: First show that in its displacement, dr, along the
path,  the  particle  sweeps  out  an  area  dA ⫽ 兩r ⴛ dr兩,
where r is  the  position  vector  of  the  particle  drawn
from some origin.)

1
2

9.2 The Spinning Electron

3. How  many  different  sets  of  quantum  numbers  are
possible for an electron for which (a) n ⫽ 1, (b) n ⫽ 2,
(c) n ⫽ 3, (d) n ⫽ 4, and (e) n ⫽ 5? Check your results
to  show  that  they  agree  with  the  general  rule  that  the
number of different sets of quantum numbers is equal
to 2n2.

4. List the possible sets of quantum numbers for an elec-

tron in (a) the 3d subshell and (b) the 3p subshell.

5. The force on a magnetic moment ␮z in a nonuniform

magnetic ﬁeld Bz is given by

Fz ⫽ ␮z

dBz
dz

If a beam of silver atoms travels a horizontal distance of
1 m through such a ﬁeld and each atom has a speed of
100 m/s, how strong must the ﬁeld gradient dBz /dz be
in order to deﬂect the beam 1 mm?

6. Consider  the  original  Stern – Gerlach  experiment  em-
ploying  an  atomic  beam  of  silver,  for  which  the  mag-
netic  moment  is  due  entirely  to  the  spin  of  the  single
valence electron of the silver atom. Assuming the mag-
netic  ﬁeld B has  magnitude  0.500 T,  compute  the
energy  difference  in  electron  volts  of  the  silver  atoms
in the two exiting beams.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

331

7. When  the  idea  of  electron  spin  was  introduced,  the
electron  was  thought  to  be  a  tiny  charged  sphere
(today  it  is  considered  a  point  object  with  no  exten-
sion in  space).  Find  the  equatorial  speed  under  the
assumption  that  the  electron  is  a  uniform  sphere  of
radius  3 ⫻ 10⫺6 nm,  as  early  theorists  believed,  and
compare your result to the speed of light, c.

8. Consider  a  right  circular  cylinder  of  radius  R,  with
mass M uniformly distributed throughout the cylinder
volume. The cylinder is set into rotation with angular
speed ␻ about  its  longitudinal  axis.  (a)  Obtain  an
expression for the angular momentum L of the rotat-
ing  cylinder.  (b)  If  charge  Q is  distributed  uniformly
over  the  curved surface  only,  find  the  magnetic  mo-
ment ␮ of  the  rotating  cylinder.  Compare  your  ex-
pressions  for ␮ and L to  deduce  the  g factor  for  this
object.

3
2

9. An  exotic  elementary  particle  called  the  omega  minus
(symbol ⍀⫺) has spin  . Calculate the magnitude of the
spin angular momentum for this particle and the possi-
ble  angles  the  spin  angular  momentum  vector  makes
with  the  z-axis.  Does  the  ⍀⫺ obey  the  Pauli  exclusion
principle? Explain.

9.3 The Spin – Orbit Interaction and Other
Magnetic Effects
10. Consider a single-electron atom in the n ⫽ 2 state. Find

all possible values for j and mj for this state.

11. Find all possible values of j and mj for a d electron.
12. Give the spectroscopic notation for the following states:
(a) n ⫽ 7, ᐉ ⫽ 4, j ⫽ ; (b) all the possible states of an
electron with n ⫽ 6 and ᐉ ⫽ 5.

9
2

13. An electron in an atom is in the 4F5/2 state. (a) Find the
values of the quantum numbers n, ᐉ, and j. (b) What is
the  magnitude  of  the  electron’s  total  angular  momen-
tum? (c) What are the possible values for the z compo-
nent of the electron’s total angular momentum?

14. (a) Starting with the expression J ⫽ L ⫹ S for the total
angular  momentum  of  an  electron,  derive  an  expres-
sion  for  the  scalar  product  L ⴢ S in  terms  of  the  quan-
tum numbers j, ᐉ, and s. (b) Using L ⴢ S ⴝ 兩L兩 兩S兩 cos␪,
where ␪ is  the  angle  between L and S,  ﬁnd  the  angle
between the electron’s orbital angular momentum and
spin  angular  momentum  for  the  following  states:
(1) P1/2, P3/2 and (2) H9/2, H11/2.

15. Spin – Orbit  energy  in  an  atom.  Estimate  the  magnitude
of  the  spin – orbit  energy  for  an  atomic  electron  in
the hydrogen 2p state. (Hint: From the vantage point
of  the  moving  electron,  the  nucleus  circles  it  in  an
orbit  with  radius  equal  to  the  Bohr  radius  for  this
state.  Treat  the  orbiting  nucleus  as  a  current  in  a
circular  wire  loop  and  use  the  result  from  classical
electromagnetism,

332

CHAPTER 9

ATOMIC STRUCTURE

 

B ⫽

2km␮

r 3

for  the B ﬁeld  at  the  center  of  loop  with  radius  r and
magnetic  moment  ␮.  Here,  km ⫽ 10⫺7 N/A2 is  the
magnetic constant in SI units.)

9.4 Exchange Symmetry and the Exclusion Principle
16. Show  that  the  symmetric  combination  of  two  single

20.

particle wavefunctions

␺ab(r1, r2) ⫽ ␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫹ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1)

displays  the  exchange  symmetry  characteristic  of
bosons,  Equation  9.16.  Is  it  possible  for  two  bosons  to
occupy the same quantum state? Explain.

17. Eight  identical,  noninteracting  particles  are  placed  in
a  cubical  box  of  sides L ⫽ 0.200 nm.  Find  the  lowest
energy  of  the  system  (in  electron  volts)  and  list  the
quantum numbers of all occupied states if (a) the par-
ticles are electrons and (b) the particles have the same
mass  as  the  electron  but  do  not  obey  the  exclusion
principle.

9.5 Electron Interactions and Screening Effects
(Optional)
18. The  claim  is  made  in  Section  9.5  that  a  d electron  is
screened  more  effectively  from  the  nuclear  charge  in
an  atom  than  is  a  p electron  or  an  s electron.  Give  a
classical  argument  based  on  the  deﬁnition  of  angular
momentum L ⫽ r ⴛ p that  indicates  that  smaller  val-
ues of angular momentum are associated with orbits of
larger eccentricity. Verify this quantum mechanically by
calculating the probability that a 2p electron of hydro-
gen  will  be  found  inside  the  n ⫽ 1  atomic  shell  and
comparing this with the probability of ﬁnding a hydro-
gen  2s electron  in  this  same  region.  For  which  is  the
probability  largest,  and  what  effect  does  this  have  on
the  degree  of  screening?  The  relevant  wavefunctions
may be found in Table 8.4 of Chapter 8.

19.

Multielectron atoms. For atoms containing many
electrons,  the  potential  seen  by  the  outer,  or
valence,  electrons  is  often  described  by  the  Thomas–
Fermi form (see Equation 9.21)

U(r ) ⫽ ⫺

Zke 2

r

e⫺r/a

the  atomic  number  and  a is 

where Z is 
the
Thomas – Fermi  screening  length.  Use  the  Java  applet
available  at  our  companion  Web  site  (http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e  QMTools  Simulations : Prob-
lem  9.19)  to  ﬁnd  the  lowest  valence  energy  and  wave-
function for gold (Au), taking Z ⫽ 79 and a ⫽ 0.39 a 0.
(According  to  Table  9.2,  gold  has  a  valence  electron
conﬁguration of 6s1.) How many nodes does this wave-
function  exhibit?  Use  the  results  of  this  study  to  esti-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

mate the ionization energy of gold, and compare with
the  experimental  value  given  in  Table  9.2.  Also  report
the most probable distance from the nucleus for the 6s
electron in gold, according to your ﬁndings. What size
would you assign to the gold atom? How does this size
compare with that of the hydrogen atom? 

Quantum defects. According to Table 9.1, the p-
wave quantum defect for sodium is 0.86. What
is  the  energy  of  the  2p level  in  sodium?  the  3p level?
Use  the  Java  applet  available  at  our  companion  Web
site  (http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e  QMTools  Sim-
ulations : Problem  9.20)  to  determine  the  screening
length b in Equation 9.22 that reproduces the observed
p-state  energies  for  the  sodium  atom.  Based  on  your
ﬁndings,  report  the  most  probable  distance  from  the
nucleus for the 2p electrons in sodium.

9.6 The Periodic Table
21. (a)  Write  out  the  electronic  conﬁguration  for  oxygen
(Z ⫽ 8).  (b)  Write  out  the  values  for  the  set  of  quan-
tum numbers n, ᐉ, mᐉ, and ms for each of the electrons
in oxygen.

22. Which  electronic  conﬁguration  has  a  lower  energy:
[Ar]3d 44s 2 or  [Ar]3d 54s1?  Identify  this  element  and
discuss  Hund’s  rule  in  this  case.  (Note: The  notation
[Ar] represents the ﬁlled conﬁguration for Ar.)

23. Which  electronic  conﬁguration  has  the  lesser  energy
and the greater number of unpaired spins: [Kr]4d 95s1
or  [Kr]4d10?  Identify  this  element  and  discuss  Hund’s
rule  in  this  case.  (Note: The  notation  [Kr]  represents
the ﬁlled conﬁguration for Kr.)

24. Devise  a  table  similar  to  that  shown  in  Figure  9.15  for
atoms  with  11  through  19  electrons.  Use  Hund’s  rule
and educated guesswork.

25. The states of matter are solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.
Plasma  can  be  described  as  a  gas  of  charged  particles,
or a gas of ionized atoms. Most of the matter in the So-
lar  System  is  plasma  (throughout  the  interior  of  the
Sun).  In  fact,  most  of  the  matter  in  the  Universe  is
plasma;  so  is  a  candle  ﬂame.  Use  the  information  in
Figure 9.16 to make an order-of-magnitude estimate for
the  temperature  to  which  a  typical  chemical  element
must be raised to turn into plasma by ionizing most of
the atoms in a sample. Explain your reasoning. 

9.7 X-ray Spectra and Moseley’s Law
26. Show  that  Moseley’s  law  for  K␣ radiation  may  be  ex-

pressed as

√f ⫽ √ 3

4 冢 13.6 eV

h

冣 (Z ⫺ 1)

where f is the x-ray frequency and Z is the atomic num-
ber. (b) Check the agreement of the original 1914 data
shown  in  Figure  9.18  with  Moseley’s  law.  Do  this  by

comparing the least-squares slope and intercept of the
K␣ line  in  Figure  9.18  to  the  theoretical  slope  and  in-
tercept predicted by Moseley’s law. (c) Is the screened
charge seen by the L shell electron equal to Z ⫺ 1?

27. (a)  Derive  an  equation  similar  to  that  in  Problem  26,
but  for  L␣ x  rays.  Assume,  as  in  the  case  of  K␣ x  rays,
that  electrons  in  the  shell  of  origin  (in  this  case  M)

produce  no  screening  and  that  all  screening  is  attrib-
uted to electrons in the inner shells (in this case L and
K). (b) Test your equation by comparing its slope and
intercept  with  that  of  the  experimental  L␣ line  in  Fig-
ure  9.18.  (c)  From  the  intercept  of  the  experimental
L␣ line,  deduce  the  average  screened  charge  seen  by
the M shell electron.

PROBLEMS

333

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10
Statistical Physics

Chapter Outline

10.1 The Maxwell – Boltzmann

Distribution
The Maxwell Speed Distribution for

Gas Molecules in Thermal
Equilibrium at Temperature T

The Equipartition of Energy

10.2 Under What Physical Conditions

Are Maxwell – Boltzmann Statistics
Applicable?

10.3 Quantum Statistics 

Indistinguishability and

Wavefunctions and the
Bose – Einstein Condensation and
Pauli Exclusion Principle

Bose – Einstein and Fermi– Dirac

Distributions

10.4 Applications of Bose – Einstein

Statistics
Blackbody Radiation
Einstein’s Theory of Speciﬁc Heat
10.5 An Application of Fermi-Dirac

Statistics
The Free Electron Gas Theory of Metals

Summary
ESSAY: Laser Manipulation of Atoms, by
Steven Chu

Thermodynamics  is  based  on  macroscopic  or  bulk  properties,  such  as  tem-
perature  and  pressure  of  a  gas.  In  this  chapter  we  explain  thermodynamic
properties in terms of the motion of individual atoms. The goal of this micro-
scopic  approach,  known  as  statistical  physics,  or  statistical  mechanics,  is  to
explain  the  relationships  between  thermodynamic  bulk  properties  using  a
more  fundamental  atomic  picture.  It  is  possible  in  principle  to  calculate
the detailed  motion  of  individual  atoms  from  Newton’s  laws  or  the
Schrödinger  equation.  The  number  of  atoms  in  the  average  size  sample
(⬇1022 atoms/cm3),  however,  makes  such  calculations  impractical,  and  we
must rely on a statistical approach.

In  this  chapter  we  introduce  the  laws  of  statistical  physics  and  discuss  sys-
tems  of  particles  that  obey  either  classical  or  quantum  mechanics.  We  will
show  how  a  ﬁxed  amount  of  energy  may  be  shared  or  distributed  among  a
large number of particles in thermal equilibrium at temperature T. We investi-
gate  this  energy  distribution  by  calculating  the  average  number  of  particles
with  a  speciﬁc  energy  or,  what  is  essentially  the  same  thing,  by  ﬁnding  the
probability that a single particle has a certain energy.

334

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.1

THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

335

10.1 THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

The  satisfying  explanation  of  thermodynamics  in  terms  of  averages  over
atomic properties was given in the second half of the 1800s by three physicists:
James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, and Josiah Willard Gibbs. Maxwell, a
Scottish  professor  at  Cambridge,  was  extremely  impressed  by  the  work  of
Rudolf  Clausius  in  explaining  the  apparent  contradiction  between  the  high
speed  of  gas  molecules  at  room  temperature  (about  400  m/s)  and  the  slow
diffusion rate of a gas. Clausius had explained this riddle by reasoning that gas
molecules  do  not  all  travel  at  a  single  high  speed,  but  that  there  is  a  well-
deﬁned distribution of molecular speeds in a gas that depends on the gas tem-
perature; furthermore, the gas molecules collide and hence follow long zigzag
paths  from  one  spot  to  another.  Building  on  this  idea,  Maxwell  was  able  to
derive  the  functional  form  of  the  equilibrium  speed  distribution,  which  is
the number  of  gas  molecules  per  unit  volume  having  speeds  between  v and
v ⫹ dv at a speciﬁc temperature. Applying the theory of statistics to this distri-
bution, Maxwell was able to calculate the temperature dependence of quanti-
ties  such  as  the  average  molecular  speed,  the  most  probable  speed,  and  the
dispersion, or width, of the speed distribution.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

In 1872, Boltzmann, an Austrian professor at the University of Vienna, pro-
foundly  impressed  with  Darwin’s  ideas  on  evolution,  took  Maxwell’s  work  a
step further. He not only wanted to establish the properties of the equilibrium
or  most  probable  distribution  but  he  also  wished  to  describe  the  evolution
in time of a gas toward the Maxwellian distribution — the so-called approach-
to-equilibrium problem. With the use of a time-dependent speed distribution
function  and  his  kinetic  equation,  Boltzmann  was  able  to  show  that  a  system
of particles  that  starts  off  with  a  non-Maxwellian  speed  distribution  steadily
approaches and eventually achieves an equilibrium Maxwellian speed distribu-

Is the universe a gambling casino? (Courtesy of Tropicana Casino And Resort)

Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1908),
an Austrian theoretical physicist.
(Courtesy  AIP  Niels  Bohr  Library,
Lande Collection)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

336

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

tion. Boltzmann, a staunch advocate of the reality of molecules, was subjected
to personal attacks at the hands of critics who rejected the molecular theory of
matter in the late 1800s. Depressed over the lack of universal acceptance of his
theories, he committed suicide in 1908.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Gibbs, in contrast to Boltzmann, led a rather sheltered and secluded life as
a  professor  at  Yale.  The  son  of  a  Yale  professor,  he  lived  his  adult  life  in  the
same house in New Haven in which he had grown up, quietly establishing sta-
tistical mechanics and the kinetic theory of gases on a rigorous mathematical
basis.  Gibbs  published  his  work  in  the  obscure  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut
Academy of Arts and Sciences, and his work remained relatively unknown during
his lifetime.

Having  brieﬂy  discussed  the  contributions  of  Maxwell,  Boltzmann,  and
Gibbs to statistical mechanics, let us examine the underlying assumptions and
explicit form of the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution for a system of particles.
The basic assumptions are:

Assumptions of the
Maxwell – Boltzmann
distribution

• The  particles  are  identical  in  terms  of  physical  properties  but  distinguish-
able in terms of position, path, or trajectory. It will be demonstrated later in
this chapter that this assumption is equivalent to the statement that the par-
ticle size is small compared with the average distance between particles.

• The equilibrium distribution is the most probable way of distributing the
particles among various allowed energy states subject to the constraints of
a ﬁxed number of particles and ﬁxed total energy.

• There is no theoretical limit on the number of particles in a given energy
state,  but  the  density  of  particles  is  sufﬁciently  low  and  the  temperature
sufﬁciently high that no more than one particle is likely to be in a given
state at the same time.

To make  these  assumptions  concrete,  let  us  consider  the  analysis  of  a
manageable-sized  system  of  distinguishable  particles.  In  particular,  consider
the distribution of a total energy of 8E among six particles where E is an indi-
visible unit of energy. To work with a diagram of reasonable size, Figure 10.1a
enumerates the 20 possible ways of sharing an energy of 8E among six indistin-
guishable particles.  Since  we  are  actually  interested  in  distinguishable particles,
each  of  the  20  arrangements  can  be  decomposed  into  many  distinguishable
substates, or microstates, as shown explicitly for one arrangement in Figure
10.1b. The number of microstates for each of the 20 arrangements is given in
parentheses in Figure 10.1a and may be computed from the relation

NMB ⫽

N!

n 1!n 2!n 3! ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

(10.1)

where NMB is  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  number  of  microstates,  N is  the  total
number of particles, and n1, n2, n3, . . . are the numbers of particles in occu-
pied states of a certain energy. This result may be understood by arguing that
the ﬁrst energy level may be assigned in N ways, the second in N ⫺ 1 ways, and
so on, giving N ! in the numerator. The factor in the denominator of Equation
10.1  corrects  for  indistinguishable  order  arrangements  when  more  than  one
particle occupies the same energy level. As an example of the use of Equation
10.1, consider the energy distribution of six particles, with two having energy
1E, one having energy 6E, and three having energy 0. This energy distribution
is shown in the fourth diagram from the left in the top row of Figure 10.1a. In

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

(6)

(30)

(30)

(60)

(30)

10.1

THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

337

8E

6E

4E

2E

  0

8E

6E

4E

2E

  0

8E

6E

4E

2E

  0

8E

6E

4E

2E

  0

8E

6E

4E

2E

  0

(120)

(60)

(15)

(120)

(60)

(180)

(30)

(60)

(90)

(180)

FD

(120)

(6)

(15)

FD

(60)

FD

(15)

(a)

1 2 3 4 5 6

1 2 3 4 5 6

1 2 3 4 5 6

1 2 3 4 5 6

1 2 3 4 5 6

1 2 3 4 5 6

Particle label

(b)

Figure 10.1 (a) The 20 arrangements of six indistinguishable particles with a total en-
ergy of 8E. (b) The decomposition of the upper left-hand arrangement of part (a) into
six distinguishable states for distinguishable particles.

this case, N ⫽ 6, n1(0E) ⫽ 3 (that is, the number of particles in the 0 energy
state  is  3),  n2(1E) ⫽ 2, n3(2E) ⫽ 0, n4(3E) ⫽ 0, n5(4E) ⫽ 0, n6(5E) ⫽ 0,
n7(6E) ⫽ 1, n8(7E) ⫽ 0, and n9(8E) ⫽ 0. Since only the numbers of particles
in  occupied  levels  appear  in  the  denominator  of  Equation  10.1,  we  ﬁnd  that

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

338

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

the number of distinguishable microstates for this case is

NMB ⫽

6!

3!2!1!

⫽ 60

in agreement with the number in parentheses in the diagram.

To ﬁnd  the  average  number  of  particles  with  a  particular  value  of  energy,
say Ej,  we  sum  the  number  of  particles  with  energy  Ej in  each  arrangement
weighted by the probability of realizing that arrangement: 

nj ⫽ n j1p 1 ⫹ n j2 p 2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈

(10.2)

n j

is the average number of particles in the j th energy level, 

is the
Here 
number of particles found in the j th level in arrangement 1, 
is the num-
ber of particles found in the j th level in arrangement 2, p 1 is the probability
of observing arrangement 1, p 2 is the probability of arrangement 2, and so
on. Using  the  basic  postulate  of  statistical  mechanics,  that  any  indi-
vidual  microstate  is  as  likely  as  any  other  individual  microstate, we
may go on to calculate the various p’s and 
’s. For example, since there are
a total of 1287 microstates (the sum of all the numbers in the parentheses),
and  6  distinguishable  ways  of  obtaining  arrangement  1  (the  leftmost
arrangement  in  row  1  in  Fig.  10.1a),  we  see  that  p1 ⫽ 6/1287.  Using  these
ideas and Equation 10.2, we calculate the average number of particles with
energy 0 as follows:

nj1

nj2

n j

n 0

⫽ (5)(6/1287) ⫹ (4)(30/1287) ⫹ (4)(30/1287) ⫹ (3)(60/1287)

⫹ (4)(30/1287) ⫹ (3)(120/1287) ⫹ (2)(60/1287) ⫹ (4)(15/1287)
⫹ (3)(120/1287) ⫹ (3)(60/1287) ⫹ (2)(180/1287)
⫹ (1)(30/1287) ⫹ (3)(60/1287) ⫹ (2)(90/1287) ⫹ (2)(180/1287)
⫹ (1)(120/1287) ⫹ (0)(6/1287) ⫹ (2)(15/1287)
⫹ (1)(60/1287) ⫹ (0)(15/1287)

⫽ 2.307

Now notice that it is easy to calculate the probability of ﬁnding a particle with
energy 0 if we imagine reaching randomly into a box containing the six parti-
cles with total energy 8E. This probability, p(0), is simply the average number
of particles with energy 0 divided by the total number of particles:

p(0) ⫽

n 0
6

⫽

2.307

6

⫽ 0.385

It is left as a problem (Problem 1) to show that the probabilities of ﬁnding a
particle with energies from 1E through 8E are as follows:

p(1E) ⫽ 0.256

p(2E) ⫽ 0.167

p(3E) ⫽ 0.0978

p(4E) ⫽ 0.0543

p(5E) ⫽ 0.0272

p(6E) ⫽ 0.0117

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.1

THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

339

p(7E) ⫽ 0.00388

p(8E) ⫽ 0.000777

These  results,  which  are  plotted  in  Figure  10.2,  show  that  this  simple  system
follows  an  approximately  exponential  decrease  in  probability  with  energy.
(See  Problem  5.)  The  rapid  decrease  in  probability  with  increasing  energy
shown in Figure 10.2 indicates that we are more likely to ﬁnd the energy uni-
formly  distributed  among  many  particles  of  the  system  rather  than  concen-
trated in a few particles.

One  may  rigorously  derive  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  distribution  for  a  sys-
tem  in  thermal  equilibrium  at  the  absolute  temperature T containing  a  large
number of particles by using calculus (see reference 1 in Suggestions for Fur-
ther  Reading  at  the  end  of  this  chapter).  The  expression  for  the  number  of
ways  of  distributing  the  particles  among  the  allowed  energy  states  is  maxi-
mized subject to two constraints. These constraints are (1) that the total num-
ber of particles is constant at any temperature and (2) that the total system en-
ergy is ﬁxed at a given temperature. One ﬁnds an exponential form

fMB ⫽ Ae ⫺Ei/kBT

(10.3)

Maxwell – Boltzmann
distribution

where fMB is  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  probability  of  ﬁnding  a  particle  with  en-
ergy Ei,  or  in  the  language  of  statistical  mechanics,  the  probability  that  a  state
with energy Ei is occupied at the absolute temperature T. If the number of states
with the same energy Ei is denoted by gi (gi is called the degeneracy or statisti-
cal weight), then the number of particles, ni, with energy Ei is equal to the prod-
uct of the statistical weight and the probability that the state Ei is occupied, or

ni ⫽ gi fMB

(10.4)

The parameter A in Equation 10.3 is a normalization coefﬁcient, which is simi-
lar to the normalization constant in quantum physics. A is determined by re-
quiring the number of particles in the system to be constant, or

N ⫽ ni

兺

(10.5)

where N is the total number of particles in the system.

When the allowed energy states are numerous and closely spaced, the dis-

crete quantities are replaced by continuous functions as follows:

gi 9: g(E )

fMB 9: Ae⫺E/kBT

where g(E) is the density of states or the number of energy states per unit
volume in the interval dE. In a similar manner, Equations 10.4 and 10.5 may
be replaced as follows:

ni ⫽ gi f MB 9: n(E) dE ⫽ g(E) fMB(E) dE

(10.6)

N ⫽ 兺 ni 9:

N
V

⫽冕⬁

0

n (E) dE ⫽冕⬁

0

g (E)f MB(E) dE

(10.7)

where n(E) dE is  the  number  of  particles  per  unit  volume  with  energies  be-
tween E and E ⫹ dE. Note that Equations 10.6 and 10.7 may also be used for a
system of quantum particles, provided that g(E) and fMB(E) are replaced with
the appropriate density of states and quantum distribution functions.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
a
 

i

g
n
d
n
i
f
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
n
e
v
i
g

 
a
 
h
t
i

w

0

0

2E

4E

6E

8E

Energy

Figure  10.2 The  distribution
function  for  an  assembly  of  six
distinguishable  particles  with  a
total energy of 8E.

Number of particles per unit
volume with energy between
E and E ⴙ dE

340

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

EXAMPLE 10.1 Emission Lines from 

Stellar Hydrogen

(a) Find the populations of the ﬁrst and second excited
states relative to  the  ground  state  for  atomic  hydrogen
at room  temperature,  assuming  that  hydrogen  obeys
Maxwell – Boltzmann statistics.

depends  only  on  the  initial  population,  since  there  are  no
restrictions  on  the  number  of  particles  in  the  ﬁnal  state.
Returning  to  the  calculation  of  the  emission  strength,
S, we ﬁnd the relative values:

Solution For  a  gas  at  ordinary  pressures,  the  atoms
maintain  the  discrete  quantum  levels  of  isolated  atoms.
Recall that the discrete energy levels of atomic hydrogen
are given by En ⫽ (⫺13.6/n2) eV and the degeneracy by
gn ⫽ 2n2. Thus we have

Ground state:  E1 ⫽ ⫺13.6 eV    g 1 ⫽ 2
First excited state:  E2 ⫽ ⫺3.40 eV    g2 ⫽ 8
Second excited state:  E3 ⫽ ⫺1.51 eV    g3 ⫽ 18

Using Equation 10.4 gives

n 2
n 1

⫽

⫽

g2Ae⫺E2/kBT
g1Ae⫺E1/kBT ⫽
8
2

g2
g1

e(E1⫺E2)/kBT

 exp {(⫺10.2 eV)/(8.617 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)(300 K)}

⫽ 4e⫺395 ⬇ 0

The ratio of n3/n1 will be even smaller. Therefore, essen-
tially all atoms are in the ground state at 300 K.

(b)  Find  the  populations  of  the  ﬁrst  and  second  ex-
cited  states  relative  to  the  ground  state  for  hydrogen
heated to 20,000 K in a star.

Solution When a gas is at very high temperatures (as in
a ﬂame, under electric discharge, or in a star), detectable
numbers  of  atoms  are  in  excited  states.  In  this  case, 
T ⫽ 20,000 K, kBT ⫽ 1.72 eV, and we ﬁnd

n2
n1

n3
n1

⫽

⫽

g2
g1

g3
g1

e(E1⫺E2)/k BT ⫽ 4e⫺10.2/1.72 ⫽ 0.0107

e(E1⫺E 3)/k BT ⫽ 9e⫺12.1/1.72 ⫽ 0.0807

(c)  Find  the  emission  strengths  of  the  spectral  lines
corresponding  to  the  transitions  E3 : E1 and E3 : E2
relative to E2 : E1 at 20,000 K, assuming equal probabil-
ity of transition for E3 : E1, E3 : E 2, and E 2 : E1.

Solution The  strength  of  an  emission  or  absorption
line  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  atomic  transi-
tions per  unit  time.  For  particles  obeying  Maxwell –
Boltzmann statistics, the number of transitions per unit
time  from  some  initial  state  (i)  to  some  ﬁnal  state
(f ) equals  the  product  of  the  population  of  the  initial
state  and  the  probability  for  the  transition  i : f.  Note
that the  transition  rate  for  particles  obeying  MB  statistics

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

S(3 : 1)
S(2 : 1)

S(3 : 2)
S(2 : 1)

⫽

⫽

n 3P(3 : 1)
n 2P(2 : 1)

n 3P(3 : 2)
n 2P(2 : 1)

In  reality,  the  transition  probabilities  depend  on
the wavefunctions  of  the  states  involved,  but  to  sim-
plify matters  we  assume  equal  probabilities  of  transi-
tion;  that  is,  P(2 : 1) ⫽ P(3 : 1) ⫽ P(3 : 2).  This
yields

S(3 : 1)
S(2 : 1)

⫽

g3
g2

⫽

n 3
n2
⫽ 0.75

e(E2⫺E3)/kBT ⫽

18
8

e⫺1.89/1.73

S(3 : 2)
S(2 : 1)

⫽ 0.75

If the emission lines are narrow, the measured heights of
the  3 : 1  and  3 : 2  lines  will  be  75%  of  the  height  of
the  2 : 1  line,  as  shown  in  Figure  10.3.  For  broader
lines,  the  area  under  the  peaks  must  be  used  as  the
experimental measure of emission strength.

2

1

3

1

3

2

Detector
output

1.0

0.75

0.50

0.25

0

λ

Figure  10.3 The  predicted  emission  spectrum  for  the
2 : 1, 3 : 1, and 3 : 2 transitions for atomic hydrogen
at 20,000 K.

 

10.1

THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

341

The Maxwell Speed Distribution for Gas
Molecules in Thermal Equilibrium at Temperature T
Maxwell’s  important  formula  for  the  equilibrium  speed  distribution,  or  the
number of molecules with speeds between v and v ⫹ dv in a gas at temperature
T, may be found by using the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution in its continu-
ous form (Eqs. 10.6 and 10.7). In particular, we shall show that

n(v)

vmp

n(v)dv ⫽

4␲N

V 冢 m

2␲k BT 冣3/2

v2e⫺mv2/2kBTdv

(10.8)

v

vrms

n(v)

v

∆v

where n(v)dv is the number of gas molecules per unit volume with speeds be-
tween v and v ⫹ dv, N/V is the total number of molecules per unit volume, m
is the mass of a gas molecule, k B is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. This speed distribution function is sketched in Figure 10.4. The
v2 term  determines  the  behavior  of  the  distribution  as  v : 0,  and  the  expo-
nential term determines what happens as v : ⬁.

For  an  ideal  gas  of  point  particles  (no  internal  structure  and  no  interac-
tions between particles), the energy of each molecule consists only of transla-
tional kinetic energy and we have

Figure  10.4 The speed distrib-
ution  of  gas  molecules  at  some
temperature.  The  number  of
molecules  in  the  range  ⌬v is
equal  to  the  area  of  the  shaded
rectangle, n(v)⌬v.  The  most
probable speed, vmp, the average
speed, 
,  and  the  root  mean
square speed, vrms, are indicated.

v

E ⫽ 1

2mv2

for each molecule. Since the gas molecules have speeds that are continuously
distributed from 0 to ⬁ , the energy distribution of molecules is also continu-
ous and we may write the number of molecules per unit volume with energy
between E and E ⫹ dE as

n(E ) dE ⫽ g (E )f MB(E ) dE ⫽ g (E )Ae⫺mv 2/2kBT dE

To ﬁnd  the  density  of  states,  g(E),  we  introduce  the  concept  of  velocity
space. According  to  this  idea,  the  velocity  of  each  molecule  may  be  repre-
sented by a velocity vector with components vx , vy , and vz or by a point in veloc-
ity  space  with  coordinate  axes  vx, vy,  and  vz (Fig.  10.5).  From  Figure  10.5  we
note that the number of states f(v) dv with speeds between v and v ⫹ dv is pro-
portional to the volume of the spherical shell between v and v ⫹ dv:

f(v) dv ⫽ C 4␲v 2 dv

(10.9)

where C is  some  constant.  Because  E ⫽ mv2,  each  speed  v corresponds  to  a
single  energy  E,  and  the  number  of  energy  states,  g(E)dE,  with  energies
between E and E ⫹ dE is the same as the number of states with speeds between
v and v ⫹ dv. Thus,

1
2

g(E) dE ⫽ f(v) dv ⫽ C4␲v 2 dv

Substituting  this  expression  for  g(E)dE into  our  expression  for  n(E)dE,  we

obtain

n(E ) dE ⫽ A4␲v2e⫺mv2/2kBT dv

where the constant C has been absorbed into the normalization coefﬁcient A.
Since the number of molecules with energy between E and E ⫹ dE equals the
number of molecules with speed between v and v ⫹ dv, we may write

n(E ) dE ⫽ n(v) dv ⫽ A4␲v2e⫺mv2/2kBT dv

(10.10)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

vy

vx

v

v = constant

vy

vz

vx

vz

d v

Figure  10.5 Velocity  space.
The  number  of  states  with
speeds  between  v and v ⫹ dv is
proportional to the volume of a
spherical shell with radius v and
thickness dv.

342

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

To  ﬁnd A we  use  the  fact  that  the  total  number  of  particles  per  unit  volume
is N/V :

⫽冕⬁

0

n(v)dv ⫽冕⬁

0

N
V

4␲Av2e⫺mv2/2kBT dv

(10.11)

Because

冕⬁

0

z2je⫺az2

dz ⫽

1 ⭈3 ⭈5 ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ (2j ⫺ 1)

2j⫹1a j

√ ␲

a

    j ⫽ 1, 2, 3,  ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

we ﬁnd with j ⫽ 1 and a ⫽ m/2kBT

N
V

⫽

or

(4␲A)

22(m/2k BT ) √ ␲2k BT

m

⫽ A 冢 2␲k BT

m 冣3/2

A ⫽

N

V 冢 m

2␲k BT 冣3/2

Therefore,  the  normalization  coefﬁcient  A depends  on  the  number  of  par-
ticles  per  unit  volume,  the  particle  mass,  and  the  temperature.  Substituting
this  value  for  A into  Equation  10.10,  we  ﬁnally  obtain  Maxwell’s  famous
1859 result:

n(v)dv ⫽

4␲N

V

冢 m
2␲k BT 冣3/2

v2e⫺mv2/2kBT dv

(10.8)

To ﬁnd the average speed, 

, indicated in Figure 10.4, we multiply n(v)dv
by v,  integrate  over  all  speeds  from  0  to  ⬁,  and  divide  the  result  by  the  total
number of molecules per unit volume:

v

冕⬁

0

v ⫽

vn(v) dv

⫽

N/V

4␲(N/V )(m/2␲k BT )3/2冕⬁

0

N/V

v3e⫺mv2/2kBT dv

Using the deﬁnite integral formula

冕⬁

0

z3e⫺az2

dz ⫽

1
2a2

gives

v ⫽ 4␲冢 m

2␲k BT 冣3/2 冢 1

2 冣 冢 2k BT
m 冣2

⫽ √ 8k BT

␲m

(10.12)

This important result, ﬁrst proved by Maxwell, shows that the average speed of
the  molecules  in  a  gas  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  temperature
and inversely proportional to the square root of the molecular mass. The root
v2
mean  square  speed  may  be  found  by  ﬁnding  the  average  of  v2,  denoted 
,
and then taking its square root. Consequently, we have

冕⬁

0

v2 ⫽

v2n(v) dv

N/V

⫽ 4␲冢 m

2␲k BT 冣3/2冕⬁

0

v4e⫺mv2/2k BT dv

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.1

THE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN DISTRIBUTION

343

Using the deﬁnite integral formula

冕⬁

0

z4e⫺az2

dz ⫽

3

8a2 √ ␲

a

gives

v2 ⫽ 4␲冢 m

2␲k BT 冣3/2 冤

Since the root mean square speed, vrms, is deﬁned as 

vrms ⫽ √ 3k BT

m

3

8(m/2k BT )2冥 冢 2␲k BT

m 冣1/2

⫽

3k BT

m
vrms ⫽ √v2

(10.13)

, we have

(10.14)

Note that vrms is not the same as the average speed, 
, but is about 10% greater,
v
as indicated in Figure 10.4. The derivation of the most probable speed, vmp, is
left to Problem 2.

The Equipartition of Energy
As a ﬁnal remark to this section, we observe that Equation 10.13 may be rewrit-
ten as

1
2mv2 ⫽ K ⫽ 3

2k BT

In  this  form,  Equation  10.13  is  consistent  with  the  result  known  as  the
equipartition  of  energy,  or  the equipartition  theorem. According  to  this
theorem, a  classical  molecule  in  thermal  equilibrium  at  temperature T
has an average energy of kBT/2 for each independent mode of motion or
so-called degree of freedom. In this case there are 3 degrees of freedom cor-
responding to translational motion of the molecule along the independent x,
y, and z directions in space; hence the average kinetic energy in each indepen-
dent direction is kBT/2:

1
2mv 2

x ⫽ 1

2mvy

2 ⫽ 1

2mvz

2 ⫽ 1

2k BT

Equipartition of energy

The total average kinetic energy consequently equals 3 times kBT/2, in agree-
ment with Equation 10.13:

2mv2 ⫽ 1
1

2mv 2

x ⫹ 1

2mvy

2 ⫹ 1

2mvz

2 ⫽ 3

2k BT

2k BT

1 ⫽ 1

1
2 I1␻2

Note that degrees of freedom are not only associated with translational veloci-
ties. A degree of freedom is also associated with each rotational velocity as well
so that 
for a molecule with moment of inertia I1 rotating about
an axis with angular velocity ␻1. In fact, each variable that occurs squared
in the formula for the energy of a particular system represents a degree
of  freedom  subject  to  the  equipartition  of  energy. For  example,  a  one-
2 ⫹ kx 2 has  2  degrees  of  free-
dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  with  E ⫽ mvx
2 and the other
dom, one associated with its kinetic energy and the variable vx
with its potential energy and the variable x 2. Thus, each oscillator in a group
in thermal equilibrium at T has 
. The
average  total  energy  of  each  one-dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  is  then
Etotal ⫽ K ⫹ U ⫽ k BT/2 ⫹ k BT/2 ⫽ k BT
.  This  result  will  be  of  use  to  us
shortly when we model the atoms of a solid as a system of vibrating harmonic
oscillators.

2kx2 ⫽ 1

x ⫽ 1

U ⫽ 1

K ⫽ 1

2mv 2

2k BT

2k BT

and 

1
2

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

344

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

Exercise 1 (a) Show that the formula for the number of molecules with energies be-
tween E and E ⫹ dE in an ideal gas at temperature T is given explicitly in terms of E by

n(E ) dE ⫽

2␲(N/V )
(␲k BT )3/2 E 1/2e⫺E/kBT dE

(b) Use this result to show that the total energy per unit volume of the gas is given
by

Etotal ⫽

3
2

NkT

V

in agreement with the equipartition theorem.

Exercise 2 Conﬁrm Maxwell’s 1859 result that the “spread-outness” of the speed dis-
tribution increases as 
. Do this by showing that the standard deviation of the molec-
ular speeds is given by

√T

␴v ⫽ √3 ⫺

8
␲

⭈ √ k BT

m

10.2 UNDER WHAT PHYSICAL CONDITIONS

ARE MAXWELL – BOLTZMANN
STATISTICS APPLICABLE?

If  we  reexamine  the  assumptions  that  led  to  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  distribu-
tion for classical particles, keeping the quantum mechanical wave nature of parti-
cles in mind, we immediately ﬁnd a problem with the assumption of distinguisha-
bility. Since particles exhibit wave-like behavior, they are necessarily fuzzy and are
not  distinguishable  when  they  are  close  together  because  their  wavefunctions
overlap. (See Section 9.4, “Exchange Symmetry and the Exclusion Principle,” for
a review of this issue.) If trading molecule A for molecule B no longer counts as a
different conﬁguration, then the number of ways a given energy distribution can
be realized changes, as does the equilibrium or most probable distribution. Thus
the  classical  Maxwell – Boltzmann  distribution  must  be  replaced  by  a  quantum
distribution when there is wavefunction overlap or when the particle concentra-
tion is high. The MB distribution is a valid approximation to the correct quan-
tum distribution, however, in the common case of gases at ordinary conditions.
Quantum statistics are required for cases involving high particle concentrations,
such as electrons in a metal1 or photons in a blackbody cavity.

It is useful to develop a criterion to determine when the classical distribu-
tion is valid. We may say that the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution is valid
when the average distance between particles, d, is large compared with
the quantum uncertainty in particle position, ⌬x, or

⌬x ⬍⬍ d

(10.15)

To  ﬁnd ⌬x we  use  the  uncertainty  principle  and  evaluate  ⌬px for  a  particle
of mass  m.  For  such  a  particle  that  is  part  of  a  system  of  particles  in  thermal

1The density of conduction electrons in a metal is several thousand times the density of molecules
in a gas at standard temperature and pressure.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10.2

UNDER WHAT PHYSICAL CONDITIONS ARE MAXWELL–BOLTZMANN STATISTICS APPLICABLE?

345

 

equilibrium at temperature T, 
tion theorem. Thus

px ⫽ 0

and 

px

2/2m ⫽ k BT/2

from the equiparti-

⌬px ⫽ √p 2

x ⫺ (px)2 ⫽ √mk BT

Substituting this expression for ⌬px into ⌬px ⌬x ⱖ ប/2, we ﬁnd

⌬x ⱖ

ប

2√mk BT

(10.16)

(10.17)

As mentioned before, the uncertainty in particle position, ⌬x, must be much
less than the average distance, d, between particles if the particles are to be dis-
tinguishable and the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution is to hold. Substituting
d ⫽ (V/N )1/3 and 

into the relation ⌬x ⬍⬍ d gives

⌬x ⫽ ប/2 √mk BT

or cubing both sides,

ប

2√mk BT

⬍⬍ 冢 V

N 冣1/3

冢 N
V 冣

ប3

8(mk BT )3/2 ⬍⬍ 1

(10.18)

Criterion for the validity of
Maxwell – Boltzmann
statistics

Equation 10.18 shows that the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution holds for low
particle concentration and for high particle mass and temperature.

EXAMPLE 10.2 When Can We Use

Maxwell–Boltzmann Statistics?

(a)  Are  Maxwell–Boltzmann  statistics  valid  for  hydrogen
gas at standard temperature and pressure (STP)?

Solution Under  standard  conditions  of  273 K  and 
1  atmosphere,  1 mol  of  H2 gas (6.02 ⫻ 1023 molecules)
occupies  a  volume  of 22.4 ⫻ 10⫺3 m3.  Using 
⫽
3.34 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg, and kBT ⫽ 3.77 ⫻ 10⫺21 J, we ﬁnd
冢 N
V 冣

22.4 ⫻ 10⫺3 m3 冣

6.02 ⫻ 1023

⫽ 冢

m H2

ប3

8(mk BT )3/2

⫻

(1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34)3 ( J ⭈s)3

8[(3.34 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg)(3.77 ⫻ 10⫺21 J)]3/2

⫽ 8.83 ⫻ 10⫺8

This  is  much  less  than  1,  and  from  the  condition  given
by Equation  10.18,  we  conclude  that  even  hydrogen,
the lightest  gas,  is  described  by  Maxwell – Boltzmann
statistics.

(b)  Are  Maxwell – Boltzmann  statistics  valid  for  con-

duction electrons in silver at 300 K?

Solution Silver has a density of 10.5 g/cm3 and a molar
weight  of  107.9 g.  Assuming  one  free  electron  per  silver
atom, the density of free electrons in silver is found to be

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10.5 g/cm3
107.9 g/mol

 (6.02 ⫻ 1023 electrons/mol)

⫽ 5.86 ⫻ 1022 electrons/cm3
⫽ 5.86 ⫻ 1028 electrons/m3

Note  that  the  density  of  free  electrons  in  silver  is  about
2000 times greater than the density of hydrogen gas mol-
ecules at STP; that is,

(N/V )electrons in Ag

(N/V )H2 at STP

⫽

5.86 ⫻ 1028 m⫺3
2.69 ⫻ 1025 m⫺3 ⫽ 2180

Using ប3 ⫽ 1.174 ⫻ 10⫺102 ( J ⭈ s)3, me ⫽ 9.109 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg,
and k BT ⫽ 4.14 ⫻ 10⫺21 J (at T ⫽ 300 K), we ﬁnd

冢 N
V 冣

ប3

8(mek BT )3/2 ⫽ 4.64

Comparing this result to the condition given by Equation
10.18,  we  conclude  that  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  distri-
bution does not hold for electrons in silver because of the
small  mass  of  the  electron  and  the  high  free  electron
density.  We  shall  see  that  the  correct  quantum  distribu-
tion for electrons is the Fermi – Dirac distribution.

346

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

10.3 QUANTUM STATISTICS

Wavefunctions and the Bose–Einstein
Condensation and Pauli Exclusion Principle
Maxwell – Boltzmann statistics apply to systems of identical, distinguishable parti-
cles. As mentioned in the previous section, in quantum terms this means the
wavefunctions  of  the  particles  do  not  overlap.  If  the  individual  particle  wave-
functions  do  overlap,  then  the  particles  become  indistinguishable  or  inter-
changeable, and this forces the system wavefunction to be either even or odd
under particle exchange (see Section 9.4). In order to understand the impor-
tant  connection  between  wavefunctions  and  distribution  functions,  as  well  as
the origin of the Bose – Einstein condensation for a system of particles with no
actual attractive physical forces between particles, we look at a simple system of
two particles with two possible quantum states to expose the essential features.
Consider  two  independent  particles — particle  1  located  at  the  position  r1
and particle 2 located at r2 — and two quantum states — state a and state b. For
distinguishable  particles  there  exist  two  possible  system  wavefunctions,  which
are simple products of normalized single particle wavefunctions:

␺A ⫽ ␺a(r1)␺b(r2)

␺B ⫽ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1)

Now we ask for the probability that both particles are in the same state, say a.
In this case, both ␺A and ␺B are the same, and we ﬁnd the probability of two
distinguishable particles described by the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution to
be in the same state to be given by

␺MB* ␺MB ⫽ ␺a* (r1)␺a* (r2)␺a(r1)␺a(r2) ⫽ 兩␺a(r1)兩2 兩␺a(r2)兩2

If the particles are indistinguishable, we can’t tell if a given particle is in state
a or b, and to reﬂect this fact, the system wavefunction must be a combination of
the distinguishable wavefunctions ␺A and ␺B. As mentioned in Section 9.4 and
Problem 9.16, bosons have a symmetric wavefunction, ␺B, given by

␺B ⫽

1
√2

[␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫹ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1)]

where  we  have  added 

1
√2

as  the  normalization  constant.  Fermions  have  an

antisymmetric wavefunction ␺F , where 

␺F ⫽

1
√2

[␺a(r1)␺b(r2) ⫺ ␺a(r2)␺b(r1)]

For comparison to the case of distinguishable particles, we now recalculate the
probability that two bosons or fermions occupy the same state. For bosons the
wavefunction becomes

␺B ⫽

1
√2

[␺a(r1)␺a(r2) ⫹ ␺a(r2)␺a(r1)] ⫽ √2␺a(r1)␺a(r2)

and the probability for two bosons to be in the same state is
␺B* ␺B ⫽ 2 兩␺a(r1)兩2 兩␺a(r2)兩2 ⫽ 2␺⌴B* ␺MB

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.3

QUANTUM STATISTICS

347

Thus we have the amazing result that bosons are twice as probable to occupy the
same state as distinguishable particles! This is an entirely quantum mechanical
effect and it is as if there were a force attracting additional bosons once a boson
occupies a state, even though there are no actual attractive physical forces, such
as electromagnetic intermolecular forces, present. Einstein was the ﬁrst to point
out that an ideal gas of bosons (with no attractive intermolecular forces!) could
still undergo a strange kind of condensation at low-enough temperatures called
a Bose – Einstein condensation (BEC). A Bose – Einstein condensation is a sin-
gle  cooperative  state  with  all  individual  particle  wavefunctions  in  phase  in  the
ground state. In 1995 Einstein’s prediction was directly conﬁrmed by a group at
the University of Colorado led by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman who observed a
BEC  in  a  cloud  of  rubidium  atoms  cooled  to  less  than  100 nK  (see  the  guest
essay by Steven Chu at the end of this chapter for details).

For fermions, as in Chapter 9, we ﬁnd a probability of zero for two fermions

to be in the same state since the wavefunction is zero:

␺F ⫽

1
√2

[␺a(r1)␺a(r2) ⫺ ␺a(r2)␺a(r1)] ⫽ 0

This is just the Pauli exclusion principle again.

Bose–Einstein and Fermi–Dirac Distributions
As  we  have  seen  there  are  two  distributions  for  indistiguishable  particles
that ﬂow  from  parity  requirements  on  the  system  wavefunctions,  the
Bose – Einstein  distribution and  the  Fermi – Dirac  distribution. To obtain
the Bose – Einstein distribution, we retain the MB assumption of no theoretical
limit  on  the  number  of  particles  per  state.  Particles  that  obey  the  Bose –
Einstein  distribution  are  called  bosons and  are  observed  to  have  integral
spin. Some  examples  of  bosons  are  the  alpha  particle  (S ⫽ 0),  the  photon
(S ⫽ 1), and the deuteron (S ⫽ 1). To obtain the Fermi – Dirac distribution we
stipulate  that  only  one  particle  can  occupy  a  given  quantum  state.  Particles
that obey the Fermi – Dirac distribution are called fermions and are observed
to  have  half  integral  spin. Some  important  examples  of  fermions  are  the
1
electron, the proton, and the neutron, all with spin  .
2

To see  the  essential  changes  in  the  distribution  function  introduced  by
quantum statistics, let us return to our simple system of six particles with a to-
tal energy of 8E. First we consider the Bose – Einstein case; the particles are in-
distinguishable and there is no limit on the number of particles in a particular
energy state. Figure 10.1a was drawn to represent this situation. Since the par-
ticles  are  indistinguishable,  each  of  the  20  arrangements  shown  in  Figure
10.1a is equally likely, so the probability of each arrangement is 1/20. The av-
erage  number  of  particles  in  a  particular  energy  level  may  be  calculated  by
again using Equation 10.2. The average number of particles in the zero energy
level is found to be

n 0

⫽ (5)(1/20) ⫹ (4)(1/20) ⫹ (4)(1/20) ⫹ (3)(1/20) ⫹ (4)(1/20)

⫹ (3)(1/20) ⫹ (2)(1/20) ⫹ (4)(1/20) ⫹ (3)(1/20) ⫹ (3)(1/20)
⫹ (2)(1/20) ⫹ (1)(1/20) ⫹ (3)(1/20) ⫹ (2)(1/20) ⫹ (2)(1/20)
⫹ (1)(1/20) ⫹ (0)(1/20) ⫹ (2)(1/20) ⫹ (1)(1/20) ⫹ (0)(1/20)

⫽ 49/20 ⫽ 2.45

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

348

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
n
e
v
i
g

 
a
 
h
t
i
w

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
a
 
g
n
d
n

i

i
f
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

0

0

2E

4E
Energy

6E

8E

Figure  10.6 The  distribution
function  for  six  indistinguish-
able  particles  with  total  energy
8E (bosons).

0.3

0.2

0.1

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
a
 

i

g
n
d
n
i
f
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
n
e
v
i
g

 
a
 
h
t
i

w

0

0

2E

4E

6E

8E

Energy

Figure  10.7 The  distribution
function  for  six  indistinguish-
able  particles  with  total  energy
8E constrained so that no more
than  two  particles  occupy  the
same energy state (fermions).

n 1

⫽ 6/20 ⫽ 0.30,

Similarly,  we  ﬁnd  ⫽ 31/20 ⫽ 1.55,
⫽ 9/20 ⫽ 0.45,
⫽ 1/20 ⫽ 0.05,
⫽ 3/20 ⫽ 0.15,
n 4
and ⫽ 0.05. Once again using the idea that the probability of ﬁnding a par-
ticle with a given energy, p(E), is simply the average number of particles with
that energy divided by the total number of particles, we ﬁnd

⫽ 18/20 ⫽ 0.90,
⫽ 2/20 ⫽ 0.10,

n 2
n 6

n 3
n 7

n 8

n 5

p(0) ⫽

n 0
6

⫽

2.45

6

⫽ 0.408

In  like  manner  we  ﬁnd:  p(1E ) ⫽ 0.258, p(2E ) ⫽ 0.150, p(3E ) ⫽ 0.0750,
p(4E ) ⫽ 0.0500, p(5E ) ⫽ 0.0250, p(6E ) ⫽ 0.0167, p(7E ) ⫽ 0.00833,  and
p(8E ) ⫽ 0.00833.  A  plot  of  these  values  in  Figure  10.6  shows  that  the
Bose – Einstein  distribution  gives  results  similar,  but  not  identical,  to  the
Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution. In general, the Bose – Einstein distribution
tends  to  have  more  particles  in  the  lowest  energy  levels.  At  higher  energies,
the  curves  come  together  and  both  exhibit  a  rapid  decrease  in  probability
with increasing energy.

To illustrate  the  distinctive  shape  of  the  Fermi – Dirac  distribution,  again
consider our simple example of six indistinguishable particles with energy 8E.
Since the particles are fermions, we impose the constraint that no more than
two  particles  can  be  assigned  to  a  given  energy  state  (corresponding  to  elec-
trons  with  spin  up  and  down).  There  are  only  three  arrangements  (denoted
by FD) out of the 20 shown in Figure 10.1a that meet this additional constraint
imposed by the Pauli exclusion principle. Since each of these arrangements is
equally  likely,  each  has  a  probability  of  occurrence  of  1/3,  and  we  again  use
Equation 10.2 to calculate the average number of fermions in the zero energy
level, as follows:

n 0 ⫽ (2)(1/3) ⫹ (2)(1/3) ⫹ (2)(1/3) ⫽ 2.00

Similarly,  we  ﬁnd  for  the  average  number  of  fermions  with  energies  of  1E
through 8E the following:

n 1
n 5

⫽ 5/3 ⫽ 1.67, ⫽ 3/3 ⫽ 1, ⫽ 3/3 ⫽ 1, ⫽ 1/3 ⫽ 0.33,
⫽ ⫽ ⫽ ⫽ 0

n 4

n 3

n 2
n 8

n 7

n 6

Finally,  we  obtain  the  probabilities  of  ﬁnding  a  fermion  with  energies  0
through 8E:

p(0) ⫽ 2.00/6 ⫽ 0.333, p(1E) ⫽ 0.278, p(2E) ⫽ 0.167, p(3E) ⫽ 0.167,
p(4E) ⫽ 0.0550, and p(5E) ⫽ p(6E) ⫽ p(7E) ⫽ p(8E) ⫽ 0

When this distribution is plotted, we discover a distinctly different shape from
the Maxwell – Boltzmann or Bose – Einstein curves (Fig. 10.7). The results show
a leveling off of probability at both low and high energies. Although it is not
entirely  clear  that  the  points  plotted  in  Figure  10.7  conform  to  the  smooth
curve drawn, consideration of systems with more than six particles proves this
to be the case (see Problem 10.11).

When large numbers of quantum particles are considered, continuous distri-
bution functions may be rigorously derived for both the Bose – Einstein (BE)
and Fermi – Dirac (FD) cases. By maximizing the number of ways of distribut-
ing the indistinguishable quantum particles among the allowed energy states,
again subject to the two constraints of a ﬁxed number of particles and a ﬁxed

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

total energy, we ﬁnd the distribution functions to have the explicit forms:

10.3

QUANTUM STATISTICS

349

f BE(E ) ⫽

f FD(E ) ⫽

1

Be E/kBT ⫺ 1

1

He E/kBT ⫹ 1

(10.19)

(10.20)

where f(E)  is  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  a  particle  in  a  particular  state  of  en-
ergy E at a given absolute temperature T. As noted earlier, the number of par-
ticles per unit volume with energy between E and E ⫹ dE is given by

or

n(E) dE ⫽ g(E)f BE(E) dE

n(E) dE ⫽ g(E)f FD(E) dE

(10.21)

(10.22)

Thus  the  parameters  B and H in  Equations  10.19  and  10.20  may  be  deter-
mined from the total number of particles, N, since integrating Equations 10.21
and 10.22 yields

冢 N
V 冣bosons

g(E )

Be E/kBT ⫺ 1

dE

⫽冕⬁

0

and

冢 N
V 冣fermions

⫽冕⬁

0

g(E )

He E/kBT ⫹ 1

dE

(10.23)

(10.24)

In  general  we  ﬁnd  that  B and H depend  on  the  system  temperature  and
particle  density  as  shown  by  Equations  10.23  and  10.24.  For  a  system  of
bosons  that  are  not  ﬁxed  in  number  with  temperature,  Equation  10.23
no longer  serves  to  determine  B.  By  maximizing  the  ways  of  distributing
the bosons  among  allowed  states  subject  to  the  single  constraint  of  ﬁxed
energy,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  coefﬁcient  B in  Equation  10.19  is  equal
to 1.  This  is  a  particularly  important  case  since  both  photons  in  a  black-
body cavity  and  phonons  in  a  solid  are  bosons  whose  numbers  per  unit
volume increase with increasing temperature. (We deﬁne phonons shortly.)
Thus,

f (E ) ⫽

1

e E/kBT ⫺ 1

(for photons or phonons)

For the case of the Fermi – Dirac distribution, H depends strongly on tempera-
ture  and  is  often  written  in  an  explicitly  temperature-dependent  form  as
H ⫽ e⫺EF/kBT
,  where  E F is  called  the  Fermi  energy.2 With  this  substitution,
Equation 10.20 changes to the more common form

f FD(E ) ⫽

1

e(E⫺EF)/kBT ⫹ 1

(10.25)

Fermi – Dirac distribution

2If we force the functional form of H to be 
T. Fortunately, this dependence of EF on T is so weak that we can ignore it here.

H ⫽ e⫺E F/k BT

, EF will itself have a weak dependence on

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

350

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

∞

d
e
i
p
u
c
c
o
 
s
i
 
E
 
e
t
a
t
s
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
t
a
h
t
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

2.0

1.0

0

0 

BE

MB

FD with
EF ≅ 2.0 eV

all ∝ e –E/kBT

1 

2 

3 

E (eV)

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Figure  10.8 A  comparison  of  Maxwell–Boltzmann,  Bose–Einstein,  and  Fermi–Dirac
distribution functions at 5000 K.

This expression shows the meaning of the Fermi energy: The probability
of  ﬁnding  an  electron  with  an  energy  equal  to  the  Fermi  energy  is
exactly 1/2 at any temperature.

e⫺E/kBT

A plot comparing the Maxwell – Boltzmann, Bose – Einstein, and Fermi – Dirac
distributions as functions of energy at a common temperature of 5000 K is shown
in Figure 10.8. Note that for large E, all occupation probabilities decrease to zero
as 
. For small values of E, the FD probability saturates at 1 as required by
the  exclusion  principle,  the  MB  probability  constantly  increases  but  remains
ﬁnite,  and  the  BE  probability  tends  to  inﬁnity.  This  very  high  probability  for
bosons to have low energies means that at low temperatures most of the particles
drop into the ground state. When this happens, a new phase of matter with dif-
ferent physical properties can occur. This change in phase for a system of bosons
is called a Bose – Einstein condensation (BEC), and it occurs in liquid helium
at a temperature of 2.18 K. Below 2.18 K liquid helium becomes a mixture of the
normal liquid and a phase with all molecules in the ground state. The ground-
state  phase,  called  liquid  helium  II,  exhibits  many  interesting  properties,  one
being  zero  viscosity.  For  more  on  Bose  condensation  and  applications  of  this
remarkable state of matter, see the essay by Steven Chu at the end of this chapter.
The history of the discovery of the quantum distributions is interesting. The
ﬁrst  quantum  distribution  to  be  discovered  was  the  Bose – Einstein  function
introduced  in  1924  by  Satyendranath  Bose  (Indian  physicist,  1894 – 1974),
working  in  isolation.  He  sent  his  paper,  which  contained  a  new  proof  of  the
Planck  formula  for  blackbody  radiation,  to  Einstein.  In  this  paper,  Bose
applied  the  normal  methods  of  statistical  mechanics  to  light  quanta  but
treated  the  quanta  as  absolutely  indistinguishable.  Einstein  was  impressed  by
Bose’s work and proceeded to translate the paper into German for publication
in  the  Zeitschrift  für  Physik.3 To obtain  the  quantum  theory  of  the  ideal  gas,

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

3S. N. Bose, Z. Phys., 26:178, 1924.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.4

APPLICATIONS OF BOSE–EINSTEIN STATISTICS

351

The exclusion principle

Einstein  extended  the  method  to  molecules  in  several  papers  published  in
1924 and 1925.

In 1925, Wolfgang Pauli, after an exhaustive study of the quantum numbers
assigned to atomic levels split by the Zeeman effect, announced his new and
fundamental principle of quantum theory, the exclusion principle: Two elec-
trons  in  an  atom  cannot  have  the  same  set  of  quantum  numbers.  In 1926,
Enrico  Fermi  obtained  the  second  type  of  quantum  statistics  that  occurs  in
nature by combining Pauli’s exclusion principle with the requirement of indis-
tinguishability. Paul Dirac is also credited for this work, since he performed a
more rigorous quantum mechanical treatment of these statistics in 1926. The
empirical  observation  that  particles  with  integral  spin obey  BE  statistics  and
particles with half-integral spin obey FD statistics was explained much later (in
1940) by Pauli, using relativity and causality arguments.

10.4 APPLICATIONS OF BOSE–EINSTEIN

STATISTICS

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Blackbody Radiation
In this section we apply BE statistics to the problem of determining the energy
density (energy per unit volume) of electromagnetic radiation in an enclosure
heated to temperature T, now treating the radiation as a gas of photons. (In
Chapter  3  we  discussed  the  importance  of  this  blackbody  problem  for  quan-
tum  physics.)  Since  photons  have  spin  1,  they  are  bosons  and  follow
Bose – Einstein statistics. The number of photons per unit volume with energy
between E and E ⫹ dE is given by n(E) dE ⫽ g(E)f BE(E) dE. The energy density
of photons in the range from E to E ⫹ dE is

u(E ) dE ⫽ En(E ) dE ⫽

g(E )E dE
e E/kBT ⫺ 1

(10.26)

To complete our calculation, we need the factor g(E), the density of states for
photons in an enclosure. This important calculation, given in Web Appendix 1
on our Web site, shows that the number of photon states per unit volume with
frequencies between f and f ⫹ df is

N( f ) df ⫽

8␲f 2 df

c 3

⫽

8␲(hf )2d(hf )

(hc)3

⫽

8␲E 2 dE

(hc)3

using E ⫽ hf for photons. Since the number of photon states per unit volume
with frequencies between f and f ⫹ df is equal to the number of photon states
with energies between E and E ⫹ dE, we have

N( f ) df ⫽

8␲E 2 dE
(hc)3 ⫽ g(E ) dE

Thus we ﬁnd that the density of states for photons is

g(E ) ⫽

8␲E 2
(hc)3

(10.27)

Substituting  Equation  10.27  into  Equation  10.26  gives  the  expression  for  the
energy density:

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

352

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

u(E ) dE ⫽

8␲
(hc)3

E 3 dE

eE/kBT ⫺ 1

(10.28)

Converting from photon energy to frequency using E ⫽ hf in Equation 10.28,
we immediately retrieve the Planck blackbody formula:

u( f, T ) ⫽

8␲h
c3

f 3

ehf/kBT ⫺ 1

(3.9)

Thus  the  Planck  formula  for  a  blackbody  follows  directly  and  simply  from
Bose – Einstein statistics.

EXAMPLE 10.3 Photons in a Box

(a)  Find  an  expression  for  the  number  of  photons  per
unit volume with energies between E and E ⫹ dE in a cav-
ity at temperature T.

(c) Calculate the number of photons/cm3 inside a cavity
whose  walls  are  heated  to  3000 K.  Compare  this  with  a
cavity whose walls are at 3.00 K.

Solution

n(E ) dE ⫽ g(E )f (E ) dE ⫽

8␲E 2 dE

(hc)3(e E/kBT ⫺ 1)

(b) Find an expression for the total number of photons
per unit volume (all energies).

Solution

⫽冕⬁

0

N
V

or

n(E ) dE ⫽

8␲(k BT )3

(hc)3

冕⬁

0

(E/k BT )2(dE/k BT )

e E/kBT ⫺ 1

⫽ 8␲ 冢 k BT

hc 冣3冕⬁

0

N
V

z2 dz
e z ⫺ 1

Solution From standard tables,

冕⬁

0

z2 dz
e z ⫺ 1

⬇ 2.40

Therefore,

N
V

(at 3000 K) ⫽ (8␲)冤 (8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)(3000 K)

1.24 ⫻ 10⫺4 eV ⭈ cm

冥3

⭈ (2.40)

⫽ 5.47 ⫻ 1011 photons/cm3

Likewise, N/V (at  3.00 K) ⫽ 5.47 ⫻ 102 photons/cm3.
Therefore,  the  photon  density  decreases  by  a  factor
of 109 when  the  temperature  drops  from  3000 K  to
3.00 K.

Einstein’s Theory of Speciﬁc Heat
Recall that the molar speciﬁc heat of a substance, C, is the ratio of the differ-
ential thermal energy, dU, added to a mole of substance divided by the result-
ing differential increase in temperature, dT, or

C ⫽

dU
dT

(10.29)

Thus C has  units  of  calories  per  mole  per  kelvin  (cal/mol ⭈ K).  To  develop  a
theoretical expression for comparison to the experimental curves of C versus
T measured  for  different  elemental  solids,  we  need  an  expression  for  U,  the
internal thermal energy of the solid, as a function of the solid’s temperature,
T. Differentiation of this expression will then yield the speciﬁc heat as a func-
tion of temperature.

To ﬁnd  an  expression  for  U,  let  us  model  the  solid  as  a  collection  of
atoms vibrating independently on springs with equal force constants in the x,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.4

APPLICATIONS OF BOSE–EINSTEIN STATISTICS

353

y,  and  z directions,  each  atom  being  represented  by  three  identical  one-
dimensional  harmonic  oscillators.  The  internal  energy  of  each  atom  may
then  be  calculated  from  the  classical  equipartition  theorem.  A  one-
dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  has  2  degrees  of  freedom:  one  for  its  ki-
netic  energy  and  one  for  its  potential  energy.  (Physically  this  means  that
thermal energy added to the atoms in a solid may go into atomic vibration
or  into  work  done  to  stretch  the  springs  holding  the  atoms  in  place.)  Be-
cause the equipartition theorem states that the average thermal energy per
degree of freedom should be kBT/2, the internal energy per atom of a solid
should  be  (kBT/2  per  degree  of  freedom) ⫻ (2  degrees  of  freedom  per
one-dimensional  oscillator) ⫻ (three  oscillators  per  atom) ⫽ 3kBT.  As  a
mole  contains  Avogadro’s  number  of  atoms,  NA,  the  total  internal  energy
per mole, U, is predicted to be

U ⫽ 3NAkBT ⫽ 3RT

(10.30)

where R is  the  universal  gas  constant  given  by  R ⫽ NAkB ⫽ 8.31 J/mol ⭈ K ⫽
1.99 cal/mol ⭈ K. Using C ⫽ dU/dT, we immediately see that C should be con-
stant with temperature:

C ⫽

d
dT

 (3RT ) ⫽ 3R ⫽ 5.97 cal/mol ⭈K

(10.31)

The  speciﬁc  heat  of  many  solids  is  indeed  constant  with  temperature,  espe-
cially  at  higher  temperatures,  as  can  be  seen  in  Figure  10.9,  showing  good
agreement with the classical idea that the average thermal energy is kBT/2 per
degree  of  freedom.  However,  as  can  also  be  seen  in  Figure  10.9,  the  speciﬁc
heat  of  all  solids  drops  sharply  at  some  temperature  and  approaches  zero  as
the temperature approaches 0 K.

The explanation of why classical physics failed to give the correct value of
speciﬁc heat at all temperatures was given by Einstein in 1907. He realized
that the quantized energies of vibrating atoms in a solid must be explicitly
considered  at  low  temperatures  to  secure  agreement  with  experimental
measurements of speciﬁc heat. Einstein assumed that the atoms of the solid

)
K

⋅

l
o
m
/

l
a
c
(
C

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Lead

Aluminum

Silicon

Diamond

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Absolute temperature, K

Figure 10.9 The dependence of speciﬁc heat on temperature for several solid elements.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

354

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

could be modeled as a system of independent or uncoupled three-dimensional
quantum harmonic oscillators with equal spring constants in the x, y, and z
directions.  He  then  showed  that  the  average  energy  of  a  one-dimensional
oscillator  with  frequency  ␻ at  temperature  T was  given  by  the  Bose –
Einstein distribution, or 

E ⫽

ប␻

e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1

Because  the  atoms  are  considered  to  be  independent,  he  gave  the  internal
energy of a mole of atoms, or NA atoms, as 

U ⫽ 3NAE ⫽ 3NA

ប␻

e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1

Finally, he obtained the molar speciﬁc heat:

C ⫽

dU
dT

⫽ 3R 冢 ប␻
k BT 冣2

e ប␻/kBT

(e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1)2

(10.32)

It is left as an exercise to show that Equation 10.32 predicts that C approaches
zero for small T as 

, and that C approaches 3R for large T.

e⫺ប␻/kBT

To understand  Equation  10.32  qualitatively,  consider  the  quantity 
average one-dimensional quantum oscillator energy at temperature, T:

E

,  the

E ⫽

ប␻

e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1

(10.33)

Recall  that  the  vibrating  atoms  of  the  solid  have  quantized  energy  levels
spaced ប␻ apart. For high temperatures such that ប␻ ⬍⬍ kBT, the energy level
spacing ប␻ is  small  relative  to  the  average  thermal  energy  per  atom,  and
we can  expect  many  atoms  to  be  in  excited  energy  levels.  In  fact,  we  can
expand 
the  denominator  of  Equation  10.33  as
exp(ប␻/kBT) ⫽ 1 ⫹ ប␻/kBT ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ to get

the  exponential 

in 

E ⫽

ប␻

e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1

⬇ k BT

In  this  case  the  atomic  energies  appear  to  be  continuous  and  the  classical
result C ⫽ 3R holds.  For  low  temperatures  such  that  ប␻ ⬎⬎ kBT,  Equation
10.33  shows  that  the  average  thermal  energy  of  an  oscillator  rapidly  tends  to
zero.  This  means  the  average  energy  is  much  less  than  the  spacing  between
adjacent atomic energy levels, ប␻, and there is insufﬁcient thermal energy to
raise an atom out of its ground state to higher energy levels. In this case atoms
are  unable  to  absorb  energy  from  the  surroundings  for  a  small  increase  in
temperature, and the increase in internal energy with temperature or speciﬁc
heat tends to zero.

A ﬁnal point to note is that Equation 10.32 has only one adjustable parame-
ter, ␻, the harmonic oscillator vibration frequency, which is chosen to give the
best ﬁt of Equation 10.32 to the experimental heat capacity data. Frequently,
␻ is  given  in  terms  of  an  equivalent  temperature  TE,  called  the  Einstein
temperature, where

ប␻ ⫽ kBTE

(10.34)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

10.4

APPLICATIONS OF BOSE–EINSTEIN STATISTICS

355

)
K

 

⋅

 
l
o
m
/
l
a
c
(
 
C

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

TE  =  1300 K

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

T—
TE

Figure 10.10 Einstein’s speciﬁc heat formula ﬁtted to Weber’s experimental data for
diamond. This ﬁgure is adapted from A. Einstein, Ann. Physik., 4(22):180, 1907.

In his pioneering 1907 paper, Einstein found good agreement between his for-
mula and Heinrich Weber’s data on diamond, with TE ⫽ 1300 K. This agree-
ment is shown in Figure 10.10.

The too rapid falloff of the Einstein formula at low temperatures hinted
at  in  Figure  10.10  was  conﬁrmed  in  1911  by  Hermann  Nernst.  Although  it
was generally felt that the problem with Einstein’s result was the assumption
that each atom vibrated independently of its neighbors at a single ﬁxed fre-
quency,  no  one  really  knew  how  to  treat  a  band  or  spread  of  frequencies
corresponding  to  groups  of  neighboring  atoms  interacting  and  moving
together.  In  1912,  however,  Peter  Debye  obtained  the  experimentally
observed  temperature  dependence  of  C ⬀ T 3 for  low  temperatures  by
modeling  a  solid  as  a  continuous  elastic  object  whose  internal  energy  was
made  up  of  the  energy  in  standing  sound  (elastic)  waves.  These  sound
waves are both transverse and longitudinal in a solid and possess a range of
frequencies  from  zero  to  some  maximum  value  determined  by  the  depen-
dence  of  the  minimum  wavelength  on  the  interatomic  spacing.  Further-
more, these elastic waves or lattice vibrations are quantized, like electromag-
netic  waves  or  photons.  A  quantized  elastic  vibration  of  frequency  ␻,
called a phonon, travels at the speed of sound in a solid, and carries a
quantum  of  elastic  energy ប␻. Debye  was  able  to  show  that  a  “phonon
gas” with a distribution of allowed frequencies was a better model of a solid
at low  temperatures  than  a  system  of  independent  harmonic  oscillators
all having  the  same  frequency.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  idea  of
phonons by Debye, the concept has found many applications in condensed
matter  physics,  including  the  electron–phonon  interaction  in  supercon-
ductivity and the coupling of phonons to the motion of impurity atoms and
molecules in a lattice.

Exercise 3 Show that Equation 10.32 predicts that C approaches zero for small T as
e⫺ប␻/kBT

and that C approaches 3R for large T.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

356

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

EXAMPLE 10.4 The Speciﬁc Heat of Diamond

E

E

As we have seen, a solid at temperature T can be viewed
as  a  system  of  quantized  harmonic  oscillators  with
discrete  energy  levels  separated  by  ប␻.  The  oscillators
can only absorb thermal energy, however, if the tempera-
ture  is  high  enough  that  the  average  thermal  energy
of the oscillator, 
, is approximately equal to the oscilla-
tor  energy-level  spacing,  ប␻.  For  low  temperatures  such
that ⬍⬍ ប␻,  there  is  so  little  thermal  energy  available
that the atoms cannot even be raised to the ﬁrst excited
state and the speciﬁc heat tends to zero. In the following
example  we  show  that  the  carbon  atoms  in  diamond
are effectively  decoupled  from  thermal  energy  at  room
temperature  but  can  absorb  energy  at  a  temperature
of 1500 K.
(a)  Calculate  the  vibration  frequency  of  the  carbon
atoms in diamond if the Einstein temperature is 1300 K.
Also  find  the  energy-level  spacing  for  the  carbon 
atoms.

The  spacing  between  adjacent  oscillator  energy  levels  in
carbon is

ប␻ ⫽ (6.58 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈ s)(1.70 ⫻ 1014 Hz) ⫽ 0.112 eV

(b)  Calculate  the  average  oscillator  energy 
at  room
temperature and at 1500 K and compare this energy with
the  carbon  energy-level  spacing  ប␻.  Is  there  sufﬁcient
thermal  energy  on  average  to  excite  carbon  atoms  at
300 K? at 1500 K?

E

Solution The  average  oscillator  energy  at  room  tem-
perature (300 K) is

E ⫽

⫽

ប␻

e ប␻/kBT ⫺ 1

0.112 eV

e0.112 eV/(8.62⫻10⫺5 eV/K)(300 K) ⫺ 1

⫽ 0.00149 eV

while the average oscillator energy at 1500 K is

Solution Since ប␻ ⫽ kBTE,  the  frequency  of  vibration
of carbon atoms in diamond is

E ⫽

0.112 eV

e0.112 eV/(8.62⫻10⫺5 eV/K)(1500 K) ⫺ 1

⫽ 0.0813 eV

␻ ⫽

k BTE

ប

⫽

(8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K)(1300 K)

6.58 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈s

⫽ 1.70 ⫻ 1014 Hz

E

Comparing, we see that  at 300 K is about 0.01ប␻, and 
E
at  1500 K  is  approximately  equal  to  ប␻.  This  means  that
at 300 K most carbon atoms are frozen into the oscillator
ground state and the speciﬁc heat tends to zero.

Exercise 4 (a) Calculate the vibration frequency of lead atoms and their energy-level
spacing if the Einstein temperature of lead is 70 K. (b) Explain the low Einstein tem-
perature of lead relative to that for diamond in terms of the physical properties of lead.
(c) Calculate the average one-dimensional oscillator energy in lead at room tempera-
ture. Is there enough energy to raise lead atoms out of the ground state at 300 K?

10.5 AN APPLICATION OF FERMI–DIRAC STATISTICS:
THE FREE ELECTRON GAS THEORY OF METALS

Because the outer electrons are weakly bound to individual atoms in a metal,
we  can  treat  these  outer  conduction  electrons  as  a  gas  of  fermions  trapped
within a cavity formed by the metallic surface. Many interesting physical quan-
tities, such as the average energy, Fermi energy, speciﬁc heat, and thermionic
emission  rate,  may  be  derived  from  the  expression  for  the  concentration  of
electrons with energies between E and E ⫹ dE:

n(E) dE ⫽ g(E)f FD(E) dE

(10.22)

Recall that the probability of ﬁnding an electron in a particular energy state

E is given by the Fermi–Dirac distribution function,

f FD(E ) ⫽

1

e(E⫺E F)/kBT ⫹ 1

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10.5

AN APPLICATION OF FERMI-DIRAC STATISTICS: THE FREE ELECTRON GAS THEORY OF METALS

357

 

Plots  of  this  function  versus  energy  are  shown  in  Figure  10.11  for  the  cases
T ⫽ 0 K and T ⬎ 0.  Note  that  at  T ⫽ 0 K,  f FD ⫽ 1  for  E ⬍ EF,  and  f FD ⫽ 0  for
E ⬎ EF. Thus all states with energies less than EF are completely ﬁlled and all states
with energies greater than EF are empty. This is in sharp contrast to the predic-
tions of MB and BE statistics, in which all particles condense to a state of zero en-
ergy at absolute zero. In fact, far from having zero speed, a conduction electron in
a metal with the cutoff energy EF has a speed v F which satisﬁes the relation

1
2m ev F

2 ⫽ EF

(10.35)

where vF is called the Fermi speed. Substituting a typical value of 5 eV for the
Fermi energy yields the remarkable result that electrons at the Fermi level pos-
sess speeds of the order of 106 m/s at 0 K!

Figure 10.11b shows that as T increases, the distribution rounds off slightly,
with states between E and E ⫺ kBT losing population and states between E and
E ⫹ k BT gaining population. In general, EF also depends on temperature, but
the dependence is weak in metals, and we may say that EF(T) ⬇ EF(0) up to
several thousand kelvin.

Let us now turn to the calculation of the density of states, g(E), for conduc-
tion  electrons  in  a  metal.  Since  the  electrons  may  be  viewed  as  a  system  of
matter  waves  whose  wavefunctions  vanish  at  the  boundaries  of  the  metal,
we obtain  the  same  result  for  electrons  as  for  electromagnetic  waves  con-
ﬁned to a cavity. In the latter case, we found (see our Web site at http://info.
brookscole.com/mp3e)  that  the  number  of  states  per  unit  volume  with
wavenumber between k and k ⫹ dk is

g(k) dk ⫽

k2 dk
2␲2

(3.44)

To apply this expression to electrons in a metal, we must multiply it by a factor
of 2 to account for the two allowed spin states of an electron with a given mo-
mentum or energy:

g(k) dk ⫽

k2 dk
␲2

(10.36)

f (E )

f (E )

T = 0 K

T > 0 K

1.0

0

E

E F

(a)

1.0

0.5

0

E

E F

2k BT

(b)

Figure 10.11 A comparison of the Fermi – Dirac distribution functions at (a) absolute
zero and (b) ﬁnite temperature.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

358

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

To obtain g(E) from g(k), we assume nonrelativistic free electrons. Thus

or

and

dk ⫽

E ⫽

p2
2me

⫽

ប2k2
2me

k ⫽ 冢 2meE

ប2 冣1/2

(10.37)

1

2 冢 2me

ប2 冣1/2

E ⫺1/2 dE

(10.38)

Substituting Equations 10.37 and 10.38 into Equation 10.36 yields

Density of states for
conduction electrons

where

g(E ) dE ⫽ DE 1/2 dE

(10.39)

D ⫽

8√2␲m e

3/2

h3

(10.40)

Thus  the  key  expression  for  the  number  of  electrons  per  unit  volume  with
energy between E and E ⫹ dE becomes

Number of electrons per unit
volume with energy between
E and E ⴙ dE

n(E ) dE ⫽

DE 1/2 dE

e(E⫺E F)/kBT ⫹ 1

(10.41)

Figure 10.12 is a plot of n(E) versus E, showing the product of an increasing
density of states and the decreasing FD distribution. Because

⫽冕⬁

0

N
V

n(E ) dE ⫽ D冕⬁

0

E 1/2 dE

e(E⫺E F)kBT ⫹ 1

(10.42)

n(E )

k BT

T = 0 K

T = 300 K

1

2

3

E(eV)

Figure  10.12 The  number  of
electrons  per  unit  volume  with
energy  between  E and E ⫹ dE.
Note that n(E) ⫽ g(E)f FD(E).

we  can  determine  the  Fermi  energy  as  a  function  of  the  electron  concen-
tration, N/V. For arbitrary T, Equation 10.42 must be integrated numerically.
At T ⫽ 0 K, the integration is simple since f FD(E) ⫽ 1 for E ⬍ E F and is 0 for
E ⬎ E F. Therefore, at T ⫽ 0 K, Equation 10.42 becomes

⫽ D冕EF

0

N
V

E 1/2 dE ⫽ 2

3/2

3 DE F

(10.43)

Substituting the value of D from Equation 10.40 into Equation 10.43 gives for
the Fermi energy at 0 K, EF(0),

EF(0) ⫽

h2

2me 冢 3N

8␲V 冣2/3

(10.44)

Equation 10.44 shows a gradual increase in EF(0) with increasing electron con-
centration.  This  is  expected,  because  the  electrons  ﬁll  the  available  energy
states, two electrons per state, in accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle
up to a maximum energy EF. Representative values of EF(0) for various metals
calculated  from  Equation  10.44  are  given  in  Table  10.1.  This  table  also  lists
values of the Fermi speed and the Fermi temperature, TF, deﬁned by

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10.5

AN APPLICATION OF FERMI-DIRAC STATISTICS: THE FREE ELECTRON GAS THEORY OF METALS

359

 

Table 10.1 Calculated Values of Various Parameters for

Metals Based on the Free Electron Theory

Electron

Concentration

(mⴚ3)

Fermi
Energy

(eV)

Fermi
Speed
(m/s)

Fermi

Temperature

(K)

4.70 ⫻ 1028
2.65 ⫻ 1028
1.40 ⫻ 1028
8.49 ⫻ 1028
5.85 ⫻ 1028
5.90 ⫻ 1028

4.72
3.23
2.12
7.05
5.48
5.53

1.29 ⫻ 106
1.07 ⫻ 106
0.86 ⫻ 106
1.57 ⫻ 106
1.39 ⫻ 106
1.39 ⫻ 106

5.48 ⫻ 104
3.75 ⫻ 104
2.46 ⫻ 104
8.12 ⫻ 104
6.36 ⫻ 104
6.41 ⫻ 104

Metal

Li
Na
K
Cu
Ag
Au

TF ⬅ EF
k B

(10.45)

As a ﬁnal note, it is interesting that a long-standing puzzle concerning the
anomalously  small  contribution  of  the  conduction  electron  “gas”  to  the  heat
capacity of a solid has a qualitative solution in terms of the Fermi–Dirac distri-
bution.  If  conduction  electrons  behaved  classically,  warming  a  gas  of  N elec-
trons from 0 to 300 K should result in an average energy increase of 3kBT/2
for each particle, or a total thermal energy per mole, U, given by

U ⫽ NA (3

2 k BT ) ⫽ 3

2 RT

Thus the electronic heat capacity per mole should be given by

Cel ⫽

dU
dT

⫽ 3

2 R

assuming  one  free  electron  per  atom.  An  examination  of  Figure  10.12,  how-
ever,  shows  that  on  heating  from  0  K,  very  few  electrons  become  excited  and
gain an energy kBT. Only a small fraction f within kBT of EF can be excited ther-
mally. The fraction f may be approximated by the ratio of the area of a thin rec-
tangle of width kBT and height n(EF) to the total area under n(E). Thus

f ⬇

⫽

area of shaded rectangle in Figure 10.12

total area under n(E )

(k BT )g(EF)

F

E 1/2 dE

D冕E

0

⫽

(k BT )D(EF)1/2

3/2

2
3 DE F

⫽

3
2

k BT
EF

⫽

3
2

T
TF

Since only f N of the electrons gain an energy of the order of kBT, the actual
total thermal energy gained per mole is

U ⫽ 冢 3

2

T

TF 冣 (NAk BT ) ⫽

3
2

RT 2
TF

From this result, we ﬁnd that the electronic heat capacity is

Cel ⫽

dU
dT

⬇ 3R

T
TF

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

360

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

Substituting T ⫽ 300 K and TF ⫽ 5 ⫻ 104 K, we ﬁnd a very small value for the
electronic heat capacity at ordinary temperatures:

Cel ⬇ 3R 冢 300 K

50,000 K 冣 ⫽ 0.018R

Thus,  the  electrons  contribute  only  0.018R/1.5R,  or  about  1%  of  the  classi-
cally expected amount, to the heat capacity.

EXAMPLE 10.5 The Fermi Energy of Gold

(a) Calculate the Fermi energy of gold at 0 K.

(b) Calculate the Fermi speed for gold at 0 K.

Solution The  density  of  gold  is  19.32 g/cm3,  and  its
molar  weight  is  197 g/mol.  Assuming  each  gold  atom
contributes  one  free  electron  to  the  Fermi  gas,  we  can
calculate the electron concentration as follows:

N
V

⫽ (19.32 g/cm3)冢

1

197 g/mol 冣 ⫻ (6.02 ⫻ 1023 electrons/mol)

⫽ 5.90 ⫻ 1022 electrons/cm3

⫽ 5.90 ⫻ 1028 electrons/m3

Using Equation 10.44, we ﬁnd

h2

EF(0) ⫽

⫽

8␲V 冣2/3

2m e 冢 3N
2(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg) 冢 3 ⫻ 5.90 ⫻ 1028 m⫺3

(6.625 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)2

8␲

Solution Since mevF

1
2

vF ⫽ 冢 2EF

me 冣1/2

2 ⫽ EF,
⫽ 冢 2 ⫻ 5.85 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg 冣1/2

⫽ 1.39 ⫻ 106 m/s

(c) Calculate the Fermi temperature for gold at 0 K.

Solution The Fermi temperature is given by

TF ⫽

EF
k B

⫽

5.53 eV

8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K

⫽ 64,000 K

冣2/3

Thus a gas of classical particles would have to be heated
to about 64,000 K to have an average energy per particle
equal to the Fermi energy at 0 K!

⫽ 8.85 ⫻ 10⫺19 J ⫽ 5.53 eV

SUMMARY

Statistical  physics  deals  with  the  distribution  of  a  ﬁxed  amount  of  energy
among a number of particles that are identical and indistinguishable in any way
(quantum particles) or identical particles that are distinguishable in the classi-
cal limit of narrow particle wave packets and low particle density. In most situa-
tions, one is not interested in the energies of all the particles at a given instant,
but rather in the time average of the number of particles in a particular energy
level.  The  average  number  of  particles  in  a  given  energy  level  is  of  special
interest in spectroscopy because the intensity of radiation emitted or absorbed
is proportional to the number of particles in a particular energy state.

For  a  system  described  by  a  continuous  distribution  of  energy  levels,  the
number  of  particles  per  unit  volume  with  energy  between  E and E ⫹ dE is
given by

n(E) dE ⫽ g(E)f(E) dE

(10.6)

where g(E)  is  the  density  of  states  or  the  number  of  energy  states  per  unit
volume  in  the  interval  dE and f(E)  is  the  probability  that  a  particle  is  in  the
energy state E. The function f(E) is called the distribution function.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

361

Three  distinct  distribution  functions  are  used,  depending  on  whether  the
particles are distinguishable and whether there is a restriction on the number
of particles in a given energy state:

• Maxwell–Boltzmann Distribution (Classical). The particles are distin-
guishable,  and  there  is  no  limit  on  the  number  of  particles  in  a  given
energy state.

f MB(E ) ⫽ Ae⫺E/kBT

(10.3)

• Bose–Einstein  Distribution  (Quantum). The  particles  are  indistinguish-
able, and there is no limit on the number of particles in a given energy state.

f BE(E ) ⫽

1

Be E/kBT ⫺ 1

(10.19)

• Fermi–Dirac  Distribution  (Quantum). The  particles  are  indistinguish-

able, and there can be no more than one particle per quantum state.

f FD(E ) ⫽

1

e(E⫺EF)/kBT ⫹ 1

(10.25)

where EF is  the  Fermi  energy. At T ⫽ 0 K,  all  levels  below  EF are  ﬁlled
and all levels above EF are empty.

At low particle concentrations and high temperature, most systems are well
described  by  Maxwell–Boltzmann  statistics.  The  criterion  that  determines
when the classical Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution is valid is 

冢 N
V 冣

h3

(8mk BT )3/2 ⬍⬍ 1

(10.18)

where N/V is  the  particle  concentration,  m is  the  particle  mass,  and  T is  the
absolute temperature. For high particle concentration, low particle mass, and
modest  temperature,  there  is  considerable  overlap  between  the  particles’
wavefunctions, and quantum distributions must be used to describe these sys-
tems of indistinguishable particles.

A system of photons in thermal equilibrium at temperature T is described

by the Bose–Einstein distribution with B ⫽ 1 and a density of states given by

g(E ) ⫽

8␲E 2
(hc)3

(10.27)

Thus, the concentration of photons with energies between E and E ⫹ dE is

n(E ) dE ⫽

8␲E 2

(hc)3 冢

1

e E/kBT ⫺ 1 冣 dE

Phonons, which are quantized lattice vibrations of a solid, are also described
by the Bose–Einstein distribution with B ⫽ 1.

Free  (conduction)  electrons  in  metals  obey  the  Pauli  exclusion  principle,
and we must use the Fermi–Dirac distribution to treat such a system. The den-
sity of states for electrons in a metal is

g(E ) ⫽

8√2␲m e

3/2

h3

E 1/2

(10.39)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

362

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

hence  the  number  of  electrons  per  unit  volume  with  energy  between  E and
E ⫹ dE is

n(E ) dE ⫽

8√2␲m e

3/2 E 1/2

h3(e(E⫺EF)/kBT ⫹ 1)

dE

(10.41)

An expression for the Fermi energy at 0 K as a function of electron concentra-
tion may be obtained by integrating Equation 10.41. One ﬁnds

EF(0) ⫽

h2

2me 冢 3N

8␲V 冣2/3

(10.44)

The  small  electronic  contribution  to  the  heat  capacity  of  a  metal  can  be
explained  by  noting  that  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  electrons  near  EF gain
kBT in thermal energy when the metal is heated from 0 K to T K.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. A.  Beiser,  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  5th  ed.,  New  York,

McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1995.

More  advanced  treatments  of  statistical  physics  may  be
found in the following books:

2. P. M. Morse, Thermal Physics, New York, Benjamin, 1965.
3. C. Kittel, Thermal Physics, New York, Wiley, 1969.
4. D.  Grifﬁths,  Introduction  to  Quantum  Mechanics,  Engle-

wood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1994.

QUESTIONS

1. Discuss  the  basic  assumptions  of  Maxwell–Boltzmann,
Fermi–Dirac,  and  Bose–Einstein  statistics.  How  do  they
differ, and what are their similarities?

2. Explain  the  role  of  the  Pauli  exclusion  principle  in  de-

scribing the electrical properties of metals.

PROBLEMS

10.1 The Maxwell–Boltzmann Distribution

1. Verify  that  for  a  system  of  six  distinguishable  particles
with total energy 8E, the probabilities of ﬁnding a parti-
cle  with  energies  1E through  8E are:  0.256,  0.167,
0.0978, 0.0543, 0.0272, 0.0117, 0.00388, 0.000777.

2. Show that the most probable speed of a gas molecule is

vmp ⫽ √ 2k BT

m

Note that the most probable speed corresponds to the
point  where  the  Maxwellian  speed  distribution  curve,
n(v), has a maximum.

3. Figure P10.3 shows an apparatus similar to that used by
Otto Stern in 1920 to verify the Maxwell speed distribu-
tion.  A  collimated  beam  of  gas  molecules  from  an
oven, O, is allowed to enter a rapidly rotating cylinder
when  slit  S is  coincident  with  the  beam.  The  pulse  of
molecules  created  by  the  rapid  rotation  of  S then
strikes and adheres to a glass plate detector, D. The ve-
locity  of  a  molecule  may  be  determined  from  its  posi-
tion on the glass plate (fastest molecules to the right).
The number of molecules arriving with a given velocity

may be determined by measuring the density of mole-
cules deposited on D at a given position. Suppose that

D

ω

A

S

O

Figure  P10.3 A  schematic  drawing  of  an  apparatus  used
to verify the Maxwell speed distribution.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

the  oven  contains  a  gas  of  bismuth  molecules  (Bi2)  at
850 K,  and  that  the  cylinder  is  10 cm  in  diameter  and
rotates  at  6250 rpm.  (a)  Find  the  distance  from  A of
the impact points of molecules traveling at 
, vrms, and
vmp. (b) Why do you suppose that measurements were
originally made with Bi2 instead of O2 or N2?

v

4. Energy  levels  known  as  tunneling  levels  have  been
observed  from  CN⫺ ions  incorporated  into  KCl  crys-
tals.  These  levels  arise  from  the  rotational  motion  of
CN⫺ ions as they tunnel, at low temperatures, through
barriers 
separating  crystalline  potential  minima.
According  to  one  model,  the  tunneling  levels  should
consist  of  four  equally  spaced  levels  in  the  far  IR  with
spacing  of  12.41 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV  (1 cm⫺1).  Assuming  that
the  CN⫺ ions  obey  Maxwell – Boltzmann  statistics  and
using  Figure  P10.4,  calculate  and  sketch  the  expected
appearance  of  the  absorption  spectra  (strength  of
absorption  vs.  energy)  at  4 K  and  1 K.  Assume  equal
transition  probabilities  for  all  allowed  transitions,  and
make  the  strength  of  absorption  proportional  to  the
peak height. Use kB ⫽ 8.62 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K.

∆  =  1 cm –1  =  12.41 × 10–5 eV

Energy

∆

∆

∆

E3    (1)

E2    (2)

E1    (2)

E0    (1)

Figure  P10.4 Tunneling  energy  levels.  Allowed  transi-
tions  are  indicated  by  vertical  arrows.  The  degeneracy  of
each level is indicated in parentheses.

5. Fit  an  exponential  curve  P(E) ⫽ Ae⫺BE to  Figure  10.2
to see how closely the system of six distinguishable par-
ticles comes to an exponential distribution. Use the val-
ues at energies of 0 and 1E to determine A and B.

6. The energy difference between the ﬁrst excited state of
mercury and the ground state is 4.86 eV. (a) If a sample
of mercury vaporized in a ﬂame contains 1020 atoms in
thermal equilibrium at 1600 K, calculate the number of
atoms  in  the  n ⫽ 1  (ground)  and  n ⫽ 2  (ﬁrst  excited)
states.  (Assume  the  Maxwell – Boltzmann  distribution
applies  and  that  the  n ⫽ 1  and  n ⫽ 2  states  have  equal
statistical weights.) (b) If the mean lifetime of the n ⫽ 2
state  is  ␶ seconds,  the  transition  probability  is  1/␶ and
the number of photons emitted per second by the n ⫽ 2
state is n 2/␶, where n 2 is the number of atoms in state 2.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

363

If the lifetime of the n ⫽ 2 state is 100 ns, calculate the
power (in watts) emitted by the hot atoms.

7. Consider  a  molecule  with  a  permanent  electric  dipole
moment p placed in an electric ﬁeld ␧, with p aligned
either  parallel  or  antiparallel  to  ␧.  (a)  Recall  that
the energy  of  a  dipole  in  an  electric  ﬁeld  is  given  by
E ⫽ ⫺ p ⭈␧, and show that this system has two allowed
energy  states  separated  by  2p␧.  (b)  Assume  a  ground-
state  energy  of  0  and  an  excited-state  energy  of  2p␧
and  degeneracies  in  the  ratio  g(2p␧)/g(0) ⫽ 2/1.
For a  collection  of  N molecules  obeying  Maxwell–
Boltzmann statistics, calculate the ratio of the number
of molecules in the excited state to the number in the
ground state at temperature T. (c) For high T such that
kBT ⬎⬎ 2p␧,  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  molecules  in
the  upper  state  to  the  number  in  the  lower  is  2  to  1.
Taking  reasonable  estimates  of  p ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 10⫺30 C ⭈ m
and ␧⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 106 V/m,  ﬁnd  the  temperature  at
which  the  ratio  has  fallen  by  a  measurable  10%  to
1.9 to  1.  (d)  Calculate  the  average  energy 
at  T and
show  that  : 0  as  T : 0  and  : 4p␧/3  as  T : ⬁.
(e) Find E total from 
, and show that the heat capacity
for this two-level system is

E

E

E

E

C ⫽ 冢 Nk B

2 冣冢 2p␧

k BT 冣2冢

e 2p␧/kBT

2e 2p␧/kBT )2 冣

(1 ⫹ 1

(f) Sketch C as a function of 2p␧/kBT. Find the value
of 2p␧/kBT at which C is a maximum, and explain, in
physical terms, the dependence of C on T.

8. Use the distribution function given in Exercise 10.1,

n(E ) dE ⫽

2␲(N/V )
(␲k BT )3/2 E 1/2e⫺E/kBT dE

to ﬁnd (a) the most probable kinetic energy of gas mol-
ecules at temperature T, (b) the mean kinetic energy at
T, and (c) the root mean square kinetic energy at T.

9. The  light  from  a  heated  atomic  gas  is  shifted  in  fre-
quency because of the random thermal motion of light-
emitting  atoms  toward  or  away  from  an  observer.  Esti-
mate the fractional Doppler shift (⌬f/f0), assuming that
light of frequency f0 is emitted in the rest frame of each
atom, that the light-emitting atoms are iron atoms in a
star at temperature 6000 K, and that the atoms are mov-
ing relative to an observer with the mean speed

v ⫽ ⫾√ 8k BT

␲m

Must we use the relativistic Doppler shift formulas

f ⫽ f0

√1 ⫾ v/c
√1 ⫿ v/c

for  this  calculation?  Such  thermal  Doppler  shifts  are
measurable  and  are  used  to  determine  stellar  surface
temperatures.

364

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

10.2 Under What Physical Conditions Do
Maxwell–Boltzmann Statistics Apply?
10. Helium  atoms  have  spin  0  and  are  therefore  bosons.
(a) Must we use the Bose–Einstein distribution at stan-
dard temperature and pressure to describe helium gas,
or  will  the  Maxwell–Boltzmann  distribution  sufﬁce?
(b) Helium  becomes  a  liquid  with  a  density  of
0.145 g/cm3 at  4.2 K  and  atmospheric  pressure.  Must
the  Bose–Einstein  distribution  be  used  in  this  case?
Explain.

10.3 Quantum Statistics
11. To  obtain  a  more  clearly  deﬁned  picture  of  the
Fermi–Dirac  distribution,  consider  a  system  of  20
Fermi–Dirac  particles  sharing  94  units  of  energy.  By
drawing  diagrams  like  Figure  P10.11,  show  that  there
are  nine  different  microstates.  Using  Equation  10.2,
calculate  and  plot  the  average  number  of  particles  in
each energy level from 0 to 14E. Locate the Fermi en-
ergy at 0 K on your plot from the fact that electrons at
0 K ﬁll  all  the  levels  consecutively  up  to  the  Fermi  en-
ergy.  (At  0 K  the  system  no  longer  has  94  units  of  en-
ergy, but has the minimum amount of 90E.)

15E

10E

5E

0

1 Microstate...8 others?

Figure  P10.11 One  of  the  nine  equally  probable  mi-
crostates for 20 FD particles with a total energy of 94E.

10.4 Bose–Einstein Statistics
12. (a) Find the average energy per photon for photons in
thermal  equilibrium  with  a  cavity  at  temperature  T.
(b) Calculate  the  average  photon  energy  in  electron
volts at T ⫽ 6000 K. Hint: Two useful integrals are

冕⬁

0

z2dz
e z ⫺ 1

⬇ 2.41  and  冕⬁

0

z3dz
e z ⫺ 1

⫽

␲4
15

13. (a) Show that the speciﬁc heat of any substance in the
Einstein  model  equals  5.48  cal/mol ⭈ K  at  T ⫽ TE.
(b) Using  this  result,  estimate  the  Einstein  tempera-
tures of lead, aluminum, and silicon from Figure 10.9.
(c) Using the temperatures found in part (b), calculate
the  Einstein  speciﬁc  heats  of  each  element  at  50-K
intervals  and  compare  with  the  experimental  results
shown  in  Figure  10.9.  You  may  wish  to  photocopy
Figure 10.9 and plot your calculated values on this ﬁg-
ure for easy comparison.

10.5 Fermi – Dirac Statistics
14. The Fermi energy of copper at 0 K is 7.05 eV. (a) What
is the average energy of a conduction electron in cop-
per at 0 K? (b) At what temperature would the average
energy  of  a  molecule  of  an  ideal  gas  equal  the  energy
obtained in (a)? (See Problem 16)

15. The Fermi energy of aluminum is 11.63 eV. (a) Assum-
ing that the free electron model applies to aluminum,
calculate the number of free electrons per unit volume
at low temperatures. (b) Determine the valence of alu-
minum by dividing the answer found in part (a) by the
number  of  aluminum  atoms  per  unit  volume  as  calcu-
lated from the density and the atomic weight. Note that
aluminum has a density of 2.70 g/cm3.

16. Show  that  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  a  conduction
electron in a metal at 0 K is given by  ⫽ 3EF/5. By way
of  contrast,  note  that  all of  the  molecules  in  an  ideal
gas at 0 K have zero energy! Hint: Use the standard deﬁn-
ition of an average given by

E

冕⬁

0

E ⫽

Eg(E )f FD(E ) dE

N/V

where E F is in electron volts when n is in electrons per
cubic meter.

1
2

17. Although  we  usually  apply  Fermi–Dirac  statistics  to  free
electrons  in  a  conductor,  Fermi–Dirac  statistics  apply  to
any system of spin  particles, including protons and neu-
trons  in  a  nucleus.  Since  protons  are  distinguishable
from  neutrons,  assume  that  each  set  of  nucleons  inde-
pendently  obeys  the  Fermi–Dirac  distribution  and  that
the  number  of  protons  equals  the  number  of  neutrons.
Using these ideas, estimate EF and 
for the nucleons in
Zn.  (Zn  has  30  protons,  34  neutrons,  and  a  radius  of
4.8 ⫻ 10⫺15 m.) Are your answers reasonable? Explain.

E

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

PROBLEMS

365

a

electron 

conduction 

27. Copper  has  a  Fermi  energy  of  7.05 eV  at  300 K
and
concentration  of
8.49 ⫻ 1028 m⫺3. Calculate and plot (a) the density of
states, g(E); versus E; (b) the particle distribution func-
tion, n(E),  as  a  function  of  energy  at  T ⫽ 0 K;  and
(c) the  particle  distribution  function  versus  E at
T ⫽ 1000 K.  Your  energy  scales  should  range  from
E ⫽ 0 to E ⫽ 10 eV.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

18. Show that Equation 10.44 can be expressed as

EF ⫽ (3.65 ⫻ 10⫺19)n2/3 eV

where EF is in electron volts when n is in electrons per
cubic meter.

19. Calculate the probability that a conduction electron in
copper  at  300 K  has  an  energy  equal  to  99%  of  the
Fermi energy.

20. Find  the  probability  that  a  conduction  electron  in  a
metal  has  an  energy  equal  to  the  Fermi  energy  at  the
temperature 300 K.

21. Sodium  is  a  monovalent  metal  having  a  density  of
0.971 g/cm3 and a molar mass of 23.0 g/mol. Use this
information to calculate (a) the density of charge carri-
ers, (b) the Fermi energy, and (c) the Fermi speed for
sodium.

22. Calculate the energy of a conduction electron in silver
at  800 K  if  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  the  electron  in
that state is 0.95. Assume that the Fermi energy for sil-
ver is 5.48 eV at this temperature.

23. Consider  a  cube  of  gold  1  mm  on  an  edge.  Calculate
the  approximate  number  of  conduction  electrons  in
this cube whose energies lie in the range from 4.000 to
4.025 eV at 300 K. Assume EF(300 K) ⫽ EF(0).

24. (a)  Consider  a  system  of  electrons  conﬁned  to  a
three-dimensional  box.  Calculate  the  ratio  of  the
number  of allowed  energy  levels  at  8.5 eV  to  the
number  of  allowed  energy  levels  at  7.0 eV.  (b)  Cop-
per  has  a  Fermi  energy  of  7.0 eV  at  300 K.  Calculate
the  ratio  of  the  number  of  occupied  levels  at  an  en-
ergy of 8.5 eV to the number of occupied levels at the
Fermi  energy.  Compare  your  answer  with  that  ob-
tained in part (a).

Calculator/Computer Problems
25. Consider  a  system  of  104 oxygen  molecules  per  cubic
centimeter  at  a  temperature  T.  Calculate  and  plot  a
graph  of  the  Maxwell  distribution,  n(v),  as  a  function
of v and T.  Use  your  program  to  evaluate  n(v)  for
speeds  ranging  from  v ⫽ 0  to  v ⫽ 2000 m/s  (in  inter-
vals  of  100 m/s)  at  temperatures  of  (a)  300 K  and
(b) 1000 K.  (c)  Make  graphs  of  n(v)  versus  v and  use
the  graph  at  T ⫽ 1000 K  to  estimate  the  number  of
molecules per cubic centimeter having speeds between
800  m/s  and  1000  m/s  at  T ⫽ 1000 K.  (d)  Calculate
and  indicate  on  each  graph  the  root  mean  square
speed, the average speed, and the most probable speed
(see Problem 2).

26. Graph  the  Fermi–Dirac  distribution  function,  Equa-
tion  10.25,  versus  energy.  Plot  f (E )  versus  E for  (a) 
T ⫽ 0.2TF and  (b)  T ⫽ 0.5TF,  where  TF is the  Fermi
temperature, deﬁned by Equation 10.45.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Essay

LASER MANIPULATION OF ATOMS

The  ability  to  control  charged  particles  at  a  distance  with  electric  and  magnetic

ﬁelds  has  led  to  an  enormous  number  of  advances  in  science  and  technology.
Applications include particle accelerators, x-ray sources, television, and vacuum
tubes.  Until  recently,  our  ability  to  control  the  motion  of  neutral  particles  has  been
much more limited. Usually, the device we use to hold an object such as the tips of your
ﬁngers  or  the  wall  of  a  bottle  do  not  exert  any  force  on  an  object  until  the  device  is
brought within a few atomic diameters of the object. Once the atoms at the surface of
your ﬁngers are atomically close to an object, the electrons on your ﬁnger are repelled
by the electrons of the object. The electric forces generated by this repulsion allow us
to grasp neutral objects.

In the last two decades, scientists have developed the ability to manipulate neutral par-
ticles,  such  as  atoms,  molecules,  and  micron-sized  particles.  This  new  ability  has  quickly
led to a wide number of applications, including the study of atom–atom interactions and
light–matter interactions in an entirely new regime, the production of new quantum states
of matter, and the construction of exquisitely accurate atomic clocks and accelerometers.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

LASER COOLING

The  revolution  in  the  control  of  neutral  atoms  is  based  on  the  ability  to  laser-cool
atoms to extremely low temperatures. How cold? The surface of the Sun (5000 K) is 18
times hotter than the freezing point of water and 1250 times hotter than the tempera-
ture at which helium liqueﬁes (4 K). By comparison, atoms have been cooled by lasers
to less than 10⫺9 K, a billion times colder than liquid helium temperatures.

The ﬁrst methods of laser cooling were simple. Since photons have momentum, light
can  exert  forces  on  atoms.  For  a  photon  of  frequency  f,  its  momentum  is  p␥ ⫽ E/c ⫽
hf/c. As an example, a sodium atom absorbing one quantum of yellow light at 589 nm
will  recoil  with  a  velocity  change  ⌬v ⫽ p␥/mNa ⫽ 3 cm/s.  Although  typical  atomic
speeds are on the order of 105 cm/s, laser light directed against a beam of atoms can be
used to slow the atoms down since a laser can induce over 107 photon absorptions per
second. Typically, atoms in a thermal beam can be stopped in a few milliseconds.

Atoms  absorb  light  only  if  the  laser  is  tuned  to  a  resonance  frequency.  An  atom
moving  toward  a  laser  beam  with  velocity  v will  experience  an  upward  Doppler  frac-
tional frequency shift given by ⌬f/f ⫽ v/c. Thus, an atom moving toward a laser beam
at 105 cm/s will be in resonance with the laser beam only if the light is tuned 1.7 GHz
below  the  atomic  resonance.  As  the  atom  slows  down,  the  laser  frequency  has  to  be
continuously increased in order to keep it in resonance.

Once the atoms are fairly cold, further laser cooling is accomplished by surround-
ing the atom with counterpropagating laser beams tuned slightly to the low-frequency
side of an atomic resonance as in Figure 1. The atoms absorb more photons from the
beam opposing its motion because of the Doppler shift, independent of the direction
of motion. By surrounding the atom with six laser beams, cooling in all three dimen-
sions  is  accomplished.  This  method  of  laser  cooling  was  ﬁrst  proposed  in  1975  by
Theodore Hänsch and Arthur Schawlow at Stanford University and ﬁrst demonstrated
by Steve Chu and his colleagues at AT&T Bell Labs in 1985. At that time, sodium atoms
were cooled from over 500 K to 240 ␮K. The sea of photons surrounding the atoms was
dubbed “optical molasses” because the light ﬁeld serves as a viscous damping medium
that slows the motion of the atoms.

As the atoms cool to temperatures at which the average Doppler shift is a small frac-
tion  of  the  resonance  linewidth,  the  differential  absorption,  and  hence  the  cooling

366

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

f L – ∆f D

v

Atom

f L + ∆f D

ESSAY

LASER MANIPULATION OF ATOMS

367

g
n
i
b
r
o
s
b
a
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

n
o
t
o
h
p
 
a

f L – ∆f D

f L

f L + ∆f D

Increasing
frequency

Figure  1 An  atom  irradiated  by  two  counterpropagating  laser  beams  tuned  to  fre-
quency f L will see frequencies f L ⫾ ⌬f D. If f L is tuned below the atomic resonance, the
atom will receive more photon momentum kicks from the beam opposing the motion.

force, decreases. An equilibrium temperature is reached when the cooling rate of opti-
cal molasses balances the heating rate due to the random absorption and reemission of
photons. For a simple atom consisting of one ground and one excited state separated
by ប␻,  the  minimum  equilibrium  temperature  was  calculated  to  be  kBT ⫽ ប␻/2.  In
1988, a NIST1 group at Gaithersburg, Maryland, led by William Phillips discovered that
atoms  could  be  cooled  in  optical  molasses  to  temperatures  far  below  this  theoretical
minimum temperature.

Jean  Dalibard  and  Claude  Cohen-Tannoudji  at  the  École  Normale  Supérieure,
and Steve  Chu,  now  at  Stanford,  realized  that  the  low  temperatures  were  due  to  the
interplay  between  several  physical  effects.  (1)  Atoms  with  nonzero  angular  momentum
have several Zeeman sublevels in the ground and excited states. (2) These Zeeman energy
levels shift with the presence of light by different amounts, depending on the strength of
the coupling of the atom to the light ﬁeld. If the laser is tuned below the resonance fre-
quency, the states are shifted to lower energy. (3) For a given polarization of the light ﬁeld,
the atom is preferentially driven into the quantum states with the lowest energy. (The pop-
ulation of speciﬁc Zeeman states due to polarized light is known as “optical pumping.” Al-
fred Kastler was awarded a Nobel prize in 1966 for his studies of this effect.)

Two counterpropagating laser beams with orthogonal linear polarization generate a
laser ﬁeld having spatially dependent polarization as in Figure 2. An atom in a region
in space where the light has positive helicity (␴⫹) will optically pump into a low-energy
ground state mF ⫽ ⫹F. If it then moves into a region of space where the light has nega-
tive  helicity  (␴⫺),  the  ⫹F state  becomes  the  highest-energy  ground  state.  The  kinetic
energy of the atom is thus converted into internal energy. This internal energy is dissi-
pated by the optical pumping effect, which drives the atom into the mF ⫽ ⫺F state, the
low-energy state for ␴⫺ light. In effect, the atom slows down as it rolls up a potential hill
created by the light shift of the atomic energy states. Near the top of the hill, the atom
optically pumps into the new low-energy state; that is, it ﬁnds itself at the bottom of a
new hill. Optical molasses with polarization gradients is sometimes referred to as Sisy-
phus cooling, after the mythical condemned man who faced the perpetual torment of
rolling a rock up a hill only to have it roll back down again. This cooling process has
cooled sodium atoms to 35 ␮K and cesium atoms to 3 ␮K.

Other laser cooling techniques that use a number of quantum coherence tricks and
that  are  given  exotic  names,  such  as  “coherent  population  trapping”  and  “stimulated

1National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

σ
+

Linearly
polarized

σ
–

λ

/8

λ

/8

(a)

–3/2 –1/2 +1/2

+3/2

–1/2

+1/2

(b)

Figure  2 (a)  Polarization  gra-
dients that result from the super-
position  of  orthogonal  linearly
polarized  light.  The  local  polar-
ization of the light changes from
positive helicity (␴⫹) to linear to
negative  helicity  polarization
(␴⫺)  in  a  distance ␭/4.  (b)  The
energy levels of an atom with an
F ⫽ 1/2  ground  state  and  an
F ⫽ 3/2  excited  state  irradiated
with  positive-helicity  light.  The
dashed  lines  show  the  allowed
spontaneous emission paths, and
the  dotted  lines  denote  the  en-
ergy levels in the absence of the
light  shifts.  Because  the  excita-
tion  light  is  always  trying  to  add
⫹ប unit  of  angular  momentum
to  the  atom,  repeated  excitation
and  spontaneous  emission  will
optically pump the atom into the
⫹1/2  ground  state.  The  light
shifts  are  greatly  exaggerated
with respect to the separation of
the  energy  levels.  (From  S.  Chu,
Science, 253:861 – 866, 1991).

368

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

Raman cooling,” have cooled atoms to temperatures in the nanokelvin range at which
the average speed is less than the speed change an atom experiences if it recoils from a
single  photon.  An  explanation  of  these  cooling  methods  can  be  found  in  the  articles
listed at the end of this essay.

Once atoms are cooled to low temperatures corresponding to speeds on the order
of 1 cm/s, they can be easily manipulated with light, as well as static magnetic or elec-
tric ﬁelds. For example, atoms cooled to microkelvin energies have been tossed upward
with light to form an atomic fountain. As they follow the ballistic trajectory dictated by
gravity, they are in a nearly perturbation-free environment, and very accurate measure-
ments of atomic energy level splittings are possible.

A fundamental limitation to the accuracy of any measurement is the Heisenberg un-
certainty principle, which states that the quantum measurement time ⌬t and the uncer-
tainty in the energy measurement ⌬E must be greater than  ប/2: ⌬E ⌬t ⱖ ប/2. For an
atom  in  an  atomic  beam  the  measurement  time  is  limited  by  the  transit  time  of  the
atom through the measuring device. With an atomic fountain, the measurement time
has been increased from a few milliseconds to roughly one second. This thousandfold
increase  in  the  measurement  time  will  undoubtedly  lead  to  more  accurate  atomic
clocks.  The  current  time  standard,  deﬁned  by  the  energy  level  splitting  between  two
ground states of the cesium atom, is accurate to one part in 1014.

Atomic fountains have also been used to construct atom interferometers. Similar to
an optical interferometer, the atom interferometer splits the atom into a superposition
of  two  coherent  states  that  separate  spatially  and  recombine  to  form  interference
fringes. Atom interferometers make extremely sensitive inertial sensors because of the
long transit time of the atoms through the device. The Stanford group has measured g,
the acceleration of an atom due to gravity, with a resolution of one part in 108 with an
atom  interferometer,  and  it  is  likely  that  the  uncertainty  will  be  reduced  to  less  than
one part in 1011. A portable version of this device could replace the mechanical “g” me-
ters now used in oil exploration. A low value of g could signify the presence of porous,
oil-laden rock, which has a lower density than solid rock.

ATOM TRAPPING

Atoms cooled below a millikelvin can also be held in space with either static magnetic
ﬁelds, laser ﬁelds, or a combination of a weak magnetic ﬁeld and circularly polarized
light. Atom traps have been used to accumulate a large number of laser-cooled atoms,
conﬁne them for further cooling, and use them for studies of atomic collisions at very
low temperatures.

A  magnetic  trap  exerts  forces  on  an  atom  via  the  atom’s  magnetic  moment.  The
potential energy of a magnetic dipole in a magnetic ﬁeld B is given by ⫺␮⭈ B, where ␮
is the magnetic moment, typically on the order of 1 ␮B. Atoms were ﬁrst magnetically
trapped  in  1985  by  the  NIST  group  with  a  “spherical  quadrupole  ﬁeld”  as  shown  in
Figure  3.  At  the  center  of  the  trapping  coils,  the B-ﬁeld  is  0  and  increases  linearly  as
one  moves  radially  outward.  An  atom  with  its  magnetic  dipole  aligned  antiparallel  to
the B-ﬁeld minimizes its energy by seeking regions where the ﬁeld magnitude is small-
est; that is, the atom experiences a force that drives it to the center of the trap. If the
atom moves slowly in the trap, it can remain aligned antiparallel to the magnetic ﬁeld,
even  if  the  ﬁeld  changes  direction.  Classically,  if  the  magnetic  moment  precesses
rapidly around a slowly changing magnetic ﬁeld, it continues to spin around a chang-
ing  ﬁeld  axis.  Quantum  mechanically,  the  state  of  the  atom  “adiabatically”  follows
external ﬁeld conditions that deﬁne that quantum state.

Atoms can also be held with a laser beam by using intense light tuned far from an
atomic  resonance  to  polarize  the  atom.  The  induced  dipole  moment  p on  the  atom
points in the same direction as the driving electric ﬁeld as long as the frequency of the
light  is  well  below  the  atomic  resonance  frequency.  Thus,  the  potential  energy  of  the

Magnetic field

coils

z

B = 0

y

x

Figure  3 A  spherical  quadru-
pole  trap  showing  some  of  the
magnetic  ﬁeld  lines  and  the  di-
rection  of  the  currents.  The
dashed  line  indicates  an  atom
moving in the trap with its mag-
netic  moment  (bright  colored
arrows)  remaining  antiparallel
to the ﬁeld lines.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

LASER MANIPULATION OF ATOMS

369

atom in the light ﬁeld, ⫺p ⴢ␧, causes the atom to seek regions of highest laser inten-
sity. The ﬁrst optical trap, demonstrated by the Bell Labs group in 1986, was based on a
single  focused  laser  beam.  Since  the  focal  point  of  a  laser  beam  can  be  easily  moved
with  mirrors  or  lenses,  this  trap  was  dubbed  “optical  tweezers.”  If  the  light  is  tuned
above  the  atomic  resonance,  an  atom  is  repelled  by  the  light.  A  box  of  light  formed
from focused sheets of light has also been used to trap atoms by the Stanford group. By
using  an  optical  microscope  to  focus  the  laser  light  and  simultaneously  observe  sam-
ples, this type of trap has also been used to manipulate particles, such as micron-sized
spheres, bacteria, and viruses and individual molecules of DNA in aqueous solution.

The most widely used atom trap, ﬁrst demonstrated at Bell Labs in 1987, uses a com-
bination of a weak spherical magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld and circularly polarized light.
The magnetic ﬁeld shifts the Zeeman energy levels of the atom as in Figure 4. When
illuminated with circularly polarized light, an atom to the right of the trap center will
predominately  scatter  ␴⫹ light,  and  atoms  left  of  center  will  scatter  more  ␴⫺ light.
Thus, the atoms are pushed to the trap center by the same scattering force used in the
ﬁrst laser cooling experiments. The advantage of this trap is that it combines laser trap-
ping  with  laser  cooling  and  needs  only  low-intensity  laser  light  and  weak  magnetic
ﬁelds.  Another  advantage  is  that  atoms  can  be  loaded  directly  inside  a  low-pressure
vapor cell without the initial slowing from an atomic beam. Over 1010 atoms can be col-
lected in a magneto-optic/cell trap in a few seconds.

+
σ

F –
σ

F +
σ

Atom

x

0

F –
σ

F +
σ

Atom

z

–
σ

y

B = B(z)k

mJ = –1 mJ = 0 mJ = +1

–σ

+
σ

–
σ

+
σ

–
σ

+
σ

J = 1

J = 0

B < 0

B = 0

B > 0

Figure 4 In a spherical quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld, the energy levels of an atom with
a J ⫽ 0  ground  state  and  a  J ⫽ 1  excited  state  will  be  shifted  in  energy  in  a  spatially
dependent way. For example, along the z-axis of the ﬁeld given in Figure 3, the B ﬁeld
is  positive  and  increases  linearly  along  the  ⫹z-axis.  It  reverses  direction  along  the
⫺z-axis. An atom irradiated by two counterpropagating beams tuned below the transi-
tion  frequency  as  in  optical  molasses  will  cool.  If  the  light  is  circularly  polarized  as
shown, the momentum exchange will also trap the atom by tending to force it to the
B ⫽ 0 region. Because ␴⫺ light excites the transition mJ ⫽ 0 : mJ ⫽ ⫺1, and ␴⫹ light
excites mJ ⫽ 0 : mJ ⫽ ⫹1,  the  ␴⫺ beam  is  slightly  more  in  resonance  with  an  atom
located  in  the  positive  z direction  than  the ␴⫹ light.  Consequently,  more ␴⫺ photons
than ␴⫹ photons are scattered by an atom in the ⫹z position.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

370

CHAPTER 10

STATISTICAL PHYSICS

 

BOSE–EINSTEIN CONDENSATION

Laser-cooled atoms in traps allow one to study atomic collisions in the new domain of
ultracold  temperatures.  At  very  low  temperatures,  the  atoms  will  no  longer  exhibit  a
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution of energies. Depending on whether a gas of atoms has
total  angular  momentum  0ប,  1ប,  2ប,  . . .  or  ប/2,  3ប/2,  5ប/2,  . . .  the  atoms  obey
either Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac statistics. One of the most dramatic quantum gas
effects predicted by Einstein should occur when the de Broglie wavelength ␭ ⫽ h/p of
Bose atoms is comparable to the interatomic spacing. At the critical phase space den-
sity of n␭3 ⫽ 2.612, where n is the density of atoms in the gas, a sizable fraction of the
atoms should begin to condense into a single quantum state.

In 1995, a group at the University of Colorado at Boulder led by Eric Cornell and
Carl Wieman veriﬁed this prediction for a gas of rubidium atoms by combining many
of  the  cooling  and  trapping  techniques  developed  in  the  previous  ten  years.  They
started  by  cooling  and  trapping  atoms  in  a  magneto-optic  trap.  Further  cooling  was
accomplished using optical molasses and Sisyphus cooling in the absence of a magnetic
ﬁeld. At this point, the phase space density of the atoms was increased above that of an
intense  thermal  atomic  beam  by  13  orders  of  magnitude.  The  atoms  were  then  opti-
cally pumped into a particular atomic Zeeman state and loaded into a magnetic trap.

The  spherical  quadrupole  magnetic  trap  they  used  was  modiﬁed  to  correct  a  known
ﬂaw  of  the  NIST  trap.  If  an  atom  in  the  trap  ventures  close  to  the  zero  magnetic  ﬁeld
point, the precession frequency of the atom goes to zero and its spin can no longer follow
the direction of the ﬁeld line. The spin could then ﬂip to become parallel to the ﬁeld and
hence antitrapped: the trap has a “hole” at its center. The Boulder group solved the prob-
lem by rotating the zero point of the magnetic ﬁeld with additional magnetic ﬁeld coils. If
the rotation frequency is made much faster than the atomic motion in the trap, the atoms
experience a time-averaged potential centered on the point of rotation. Since the hole ro-
tates outside of the ensemble of atoms, the atoms never see the hole.

The  ﬁnal  cooling  to  about  20 nK  was  accomplished  by  “evaporization”  from  the
magnetic  trap,  a  cooling  technique  ﬁrst  demonstrated  by  Harold  Hess,  Tom  Greytak,
Dan  Kleppner,  and  colleagues  at  MIT  in  1989.  Evaporization  allows  the  very  hottest
atoms  to  leave  the  sample,  thereby  reducing  the  average  energy  of  the  remaining
atoms. Collisions rethermalize the sample to produce more hot atoms, and as the evap-
orization proceeds, the evaporization barrier is lowered in order to continue the cool-
ing process. Using this technique, they were able to increase the phase space density by
another 5 orders of magnitude.

Figure  5  shows  the  velocity  distribution  of  a  cloud  of  about  2000  rubidium  atoms
cooled in the vicinity of the Bose condensation threshold. The real experimental difﬁ-
culty is to both cool and maintain sufﬁciently low density in the cloud (interatomic dis-
tance about 10⫺4 cm) to preserve the ideal gas character of the cloud, minimize inter-
atomic  forces,  and  prevent  liquifaction.  Just  above  the  required  phase  space  density,
the  atomic  energy  is  distributed  in  all  directions  equally  among  the  many  quantum
states, in accord with the equipartition theorem of statistical physics. As the threshold
condition  is  crossed,  a  central  peak  at  v ⫽ 0  begins  to  form,  signifying  the  onset  of  a
condensation.  With  further  cooling,  most  of  the  atoms  condense  into  the  ground
quantum state of the system. Since the trap potential is not spherically symmetrical, the
ground quantum state is also asymmetrical.

Once  the  atoms  are  in  a  Bose  condensate,  their  energy  is  deﬁned  in  terms  of  the
localization energy ⌬x ⌬p ⱖ ប/2. Since the atoms remain in the Bose condensate as the
conﬁning forces of the trap are relaxed, the effective temperature kBT/2 ⫽ 3⌬p2/2m
can be brought into the picokelvin range.

The  activity  in  laser  cooling  and  atom  trapping  has  exploded  into  many  areas  of
physics,  chemistry,  biology,  and  medicine.  One  of  the  joys  of  science  is  that  many  of
these  applications  were  not  foreseen  by  the  inventors  of  the  ﬁeld  in  the  early  days.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ESSAY

LASER MANIPULATION OF ATOMS

371

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Similarly, the applications of a Bose–Einstein condensate of atoms cannot be predicted.
Since  the  condensate  is  analogous  to  in-phase  photons  in  a  laser  cavity,  one  can,  in
principle,  construct  an  exquisitely  intense  beam  of  atoms  or  atom  laser.  Another
unforeseen  application  is  the  remarkable  slowing  and  stopping  of  light  pulses  in
a Bose–Einstein  condensate  of  sodium  atoms  ﬁrst  observed  in  2000  by  the  Danish-
American  physicist  Lene  Vestergaard  Hau.2 Since  all  of  the  information  content  in  a
light  pulse  slowed  in  a  BEC  is  recoverable  at  later  times,  this  effect  can  probably  be
used in opto-electronic components such as switches, memories, and delay lines.

This is indeed still an exciting time for physics.

Suggestions for Further Reading

For general reviews of cooling and trapping, see S. Chu, Sci. Am., February, 1992; and

S. Chu, Science, 253:861, 1991.

For  a  description  of  newer  methods  of  laser  cooling,  see  C.  Cohen-Tannoudji  and
W. D. Phillips, Phys. Today, 43:33, 1990. Raman cooling is described in M. Kasevich
and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 69:1741, 1992.

The  ﬁrst  Bose–Einstein  condensation  of  a  gas  is  described  in  M.  H.  Anderson,  J.  R.

Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E. Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, Science, 269:198, 1995.

2Hau et al., Nature, 18 February, 1999.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11
Molecular Structure

Chapter Outline

11.1 Bonding Mechanisms: 

11.4 Electron Sharing and the 

A Survey
Ionic Bonds
Covalent Bonds
van der Waals Bonds
The Hydrogen Bond

11.2 Molecular Rotation

and Vibration
Molecular Rotation
Molecular Vibration
11.3 Molecular Spectra

Covalent Bond
The Hydrogen Molecular Ion
The Hydrogen Molecule

11.5 Bonding in Complex Molecules

(Optional)

Summary
WEB APPENDIX: Overlap Integrals of

Atomic Wavefunctions

Except  for  the  inert  gases,  elements  generally  combine  to  form  chemical
compounds whose basic unit is the molecule, an aggregate of individual atoms
joined by chemical bonds. The physical and chemical properties of molecules
derive  from  their  constituent  atoms—their  arrangement,  the  manner  and
degree to which they interact, and their individual electronic structures.

The  properties  of  molecules  can  be  studied  experimentally  by  examining
their  spectra.  As  with  atoms,  a  molecule  can  emit  or  absorb  photons,  with
accompanying  electronic  transitions  among  the  allowed  energy  levels  of  the
molecule. The resulting emission or absorption spectrum is different for each
molecule and acts as a sort of ﬁngerprint of its electronic structure.

But molecules also emit or absorb energy in ways not found in atoms. Mole-
cules can rotate, storing energy in the form of kinetic energy of rotation, and
they can vibrate, and so possess energy of vibration. As we shall discover, both
the rotational and vibrational energies are quantized and so give rise to their
own unique spectra. It follows that molecular spectra are vastly more compli-
cated  than  atomic  spectra,  but  also  carry  a  good  deal  more  information.  In
particular,  the  vibration–rotation  spectrum  tells  us  how  the  individual  atoms
that form the molecule are arranged and the strength of their interaction.

In this chapter we shall describe the bonding mechanisms in molecules, the
various modes of molecular excitation, and the radiation emitted or absorbed

372

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.1

BONDING MECHANISMS: A SURVEY

373

by  molecules.  In  the  course  of  our  study  we  shall  encounter  the  quantum
origins  of  the  chemical  bond  and  discover  why  some  atoms  bond  to  form  a
molecule and others do not. Central to this inquiry are the roles played by the
exclusion  principle  and  tunneling,  nonclassical  ideas  that  underscore  the
importance of wave mechanics to the study of molecular structure.

11.1 BONDING MECHANISMS: A SURVEY

Two  atoms  combine  to  form  a  molecule  because  of  a  net  attractive  force  be-
tween them. Furthermore, the total energy of the bound molecule is less than
the  total  energy  of  the  separated  atoms;  the  energy  difference  is  the  energy
that must be supplied to break apart the molecule into its constituent atoms.

Fundamentally,  the  bonding  mechanisms  in  a  molecule  are  primarily  due
to electrostatic forces between atoms (or ions). When two atoms are separated
by an inﬁnite distance, the force between them is zero, as is their electrostatic
energy. As the atoms are brought closer together, both attractive and repulsive
forces  come  into  play.  At  very  large  separations,  the  dominant  forces  are
attractive  in  nature.  For  small  separations,  repulsive  forces  between  like
charges begin to dominate. The potential energy of the pair can be positive or
negative, depending on the separation between the atoms.

The total potential energy U of a system of two atoms often is approximated

by the expression

U ⫽ ⫺

A
r n ⫹

B
r m

where r is the internuclear separation distance between the two atoms, A and
B are constants associated with the attractive and repulsive forces, and n and m
are small integers. Figure 11.1 presents a sketch of the total potential energy

U(r)

Repulsive potential ∝ 1/r m

Total potential

0

r

Binding
energy

Attractive potential ∝ 1/r n

Equilibrium
separation

Figure 11.1 The total particle energy as a function of the internuclear separation for
a system of two atoms.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

374

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

versus  internuclear  separation  for  a  two-atom  system.  Note  that  the  potential
energy  for  large  separations  is  negative,  corresponding  to  a  net  attractive
force.  At  the  equilibrium  separation,  the  attractive  and  repulsive  forces  just
balance.  At  this  point,  the  potential  energy  has  its  minimum  value  and  the
slope of the curve is zero.

A complete description of the binding mechanisms in molecules is a highly
complex problem because bonding involves the mutual interactions of many
particles.  In  this  section  we  shall  discuss  some  simpliﬁed  models  in  order  of
decreasing  bond  strength:  the  ionic  bond,  the  covalent  bond,  the  van  der
Waals bond, and the hydrogen bond. 

Ionic Bonds
When two atoms combine in such a way that one or more electrons are trans-
ferred from one atom to the other, the bond formed is called an ionic bond.
Ionic  bonds  are  fundamentally  caused  by  the  Coulomb  attraction  between
oppositely charged ions. A familiar example of an ionically bonded molecule
is  sodium  chloride,  NaCl,  or  common  table  salt.  Sodium,  which  has  an  elec-
tronic  conﬁguration  1s 22s 22p 63s,  gives  up  its  3s valence  electron  to  form  a
Na⫹ ion. The energy required to ionize the atom to form Na⫹ is 5.1 eV. Chlo-
rine, which has an electronic conﬁguration 1s 22s 22p 5, is one electron short of
the  closed-shell  structure  of  argon.  Because  closed-shell  conﬁgurations  are
energetically  more  favorable,  the  Cl⫺ ion  is  more  stable  than  the  neutral
Cl atom.  The  energy  released  when  an  atom  takes  on  an  electron  is  the
electron  afﬁnity of  the  atom.  For  chlorine,  the  electron  afﬁnity  is  3.7 eV.
Therefore,  the  energy  required  to  form  Na⫹ and  Cl⫺ from  isolated  atoms  is
5.1 ⫺ 3.7 ⫽ 1.4 eV.  It  costs  5.1 eV  to  remove  the  electron  from  the  Na  atom
but you gain 3.7 eV of it back when that electron joins the Cl atom. The differ-
ence, in this case 1.4 eV, is called the activation energy of the molecule. As
the  ions  are  brought  closer  together,  their  mutual  energy  decreases  due  to
electrostatic  attraction.  At  sufﬁciently  small  separations,  the  energy  of  forma-
tion  becomes  negative,  indicating  that  the  ion  pair  now  is  energetically  pre-
ferred over neutral Na and Cl atoms.

The  total  energy  versus  internuclear  separation  for  Na⫹ and  Cl⫺ ions  is
sketched in Figure 11.2. At very large separation distances, the energy of the
system  of  ions  is  1.4 eV,  as  just  calculated.  The  total  energy  has  a  minimum
value of ⫺4.2 eV at the equilibrium separation of about 0.24 nm. This means
that  the  energy  required  to  break  the  Na⫹⫺Cl⫺ bond  and  form  neutral
sodium and chlorine atoms, called the dissociation energy, is 4.2 eV.

When the two ions are brought closer than 0.24 nm, the electrons in closed
shells begin to overlap, which results in a repulsion between the closed shells.
This repulsion is partly electrostatic in origin and partly a result of the identity
of electrons. Because they must obey the exclusion principle (Chapter 9), some
electrons  in  overlapping  shells  are  forced  into  higher  energy  states  and  the
system energy increases, as if there were a repulsive force between the ions.

Covalent Bonds
A covalent  bond between  two  atoms  is  one  in  which  electrons  supplied  by
either one or both atoms are shared by the two atoms. Many diatomic mole-
cules, such as H2, F2, and CO, owe their stability to covalent bonds. In the case

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Total energy (eV)

11.1

BONDING MECHANISMS: A SURVEY

375

4

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

–3

–4

Dissociation

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

4.2 eV

0.24 nm

Na+ + Cl –

Na + Cl

1.6

r (nm)

+

+

Figure  11.3 Classical  orbit
model  for  the  covalent  bond
formed  by  the  two  1s electrons
of the H2 molecule.

Figure  11.2 Total  energy  versus  the  internuclear  separation  for  Na⫹ and  Cl⫺ ions.
The energy required to separate the NaCl molecule into neutral atoms of Na and Cl is
the dissociation energy, 4.2 eV.

of  the  H2 molecule,  the  two  electrons  are  equally  shared  between  the  nuclei
and form a so-called molecular orbital. The two electrons are more likely to be
found  between  the  two  nuclei,  hence  the  electron  density  is  large  in  this
region. The formation of the molecular orbital from the s orbitals of the two
hydrogen atoms is represented in Figure 11.3. Because of the exclusion princi-
ple, the two electrons in the ground state of H2 must have antiparallel spins. If
a  third  H  atom  is  brought  near  the  H2 molecule,  the  third  electron  would
have to occupy a higher-energy quantum state because of the exclusion princi-
ple, which is an energetically unfavorable situation. Hence, the H3 molecule is
not stable and does not form. The stability of H2 and related species is exam-
ined in detail in Section 11.4.

More  complex  stable  molecules,  such  as  H2O,  CO2,  and  CH4,  are  also
formed  by  covalent  bonds.  Consider  methane,  CH4,  a  typical  organic  mole-
cule  shown  schematically  in  the  electron-sharing  diagram  of  Figure  11.4a.
Note  that  covalent  bonds  are  formed  between  the  carbon  atom  and  each  of
the  four  hydrogen  atoms.  The  spatial  electron  distribution  of  the  four  cova-
lent bonds is shown in Figure 11.4b. The four hydrogen nuclei are at the cor-
ners of a regular tetrahedron, with the carbon nucleus at the center.

van der Waals Bonds
Ionic  and  covalent  bonds  occur  between  atoms  to  form  molecules  or  ionic
solids, so that they can be described as bonds within molecules. Two additional
types  of  bonds,  van  der  Waals  bonds  and  hydrogen  bonds,  can  occur  between
molecules.

We might expect that two neutral molecules would not interact by means of
the  electric  force  because  they  each  have  zero  net  charge.  We  ﬁnd,  however,
that they are attracted to each other by weak electrostatic forces called van der
Waals  forces.  Likewise,  atoms  that  do  not  form  ionic  or  covalent  bonds  are
attracted  to  each  other  by  van  der  Waals  forces.  Inert  gases,  for  example,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

376

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

+

H

H

+

C

+6

H

+

H

C

H

H

+

H

(a)

H

(b)

Figure 11.4 (a) Classical orbit model for the four covalent bonds in the CH4 mole-
cule. (b) Quantum-mechanical picture of the spatial arrangement of the four covalent
bonds  of  the  CH4 molecule.  The  carbon  atom  is  at  the  center  of  a  tetrahedron  with
hydrogen atoms at its corners. The orbitals supplied by carbon are actually sp 3 hybrid
orbitals as explained at the end of Section 11.5. These orbitals have two lobes, and only
the larger lobes, which are shown here greatly narrowed for ease of depiction, partici-
pate  in  the  bonding.  Each  C ! H  bond  consists  of  an  overlapping  1s orbital  from  hy-
drogen and an sp 3 hybrid orbital from carbon. (Adapted from D. Ebbing, General Chem-
istry, 5th ed., Boston, Houghton Mifﬂin Co., 1996)

because  of  their  ﬁlled  shell  structure,  do  not  generally  form  molecules.
Because  of  van  der  Waals  forces,  however,  at  sufﬁciently  low  temperatures  at
which thermal excitations are negligible, inert gases ﬁrst condense to liquids
and  then  solidify  (with  the  exception  of  helium,  which  does  not  solidify  at
atmospheric  pressure).  The  van  der  Waals  force  arises  when  an  electrically
neutral molecule has centers of positive and negative charge that do not coin-
cide. As a result, the molecule constitutes an electric dipole. The interaction
between electric dipoles causes two molecules to attract one another.

There  are  three  types  of  van  der  Waals  forces,  which  we  shall  brieﬂy
describe.  The  ﬁrst  type,  called  the  dipole – dipole  force, is  an  interaction
between two molecules, each having a permanent electric dipole moment. For
example,  polar  molecules  such  as  HCl  and  H2O  have  permanent  electric
dipole  moments  and  attract  other  polar  molecules.  In  effect,  one  molecule
interacts with the electric ﬁeld produced by another molecule.

The second type, the dipole-induced force, results when a polar molecule
having  a  permanent  electric  dipole  moment  induces  a  dipole  moment  in  a
nonpolar  molecule.  In  this  case,  the  electric  ﬁeld  of  the  polar  molecule
creates the dipole moment in the nonpolar molecule, which then results in an
attractive force between the molecules.

The  third  type,  called  the  dispersion  force, is  an  attractive  force  that
occurs  between  two  nonpolar  molecules.  Although  the  average  dipole
moment  of  a  nonpolar  molecule  is  zero,  charge  ﬂuctuations  can  cause  two

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.2

MOLECULAR ROTATION AND VIBRATION

377

F –

F –

H+

Figure  11.5 Hydrogen  bond-
ing  in  the  (HF2)⫺ molecular
ion.  The  two  negative  ﬂuorine
ions are bound by the positively
charged proton between them.

nonpolar  molecules  near  each  other  to  have  dipole  moments  that  are  corre-
lated in time so as to produce an attractive van der Waals force.

Because all three types of van der Waals forces are dipolar in origin, they all
fall  off  with  separation  distance  r as  1/r 7;  however,  the  proportionality  con-
stant is different for each type.

The Hydrogen Bond
Because hydrogen has only one electron, it is expected to form a covalent bond
with only one other atom within a molecule. A hydrogen atom in a given mole-
cule can also form a second type of bond between molecules called a hydrogen
bond. One example of a hydrogen bond is the hydrogen diﬂuoride ion, (HF2)⫺,
shown in Figure 11.5. The two negative ﬂuorine ions are bound by the positively
charged  proton  between  them.  This  is  a  relatively  weak  chemical  bond,  with  a
binding energy of only about 0.1 eV. The water molecule, H2O, is another exam-
ple of a system that contains hydrogen bonds. In the two covalent bonds in this
molecule,  the  electrons  from  the  hydrogen  atoms  are  more  likely  to  be  found
near the oxygen atom than near the hydrogen atoms. This leaves essentially bare
protons at the positions of the hydrogen atoms. This unshielded positive charge
can be attracted to the negative end of another polar molecule. Because the pro-
ton is unshielded by electrons, the negative end of the other molecule can come
very close to the proton to form a bond that is strong enough to form a solid crys-
talline structure, such as that of ice. The bonds within a water molecule are cova-
lent, but the bonds between water molecules in ice are hydrogen bonds.

The  hydrogen  bond  is  relatively  weak  compared  with  other  chemical
bonds — it  can  be  broken  with  an  input  energy  of  about  0.1 eV.  Because  of
this, ice melts at the low temperature of 0⬚C. Despite the fact that this bond is
very weak, hydrogen bonding is a critical mechanism responsible for the link-
ing  of  biological  molecules  and  polymers.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the
DNA  (deoxyribonucleic  acid)  molecule,  which  has  a  double-helix  structure,
hydrogen bonds formed by the sharing of a proton between two atoms create
linkages between the turns of the helix.

11.2 MOLECULAR ROTATION AND VIBRATION

As is the case with atoms, we can study the structure and properties of mole-
cules  by  examining  the  radiation  they  emit  or  absorb.  Before  we  describe
these processes, it is important to ﬁrst understand the various ways of exciting
a molecule.

Consider an individual molecule in the gaseous phase of a substance. The
energy  of  the  molecule  can  be  divided  into  four  categories:  (1)  electronic
energy,  due  to  the  interactions  between  the  molecule’s  electrons  and  nuclei;
(2)  translational  energy,  due  to  the  motion  of  the  molecule’s  center  of  mass
through  space;  (3)  rotational  energy,  due  to  the  rotation  of  the  molecule
about its center of mass; and (4) vibrational energy, due to the vibration of the
molecule’s constituent atoms.

E ⫽ Eel ⫹ Etrans ⫹ Erot ⫹ Evib

Because the translational energy is unrelated to internal structure, this compo-
nent is unimportant in interpreting molecular spectra. The electronic energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

378

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

of  a  molecule  is  very  complex  because  it  involves  the  interaction  of  many
charged particles. Electronic energies are the subject of Section 11.4. Here we
concentrate  on  the  signiﬁcant  information  about  a  molecule  that  can  be
deduced  by  analyzing  its  rotational  and  vibrational  energy  states,  which  give
spectral lines in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Molecular Rotation
Let  us  consider  the  rotation  of  a  molecule  about  its  center  of  mass.  We
conﬁne our discussion to a diatomic molecule, although the same ideas can
be  extended  to  polyatomic  molecules.  As  shown  in  Figure  11.6a,  the
diatomic molecule has only 2 rotational degrees of freedom, corresponding
to  rotations  about  the  y-  and  z-axes,  that  is,  the  axes  perpendicular  to  the
molecular axis.1

The energy of a rigid rotating molecule is all kinetic. Let m1 and m2 denote
the  atomic  masses,  with  speeds  v1 and v 2.  For  a  molecule  in  rotation,  the
speeds v1 and v2 are interrelated. In terms of the angular velocity of rotation
␻, we have

v1 ⫽ ␻r1    and    v2 ⫽ ␻r2

z

m2

m1

x

r1

r2

(a)

y

E1 =

   2
h
2I

ᐉ

6

5

4

3

2

1
0

Rotational

energy

42E1

Energy

30E1

20E1

12E1

6E1

2E1
0

(b)

Figure  11.6 (a)  A  diatomic  molecule  oriented  along  the  x-axis  has  2  rotational
degrees  of  freedom,  corresponding  to  rotation  about  the  y-  and  z-axes.  (b)  Allowed
rotational energies of a diatomic molecule as calculated using Equation 11.5.

1The excitation energy for rotations about the molecular axis is so large that such modes are not
observable.  This  follows  because  nearly  all  the  molecular  mass  is  concentrated  within  nuclear
dimensions  of  the  rotation  axis,  giving  a  negligibly  small  moment  of  inertia  about  the  internu-
clear line (see Problem 12).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

where r1 is the distance of m1 from the axis of rotation and similarly for r 2 (see
Fig. 11.6a). The angular momentum of rotation about the z-axis is

11.2

MOLECULAR ROTATION AND VIBRATION

379

L ⫽ m1v1r1 ⫹ m2v2r2 ⫽ {m1r 1

2 ⫹ m2r 2

2}␻ ⫽ I␻

The  quantity  in  curly  brackets  {. . .}  is  the  moment  of  inertia,  denoted  I.  With
this identiﬁcation, the energy of rotation is
1 ⫹ 1

E rot ⫽ 1

2m 1v 2

2m 2v 2

2 ⫽ 1

2 I␻2

Eliminating ␻ from the preceding two equations gives the simple result

Erot ⫽

L2
2I

(11.1)

Rotational energy and
angular momentum

Comparing  Equation  11.1  with  the  kinetic  energy  of  a  particle  in  transla-
tion, p 2/2m, we see that the moment of inertia I of the molecule measures its
resistance to changes in rotation in the same way that the mass m of a single
particle  measures  its  resistance  to  changes  in  translation.  The  value  for  I
depends on the rotation axis, however. For the important case where the axis
of  rotation  passes  through  the  center  of  mass,2 we  have  m1r 1 ⫽ m 2r 2,  and  r1
and r 2 can be written in terms of the atomic separation R 0 ⫽ r1 ⫹ r 2 as

R 0 ⫽ 冢 m 2

m1

⫹ 1冣 r2 ⫽ 冢1 ⫹

m1

m 2 冣 r1

Then the moment of inertia about the center of mass, ICM, becomes

ICM ⫽ 冢 m1m 2

m1 ⫹ m 2 冣 R 0

2
2 ⬅ ␮R 0

where ␮ is the reduced mass of the molecule,

␮ ⫽

m1m2

m1 ⫹ m 2

(11.2)

(11.3)

Unlike  moment  of  inertia,  which  is  a  property  of  the  molecule,  angular
momentum L is a dynamical variable; in the transition to quantum mechanics,
L 2 becomes quantized. As shown in Chapter 8, the correct quantization rule is

L2 ⫽ ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2    ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2,  ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

(11.4)

which, in turn, restricts the energy of rotation to be one of the discrete values

Erot ⫽

ប2
2ICM

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)

(11.5)

Allowed energies for rotation

In  the  context  of  molecular  rotation,  the  integer  ᐉ is  called  the  rotational
quantum  number. Thus,  we  see  that  the  rotational  energy  of  the  mole-
cule is quantized and depends on the moment of inertia of the molecule.
The  allowed  rotational  energies  of  a  diatomic  molecule  are  sketched  in

2Since there is no axis about which the molecule is constrained to rotate, the correct axis for cal-
culating rotational energy is one passing through the center of mass. Energy associated with rota-
tion about any other axis would include some energy of translation, as well as energy of rotation.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

380

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

Table 11.1 Microwave Absorption Lines for Several Rotational

Transitions of the CO Molecule

Rotational Transition

Absorption Line (m)

Absorption Line (Hz)

Wavelength of

Frequency of

ᐉ ⫽ 0 : ᐉ ⫽ 1
ᐉ ⫽ 1 : ᐉ ⫽ 2
ᐉ ⫽ 2 : ᐉ ⫽ 3
ᐉ ⫽ 3 : ᐉ ⫽ 4

2.60 ⫻ 10⫺3
1.30 ⫻ 10⫺3
8.77 ⫻ 10⫺4
6.50 ⫻ 10⫺4

1.15 ⫻ 1011
2.30 ⫻ 1011
3.46 ⫻ 1011
4.61 ⫻ 1011

Figure 11.6b.  These  results  apply  also  to  polyatomic  molecules,  provided  the
appropriate generalization of I CM is used.

The  spacing  between  adjacent  rotational  levels  can  be  calculated  from

Equation 11.5:

∆E ⫽ Eᐉ ⫺ Eᐉ⫺ 1 ⫽

ប2
2ICM

 {ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) ⫺ (ᐉ ⫺ 1)ᐉ} ⫽

ប2
ICM

ᐉ

(11.6)

where ᐉ is the quantum number of the higher energy state. In going from one
rotational state to the next, the molecule loses (or gains) energy, ⌬E. The loss
(or  gain)  typically  is  accompanied  by  photon  emission  (or  absorption)  at
the frequency ␻ ⫽ ⌬E/ប.  Thus,  photons  should  be  observed  at  the  frequen-
cies ␻0 ⫽ ប/ICM,  2␻0, 3␻0, . . . .  These  predictions  are  in  excellent  agree-
ment  with  experiment.3 The  wavelengths  and  frequencies  for  the  absorption
spectrum of the CO molecule are given in Table 11.1. The lowest frequencies
lie in the microwave range of the electromagnetic spectrum, as is typical of the
rotational spectra of all molecules. This indicates that the energy required to
excite a molecule into rotation is quite small, on the order of 10⫺4 eV. From
the data, one can deduce the moment of inertia and the bond length of the
molecule, as shown in the following example.

EXAMPLE 11.1 Rotation of the CO Molecule

The ᐉ ⫽ 0 to ᐉ ⫽ 1 rotational transition of the CO mole-
cule occurs at a frequency of 1.15 ⫻ 1011 Hz. (a) Use this
information  to  calculate  the  moment  of  inertia  of  the
molecule about its center of mass.

Solution From  Equation  11.6,  we  see  that  the  energy
difference between the  ᐉ ⫽ 0 and  ᐉ ⫽ 1 rotational levels
is ប2/I CM.  Equating  this  to  the  energy  of  the  absorbed
photon, we get

ប2
ICM

⫽ ប␻

so that ICM becomes

ICM ⫽

ប

␻

⫽

1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s
7.23 ⫻ 1011 rad/s

⫽ 1.46 ⫻ 10⫺46 kg ⭈m2

(b) Calculate the bond length of the molecule.

Solution Equation  11.2  can  be  used  to  calculate  the
bond  length  once  the  reduced  mass  of  the  molecule  is
found.  Since  the  carbon  and  oxygen  atomic  masses  are
12.0 u  and  16.0 u,  respectively,  the  reduced  mass  of  the
CO molecule is, from Equation 11.3,

The angular frequency ␻ of the absorbed radiation is

␻ ⫽ 2␲f ⫽ 2␲(1.15 ⫻ 1011 Hz) ⫽ 7.23 ⫻ 1011 rad/s

␮ ⫽

(12.0 u)(16.0 u)
12.0 u ⫹ 16.0 u

⫽ 6.857 u

⫽ 1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg

3These simple statements must be reﬁned when molecular vibration is taken into account, as dis-
cussed in Section 11.3.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.2

MOLECULAR ROTATION AND VIBRATION

381

where  the  conversion  1 u ⫽ 1.66 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg  has  been
used. Then

This  example  hints  at  the  immense  power  of  spectro-
scopic measurements to determine molecular properties!

R 0 ⫽ √ ICM

␮

⫽ √ 1.46 ⫻ 10⫺46 kg ⭈m2

1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg

⫽ 1.13 ⫻ 10⫺10 m ⫽ 0.113 nm

Molecular Vibration
A  molecule  is  a  ﬂexible  structure  whose  atoms  are  bonded  together  by  what
can  be  considered  “effective  springs.”  If  disturbed,  the  molecule  can  vibrate,
taking  on  vibrational  energy.  This  energy  of  vibration  may  be  altered  if  the
molecule is exposed to radiation of the proper frequency.

Consider  again  a  diatomic  molecule.  The  potential  energy  U(r)  versus
atomic separation r for such a molecule is sketched in Figure 11.7a. The equi-
librium  separation  of  the  atoms  is  denoted  there  by  R 0;  for  small  displace-
ments  from  equilibrium,  the  atoms  vibrate,  as  if  connected  by  a  spring  with
unstretched  length  R 0 and  force  constant  K (Fig.  11.7b).4 Atomic  displace-
ments in the direction of the molecular axis give rise to oscillations along the
line  joining  the  atoms.  For  these  longitudinal vibrations,  the  system  is  effec-
tively one-dimensional, with the coordinates of each atom measured along the
molecular axis.

We denote by ␰1 and ␰2 the displacements from equilibrium of m1 and m 2,
respectively. In terms of these displacements, the effective spring is stretched a
net amount ␰1 ⫺ ␰2, and the elastic energy of the two-atom pair is

U ⫽ 1

2 K (␰1 ⫺ ␰2)2

Harmonic approximation to
molecular vibration

U(r )

R 0

r

(a)

m1

m2

K

r

(b)

Figure 11.7 (a) A plot of the potential energy of a diatomic molecule versus atomic
separation. The parameter R 0 is the equilibrium separation of the atoms. (b) Model of
a diatomic molecule whose atoms are bonded by an effective spring of force constant
K. The fundamental vibration is along the molecular axis.

4In Section 6.6 of Chapter 6 we showed that the effective force constant K is given by the curva-
ture of U(r) evaluated at the equilibrium separation R 0; that is, 

K ⫽ ⭸2U/⭸r 2兩R 0
.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

382

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

2/2m1) ⫹ (p 2

2/2m 2), but some of this rep-
The kinetic energy of the pair is (p 1
resents translational energy for the molecule as a whole. To isolate the vibra-
tional component, we examine the problem in the center-of-mass (CM) frame,
where the total momentum of the molecule is zero. In the CM, the atomic mo-
menta  are  equal  in  magnitude  but  oppositely  directed — that  is,  p2 ⫽ ⫺p1 —
and the kinetic energy (now of vibration only) is simply

KE vib ⫽ p 2

1 冢 1

2m 1

⫹

1

2m 2 冣 ⫽

2
p 1
2␮

where ␮ is again the reduced mass deﬁned in Equation 11.3.

The  preceding  relations  describe  a  one-dimensional  oscillator  with  vibra-

tion coordinate ␰ ⫽ ␰1 ⫺ ␰2. The Schrödinger equation for this case is

⫺

ប2
2␮

d 2␺
d␰2 ⫹ 1

2 K␰2␺(␰) ⫽ Evib␺(␰)

(11.7)

which is that for the quantum oscillator studied in Chapter 6, with x there re-
placed  by ␰.  The  allowed  energies  of  vibration  are  the  oscillator  levels  (com-
pare Equation 6.29),

Allowed energies for
vibration

E vib ⫽ (v ⫹ 1

2)ប␻

v ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . .

(11.8)

where v is an integer called the vibrational quantum number. The angular
frequency ␻ is the classical frequency of vibration and is related to the force
constant K by

K ⫽ ␮␻2

(11.9)

In  the  lowest  vibrational  state,  v ⫽ 0,  we  ﬁnd  E vib ⫽ ប␻,  the  so-called  zero-
point  energy.  The  accompanying  vibration — the  zero-point  motion — is  pre-
sent  even  when  the  molecule  is  not  excited.  From  Equation  11.8  we  see  also
that the energy difference between any two successive vibrational levels is the
same and is given by ⌬E vib ⫽ ប␻. A typical value for ⌬E vib can be found from
the entries in Table 11.2 and turns out to be about 0.3 eV.

1
2

An energy level diagram for the vibrational energies of a diatomic molecule
is given in Figure 11.8. Normally, most molecules are in the lowest energy state
because  the  thermal  energy  at  ordinary  temperatures  (kBT ⬇ 0.025 eV)  is
insufﬁcient  to  excite  the  molecule  to  the  next  available  vibrational  state.

Table 11.2 Fundamental Vibrational Frequencies and Effective

Force Constants for Some Diatomic Molecules

Molecule

Frequency (Hz), v ⴝ 0 to v ⴝ 1

Force Constant (N/m)

v

5

4

3

2

1

0

∆E

Vibrational

energy
hω

11––
2

hω

hω

hω

hω

ω

h

9–
2

7–
2

5–
2

3–
2

1–
2

Energy

Figure  11.8 Allowed  vibra-
tional  energies  of  a  diatomic
molecule, where ␻ is the funda-
mental  frequency  of  vibration 
given  by 
.  Note  that
the  spacings  between  adjacent
vibrational levels are equal.

␻ ⫽ √K/␮

HF
HCl
HBr
HI
CO
NO

8.72 ⫻ 1013
8.66 ⫻ 1013
7.68 ⫻ 1013
6.69 ⫻ 1013
6.42 ⫻ 1013
5.63 ⫻ 1013

970
480
410
320
1860
1530

From G. M. Barrows, The Structure of Molecules, New York, W. A. Benjamin, 1963.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.2

MOLECULAR ROTATION AND VIBRATION

383

Electromagnetic  radiation,  however,  can  stimulate  transitions  to  the  ﬁrst
excited level. Such a transition would be accompanied by the absorption of a
photon  to  conserve  energy.  Once  excited,  the  molecule  can  return  to  the
lower vibrational state by emitting a photon of the same energy. For molecular
vibrations,  photon  absorption  and  emission  occur  in  the  infrared  region  of
the spectrum. Absorption frequencies for the v ⫽ 0 to v ⫽ 1 transitions of sev-
eral  diatomic  molecules  are  listed  in  Table  11.2,  together  with  the  effective
force constants K calculated from Equation 11.9. Since larger force constants
describe stiffer springs, K indicates the strength of the molecular bond. Notice
that  the  CO  molecule,  which  is  bonded  by  several  electrons,  is  much  more
rigid than such single-bonded molecules as HCl.

EXAMPLE 11.2 Vibration of the CO Molecule

The  CO  molecule  shows  a  strong  absorption  line  at  the
frequency  6.42 ⫻ 1013 Hz.  (a)  Calculate  the  effective
force constant for this molecule.

Thus, infrared spectroscopy furnishes useful information
on the elastic properties (bond strengths) of molecules.

(b)  What  is  the  classical  amplitude  of  vibration  for  a

Solution The  absorption  process  is  accompanied  by
a molecular  transition  from  the  v ⫽ 0  to  the  v ⫽ 1
vibrational  level.  Since  the  energy  difference  between
these  levels  is  ⌬E vib ⫽ ប␻,  the  absorbed  photon  must
have  carried  this  much  energy.  It  follows  that  the
photon  frequency  is  just  ⌬E vib/ប ⫽ ␻,  the  frequency
of the  CO  oscillator!  From  the  information  given,  we
calculate

␻ ⫽ 2␲f ⫽ 2␲(6.42 ⫻ 1013) ⫽ 4.03 ⫻ 1014 rad/s

Using  12.0 u  and  16.0 u  for  the  carbon  and  oxygen
atomic  masses,  we  ﬁnd  ␮ ⫽ 6.857 u ⫽ 1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg,
as in Example 11.1. Then

K ⫽ ␮␻2 ⫽ (1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26)(4.03 ⫻ 1014)2

⫽ 1.86 ⫻ 103 N/m

CO molecule in the v ⫽ 0 vibrational state?

Solution The total vibrational energy for the molecule is
E vib ⫽ ប␻. At maximum displacement, the CO molecule
has transformed all this into elastic energy of the spring,

1
2

2 ប␻ ⫽ 1
1

2 KA2

where A is  the  vibration  amplitude.  Using  K ⫽ ␮␻2 and
␮ ⫽ 1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg, we get

A ⫽ 冢 ប

␮␻冣1/2

⫽ 冦

1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34

(1.14 ⫻ 10⫺26)(4.03 ⫻ 1014)冧1/2

⫽ 4.79 ⫻ 10⫺12 m ⫽ 0.00479 nm

Comparing this with the bond length of 0.113 nm, we see
that  the  vibration  amplitude  is  only  about  4%  of  the
bond length.

Exercise 1 Compare the effective force constant for the CO molecule deduced here
with  that  of  an  ordinary  laboratory  spring  that  stretches  0.5 m  when  a  1.0 kg  mass  is
suspended from it.
Answer 1.86 ⫻ 103 N/m  for  the  molecule  versus  only  19.6 N/m  for  the  laboratory
spring.

A  proper  treatment  of  molecular  rotation  and  vibration  should  begin
with  Schrödinger’s  wave  equation  in  three  dimensions.  However,  because
such  problems  involve  many  particles,  approximation  methods  are  neces-
sary. For diatomic molecules, the particle mass m is replaced by the reduced
mass ␮ of  the  system,  and  the  potential  U(r)  describes  the  interaction
between atoms. Since the force between atoms depends only on their sepa-
ration, U is  spherically  symmetric,  and  the  wavefunctions  are  just  spherical

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

384

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

mᐉ(␪, ␾)

Y ᐉ

harmonics, 
,  multiplied  by  solutions,  R(r ),  to  the  radial  wave
equation  (Section  8.2).  In  this  context,  the  angular  momentum  quantum
numbers ᐉ and mᐉ specify  the  rotational  state  of  the  molecule.  Molecular
vibration  is  described  by  the  radial  wave  R(r )  and  reflects  the  choice  of
interatomic  potential  U(r ).  Near  equilibrium,  U(r )  closely  resembles  the
potential  of  a  spring,  leading  to  vibrational  energies  characteristic  of  the
quantum oscillator.

Anharmonic effects

In  actuality,  the  atoms  of  a  molecule  exert  complicated  forces  on  one
another;  these  forces  are  harmonic  only  when  the  atoms  are  close  to  their
equilibrium positions. More vibrational energy implies larger vibration ampli-
tude, and with it a breakdown of the harmonic approximation — the effective
spring must give way to a more accurate representation of the true interatomic
force.  One  way  to  do  this  consists  of  replacing  the  harmonic  potential  K␰2
in Equation 11.7 with the Morse potential shown in Figure 11.9a. Near equi-
librium (r ⫽ R 0) the Morse potential is harmonic; further away, U(r ) mimics
the  asymmetry  characteristic  of  interatomic  forces,  becoming  zero  when
the atoms are widely separated (r : ⬁) but rising sharply as the atoms come
close together. In consequence, oscillations take place about an average posi-
tion 具r典 that increases with the energy of vibration. This is the origin of thermal
expansion, in which the increased vibrational energy results from raising the
temperature of the sample. Unlike the harmonic oscillator, the interval sepa-
rating  successive  levels  of  the  Morse  oscillator  diminishes  steadily  at  higher
energies,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  11.9b.  The  Morse  oscillator  is  explored  fur-
ther in Problems 14 – 17.

1
2

Energy

U(r )

v

10

8

6
5
4
3
2

1

0

Energy

0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

r

R0

Internuclear separation

(a)

(b)

Figure  11.9 (a)  Potential  energy  U(r)  for  the  Morse  oscillator.  In  the  equilibrium
region around R 0, U(r) is harmonic, but rises sharply as the atoms are brought closer
together. (b) Allowed energies of vibration for the Morse oscillator. Notice that the sep-
aration between adjacent levels decreases with increasing energy.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.3 MOLECULAR SPECTRA

In general, a molecule rotates and vibrates simultaneously. To a ﬁrst approxi-
mation, these motions are independent of each other and the total rotational
and vibrational energy of the molecule is given by the sum of Equations 11.5
and 11.8:

11.3

MOLECULAR SPECTRA

385

Erot⫺vib ⫽

ប2
2ICM

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1) ⫹ (v ⫹ 1

2)ប␻

(11.10)

Rotation – vibration spectrum
of a diatomic molecule

2
1
ᐉ = 0

5

4

3
2
1
ᐉ = 0

5

4

3
2
1
ᐉ = 0

v = 2

v = 1

v = 0

Figure  11.10 The  rotation –
vibration levels for a typical mol-
ecule.  Note  that  the  vibrational
levels  are  separated  by  much
larger  energies  so  that  a  com-
plete rotational spectrum can be
associated  with  each  vibrational
level.

The levels prescribed by Equation 11.10 constitute the simplest approximation
to  the rotation – vibration  spectrum of  any  molecule.  Each  level  is  indexed
by  the  two quantum  numbers  ᐉ and v,  specifying  the  state  of  rotation  and
vibration,  respectively.  For  each  allowed  value  of  the  vibrational  quantum
number v, there is a complete set of rotational levels, corresponding to ᐉ ⫽ 0,
1,  2, . . .  .  Since  successive  rotational  levels  are  separated  by  energies  much
smaller than the vibrational energy ប␻, the rotation – vibration levels of a typi-
cal molecule appear as shown in Figure 11.10. Normally, the molecule would
take on the conﬁguration with lowest energy, in this case the one designated
by v ⫽ 0 and ᐉ ⫽ 0. External inﬂuences, such as temperature or the presence
of  electromagnetic  radiation,  can  change  the  molecular  condition,  resulting
in  a  transition  from  one  rotation – vibration  level  to  another.  The  attendant
change in molecular energy must be compensated by absorption or emission
of energy in some other form. When electromagnetic radiation is involved, the
transitions — referred to as optical transitions — are subject to other conser-
vation laws as well, since photons carry both momentum and energy.

Any  optical  transition  between  molecular  levels  with  energies  E1 and E 2

must be accompanied by photon emission or absorption at the frequency

f ⫽

兩 E2 ⫺ E1 兩

h

    or    ⌬E ⫽ ⫾hf

(11.11)

Because hf is the photon energy, this is energy conservation for the system of mol-
ecule plus photon. Equation 11.11 expresses a kind of resonance between the two;
unless  photons  of  the  correct  frequency  (energy)  are  available,  no  transition  is
possible. Similar restrictions apply to other quantities that we know must be con-
served in the process of transition. In particular, the initial and ﬁnal states for an
optical transition also must differ by exactly one angular momentum unit:

兩 ᐉ

2 ⫺ ᐉ

1 兩 ⫽ 1    or    ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1

(11.12)

The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  Equation  11.12  is  that  the  photon  carries
angular momentum in the amount of ប, that is, the photon is a spin 1 particle
with  spin  quantum  number  s ⫽ 1.  Equation  11.12  then  expresses  angular
momentum  conservation  for  the  system  molecule  plus  photon.  Equations
11.11 and 11.12 are the selection rules for optical transitions.

For the lower vibrational levels, there is also a restriction on the vibrational

quantum number v:

兩 v2 ⫺ v1 兩 ⫽ 1    or    ⌬v ⫽ ⫾1

(11.13)

Equation 11.13 reﬂects the harmonic character of the interatomic force rather
than any photon property; indeed, for higher vibrational energies the concept

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

386

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

of  an  effective  spring  joining  the  atoms  is  inaccurate,  and  Equation  11.13
ceases to be valid.

Selection rules greatly restrict the number of photon frequencies or wave-
lengths observed in molecular spectra, since transitions are prohibited unless
all rules are obeyed simultaneously.5 For instance, a pure rotational transition
normally  would  not  be  observed,  since  this  requires  ⌬v ⫽ 0  in  violation  of
Equation 11.13. In the same way, a pure vibrational transition (⌬ᐉ ⫽ 0) is for-
bidden, and we conclude that optical transitions usually involve both molecu-
lar vibration and rotation.

The  spectrum  of  a  particular  molecule  can  be  predicted  by  considering  a
collection  of  such  molecules,  initially  undisturbed.  At  ordinary  temperatures
there  is  insufﬁcient  thermal  energy  to  excite  any  but  the  v ⫽ 0  vibrational
mode,  although  the  molecules  will  be  in  various  states  of  rotation.  Since  a
pure  rotational  transition  is  forbidden,  optical  absorption  must  result  from
transitions in which v increases by one unit but ᐉ either increases or decreases,
also  by  one  unit  (Figure  11.11a).  Therefore,  the  molecular  absorption
spectrum  consists  of  two  sequences  of  lines,  represented  by  ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1,  with
⌬v ⫽ ⫹1 for both cases. The energies of the absorbed photons are readily cal-
culated from Equation 11.14:

⌬E ⫽ ប␻ ⫹

⌬E ⫽ ប␻ ⫺

ប2
ICM
ប2
ICM

 (ᐉ ⫹ 1)

ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, . . .

(⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫹1)

(11.14)

ᐉ

ᐉ ⫽ 1, 2, . . .

(⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫺1)

Here ᐉ is the rotational quantum number of the initial state. The ﬁrst of Equa-
tions 11.14 generates a series of equally spaced lines at frequencies above the
characteristic  vibration  frequency ␻,  and  the  second  generates  a  series  below
this frequency. Adjacent lines are separated in (angular) frequency by the fun-
damental unit ប/I CM. Notice that ␻ itself is excluded, since ᐉ cannot be zero if
the  transition  is  one  for  which  ᐉ decreases  (⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫺1).  Figure  11.11b  shows
the expected frequencies in the absorption spectrum for the molecule; these
same frequencies appear in the emission spectrum.

The  absorption  spectrum  of  the  HCl  molecule  shown  in  Figure  11.12  fol-
lows this pattern very well and reinforces our model. However, one peculiarity
is  apparent:  Each  line  in  the  HCl  spectrum  is  split  into  a  doublet.  This  dou-
bling occurs because the sample is a mixture of two chlorine isotopes, 35Cl and
37Cl,  whose  different  masses  give  rise  to  two  distinct  values  for  ICM.  Notice,
too, that not all spectral lines appear with the same intensity, because even the
allowed transitions occur at different rates (number of photons absorbed per
second). Transition rates are governed chieﬂy by the populations of the initial
and  ﬁnal  states,  and  these  depend  on  the  degeneracy  of  the  levels  as  well  as
the temperature of the system.

5The selection rules given are for harmonic oscillations and rotations of a rigid rotor. In practice,
violations  of  these  rules  are  observed  for  predictable  reasons,  such  as  anharmonicity  or 
rotation – vibration coupling.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

ᐉ = 4

ᐉ = 3

ᐉ = 2
ᐉ = 1
ᐉ = 0

ᐉ = 4

ᐉ = 3

ᐉ = 2
ᐉ = 1
ᐉ = 0

v = 1

v = 0

∆ᐉ = –1

∆ᐉ = +1

(a)

h
——
ICM

Photon frequency

(b)

Figure  11.11 (a)  Absorptive  transitions  between  the  v ⫽ 0  and  v ⫽ 1  vibrational
states of a diatomic molecule. The transitions obey the selection rule ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1 and fall
into two sequences: those for which ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫹1 and those for which ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫺1. The transi-
tion energies are given by Equation 11.14. (b) Expected lines in the optical absorption
spectrum of a molecule. The lines on the right side of center correspond to transitions
in which ᐉ changes by ⫹1, and the lines to the left of center correspond to transitions
for which ᐉ changes by ⫺1. These same lines appear in the emission spectrum.

8.00

8.20

8.40

8.60

8.80

9.00

9.20 × 1013

Hz

Frequency

Figure 11.12 The absorption spectrum of the HCl molecule. Each line is split into a
doublet because chlorine has two isotopes, 35Cl and 37Cl, which have different nuclear
masses. (This is an adaptation of data taken by T. Faulkner and T. Nestrick at Oakland
University, Rochester, MI.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

387

388

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

The  excitation  of  rotational  and  vibrational  energy  levels  is  an  important
consideration in current models of global warming. For CO2 molecules, most
of the absorption lines are in the infrared portion of the spectrum. Thus, visi-
ble light from the Sun is not absorbed by atmospheric CO2 but instead strikes
the  Earth’s  surface,  warming  it.  In  turn,  the  surface  of  the  Earth,  being  at  a
much lower temperature than the Sun, emits thermal radiation that peaks in
the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. This infrared radiation
is absorbed by the CO2 molecules in the air instead of radiating out into space.
Thus, atmospheric CO2 acts like a one-way valve for energy from the Sun and
is  responsible,  along  with  some  other  atmospheric  molecules,  for  raising  the
temperature of the Earth’s surface above its value in the absence of an atmos-
phere.  This  phenomenon  is  commonly  called  the  “greenhouse  effect.”  The
burning  of  fossil  fuels  in  today’s  industrialized  society  adds  more  CO2 to  the
atmosphere.  Many  scientists  fear  that  this  will  increase  the  absorption  of
infrared radiation, raising the Earth’s temperature further, and may cause sub-
stantial climatic changes.

Finally,  we  note  that  molecules,  like  atoms,  often  simply  scatter radiation,
without  having  ﬁrst  to  absorb  and  later  re-emit  it.  (Indeed,  photons  of  any
energy  can  be  scattered,  so  no  resonance  is  involved.)  In  Rayleigh  scatter-
ing, the  photon  energy  is  unchanged  by  the  collision.  Rayleigh  scattering  is
stronger at shorter photon wavelengths, and it is this selectivity in the scatter-
ing that accounts for the blue color of the daytime sky. But Raman scattering
also can occur, with the photon losing — or even gaining — energy in the colli-
sion.  (Sir  Chandrasekhara  V.  Raman,  Indian  physicist,  1888 – 1970,  received
the 1930 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the scattering of light and the
effect  that  bears  his  name.)  Because  the  photon  energy  changes,  the  Raman
effect is an example of an inelastic process. For such processes, energy is still
conserved overall, with the photon energy loss or gain compensated by a suit-
able change in the rotational and/or vibrational state of the molecule. Where
rotation  is  involved,  the  energy  exchanged  in  Raman  scattering  is  consistent
with the selection rule ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾2. Figure 11.13 depicts a typical Raman process

⌬E ⫽

h2
ICM

(2ᐉ ⫹ 3)

Eel

 ⫹

h2

2ICM

(ᐉ ⫹ 2)(ᐉ ⫹ 3)

Incident photon

E

Eel

 ⫹

h2

2ICM

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)

Raman scattered photon

E ⬘

Figure  11.13 An  illustration  of  Raman  scattering.  In  this  case  an  incoming  photon
with  energy  E scatters  from  a  molecule  and  emerges  with  reduced  energy  E ⬘.  The
energy  lost  by  the  photon  increases  the  rotational  energy  of  the  molecule  in  accor-
dance with the selection rule ⌬ᐉ ⫽ 2. The energy loss translates into a change in pho-
ton frequency, the Raman shift, that can be used to probe molecular structure.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

11.3

MOLECULAR SPECTRA

389

 

where  an  incoming  photon  with  energy  E is  scattered  and  emerges  with  a
reduced  energy  E ⬘,  the  difference  being  expended  to  excite  a  higher  rota-
tional state of the molecule. The excitation energy ⌬E is found from Equation
11.10 using ᐉ, v for the quantum numbers of the initial state and ᐉ ⫹ 2, v for
those of the ﬁnal state (⌬ᐉ ⫽ 2, ⌬v ⫽ 0). The scattered photon has lower fre-
quency f ⬘ compared to the original; the Raman shift f ⫺ f ⬘ is just the excita-
tion energy ⌬E divided by h, or

f ⫺ f ⬘ ⫽

ប

2␲ICM

 (2ᐉ ⫹ 3)

(11.15)

Raman shift

Measurements of the Raman shift can be used to determine the moment of in-
ertia  of  the  molecule,  which  furnishes  important  clues  about  the  molecular
structure. Indeed, Raman spectra serve as a kind of “ﬁngerprint” for molecules,
and have been used successfully to identify minerals in lunar soil samples.

Raman scattering is relatively weak, and observable only if the incident radi-
ation is sufﬁciently intense. With the advent of powerful monochromatic laser
sources, Raman spectroscopy has found application in the remote monitoring
of pollutants. For example, the scattering produced by a laser beam directed
on the plume from an industrial smokestack can be used to monitor the efﬂu-
ent for levels of those molecules that produce recognizable Raman lines.

In  the  Raman  process,  the  electronic  state  of  the  molecule  is  unchanged.
Molecular spectra for which changes occur in the electronic state as well as in
the vibrational and/or rotational states of the molecule are called electronic
spectra. Because the electronic energy levels of a molecule are separated by
much  larger  energies  (⬃ 1 eV)  than  vibrational  (or  rotational)  levels,  elec-
tronic transitions give rise to spectral lines that lie in the visible or ultraviolet
range. For the same reason, a complete set of vibrational levels may be associ-
ated with each electronic level, just as a complete rotational spectrum accom-
panies each vibrational level.

In cataloging the electronic spectra of molecules, we ﬁnd that other photon
processes  can  occur  that,  like  Raman  scattering,  have  no  counterpart  in
atomic spectra. Molecules that absorb electromagnetic energy in the visible or
near-ultraviolet range may re-emit it at a longer wavelength in a process called
ﬂuorescence. Fluorescence  follows  the  three-step  sequence  shown  schemati-
cally in Figure 11.14. Step 1 is photon absorption that excites the molecule to
a more energetic electronic-vibrational state. In step 2, the molecule rids itself
of  some  vibrational  energy  in  collisions  with  neighboring  molecules.  This  is
followed by deexcitation to the original level in step 3 with the emission of a
photon  having  less  energy  (longer  wavelength)  than  the  absorbed  photon.
The difference in energy, called the Stokes shift, is fundamental to the sensi-
tivity  of  ﬂuorescence  techniques  because  it  allows  the  emitted  photons  to  be
detected  against  a  background  isolated  from  the  absorbed  photons.  In  a
related process called phosphorescence, step 2 proceeds through a different
mechanism  that  leaves  the  molecule  in  a  metastable  state.  Step  3  then  must
proceed via a forbidden transition, that is, one that violates the selection rules
for optical transitions and so on average takes a much longer time to occur. In
some phosphorescent materials, emission is delayed by as much as minutes or
even hours following  absorption.  The  afterglow  associated  with  phosphores-
cence is exploited in assorted “glow-in-the-dark” items, such as watch faces and
numerous novelty items.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Fluorescence and
phosphorescence

390

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

Excited state

(v ⬎ 0)

2

Excited state

(v ⫽ 0)

3

E ⬘

y
g
r
e
n
E

E

1

Ground state

Figure 11.14 Fluorescence is a three-step process. In step 1 a photon with energy E is
absorbed, in the process exciting a higher vibrational state of the molecule. This excess
energy of vibration is lost in step 2 to collisions with neighboring molecules. The mole-
cule returns to its original state in step 3 by emitting a photon with reduced energy E ⬘.
The  difference  between  the  absorbed  and  emitted  photon  energies  is  known  as  the
Stoke’s  shift.  In  phosphorescence,  the  ﬁnal  transition  is  forbidden  by  selection  rules,
resulting in photon emission that is delayed by minutes — or even hours — after the ini-
tial absorption.

Fluorescence  plays  a  prominent  role  in  our  everyday  lives,  and  is  increas-
ingly  becoming  a  vital  tool  for  biomedical  research.  The  aptly  named
ﬂuorescent lamp is a tube coated on the inside surface with a phosphor that
ﬂuoresces when exposed to the ultraviolet light produced by passing an elec-
tric current through the mercury vapor that ﬁlls the tube. And most laundry
detergents contain a dye that ﬂuoresces strongly in the blue when exposed to
sunlight — this  blue  cast  makes  clothes  appear  cleaner  than  they  really  are!
Modern  ﬂuorescence  techniques  can  accurately  measure  ion  concentrations
in living cells down to femtomolar (10⫺15 molar) levels with no adverse effects
on cell behavior and can monitor changes in concentrations on a time scale of
picoseconds (10⫺12 s). As a result, cell membrane structure and function are
actively being studied using ﬂuorescent probes.

H
+

H
+

R

11.4 ELECTRON SHARING AND

THE COVALENT BOND

Figure  11.15 The  hydrogen
⫹.  The  lone
molecular  ion  H2
electron is attracted to both pro-
tons  by  the  electrostatic  force
between  opposite  charges.  The
兩R兩 of
equilibrium  separation 
⫹ is  about 
the  protons  in  H2
0.1 nm.  (Adapted  from  D.  Ebbing,
General  Chemistry  5th  ed.,
Boston,  Houghton  Mifﬂin  Co.,
1996.)

In  this  section  we  examine  the  allowed  energies  and  wavefunctions  for  elec-
trons in a molecule. There are two aspects to the problem: One deals with the
complexity of electron motion in the ﬁeld of several nuclei; the other with the
effect of all other electrons on the motion of any one. The two may be divided
⫹ and subsequently ex-
by ﬁrst treating a one-electron molecular ion such as H2
amining the effects of adding one more electron to give the neutral hydrogen
molecule H2.

The Hydrogen Molecular Ion
⫹ consists  of  one  electron  in  the  ﬁeld  of  two
The  hydrogen  molecular  ion  H 2
protons  (Fig.  11.15).  The  electron  is  drawn  to  each  proton  by  the  force  of
Coulomb attraction, resulting in a total potential energy of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.4

ELECTRON SHARING AND THE COVALENT BOND

391

U(r) ⫽ ⫺

ke 2
兩 r 兩

⫺

ke 2

兩 r ⫺ R 兩

(11.16)

In  this  expression,  one  proton  is  assumed  to  be  at  the  origin  of  coordinates
r ⫽ 0, and the other at R. The equilibrium separation R ⫽ 兩R兩 of the protons
⫹ is about 0.1 nm. The stationary state wavefunctions and energies for the
in H 2
⫹ are  solutions  to  the  time-independent  Schrödinger  equation
electron  in  H 2
with the potential U(r) of Equation 11.16.

As  a  guide,  it  is  useful  to  consider  the  problem  in  the  two  limiting  cases
R : 0 and R : ⬁ , for which the results are already known. As R : 0, the two
protons coalesce to form a nucleus of helium; consequently, the wavefunctions
and energies in this united atom limit are those of He⫹, given by the formu-
las of Chapter 8 with atomic number Z ⫽ 2. In particular, the ground and ﬁrst
excited states are both spherically symmetric waves with energies of ⫺54.4 eV
and ⫺13.6 eV, respectively. In the separated atom limit R : ⬁, the electron
sees only the ﬁeld of a single proton and the levels are those of atomic hydro-
gen, ⫺13.6 eV  for  the  ground  state  and  ⫺3.4 eV  for  the  ﬁrst  excited  state.
Energies for these extreme cases can be marked on the correlation diagram
of Figure 11.16. The degeneracy of these levels (excluding spin) is important
and is given by the numbers in parentheses. Notice especially that the ground
state of the united atom is nondegenerate, but the ground state for the sepa-
rated atoms is doubly degenerate. The extra degeneracy stems from the pres-
⫹:  In  the  separated  atom  limit,  the  electron
ence  of  the  second  proton  in  H 2
can occupy a hydrogen-like orbital around either proton. The same argument
shows that all of the atomic levels in the separated atom limit have an extra,
twofold  degeneracy,  corresponding  to  hydrogen-like  wavefunctions  centered
⫹ in-
at  the  site  of  either  proton.  The  completed  correlation  diagram  for  H 2
cludes the energy levels at any proton separation R.

To ﬁnd out what happens at intermediate values of R, consider ﬁrst the case
where R is  ﬁnite  but  large,  so  that  the  inﬂuence  of  the  other  proton,  though
weak,  cannot  be  ignored.  This  appearance  of  a  second  attractive  force  center
means  that  the  electron  does  not  remain  with  its  parent  proton  indeﬁnitely.
Given sufﬁcient time, the electron can tunnel through the intervening potential
barrier to occupy an atomic orbital around the far proton. Some time later, the
electron tunnels back to the original proton. In principle, the situation is no dif-
ferent from the inversion of the ammonia molecule discussed in Section 7.2: In
⫹ is a double oscillator, for which the stationary states are not wavefunc-
effect, H 2
tions  concentrated  at  a  single  force  center  but  divided  equally  between  them.
The tunneling time increases with proton separation, and may be very long in-
deed — something  like  1 s  for  protons  1 nm  apart  (an  eternity  by  atomic  stan-
dards). But the time itself is inconsequential, since we are interested here in the
stationary states that have, so to speak, “all the time in the world” to form.

From  the  symmetry  of  H 2

⫹,  the  tunneling  probability  from  one  proton  to
the other must be the same in either direction, and so we expect the electron
to spend equal amounts of time in the vicinity of each. It follows that the sta-
tionary  state  wave  is  an  equal  mixture  of  atomic-like  wavefunctions  centered
on each proton as, for example,

␺⫹(r) ⫽ ␺a(r) ⫹ ␺a(r ⫺ R)

(11.17)

Molecular orbitals from
atomic wavefunctions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

392

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

0

–3.4 eV

–6.0 eV

–13.6 eV

y
g
r
e
n
E

to

–3.4 eV (6)

to

–13.6 eV (2)

–54.4 eV

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

R (bohrs)

∞

Separated
atom limit

United atom

limit

⫹,  showing  the  two  lowest  electron  energy
Figure  11.16 Correlation  diagram  for  H2
levels as a function of proton separation, in bohrs. [Recall that 1 bohr (a 0) ⫽ 0.529 Å.]
At R ⫽ 0, the levels are those of the united atom (ion) He⫹, and at R ⫽ ⬁ the levels are
those  of  neutral  H.  The  degeneracy  of  the  various  levels  (excluding  spin)  is  given  by
the numbers in parentheses.

The  subscript  a on  the  right  side  of  Eq.  11.17  is  a  collective  label  for  all  the
quantum  numbers  needed  to  specify  an  atomic  state;  for  the  ground  state  of
atomic  hydrogen,  a is  (1,  0,  0),  meaning  n ⫽ 1, ᐉ ⫽ 0,  and  mᐉ ⫽ 0.  Equation
11.17 describes the symmetric combination of two atomic wavefunctions centered
at the proton sites r ⫽ 0 and r ⫽ R. The wavefunction and probability density
given by ␺⫹(r) are sketched in Figure 11.17a and b; both are symmetric about
the molecular center located at r ⫽ R/2, or halfway between the two protons.

However, we could also have written the antisymmetric form

␺⫺(r) ⫽ ␺a(r) ⫺ ␺a(r ⫺ R)

(11.18)

This again leads to a symmetric probability distribution, but one with a node
at the molecular center (Fig. 11.17c and d). In fact, Equations 11.17 and 11.18
both  approximate  true  molecular  wavefunctions  when  R is  large,  but  they
describe  states  having  distinctly  different  energies.  In  particular,  ␺⫺ has  a
somewhat higher energy than ␺⫹, since the electron in the antisymmetric state
is  more  conﬁned,  being  relegated  largely  to  the  vicinity  of  one  or  the  other
nucleus.  As  with  the  particle  in  a  box,  this  greater  degree  of  conﬁnement

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

␺ +␺

(a)

␺ –␺

(c)

11.4

ELECTRON SHARING AND THE COVALENT BOND

393

+

+

+

+

␺ +2␺

(b)

␺ –2␺

(d)

Figure 11.17 The wavefunction (a) and probability density (b) for the approximate
molecular  wave  ␺⫹ formed  from  the  symmetric  combination  of  atomic  orbitals  cen-
tered  at  r ⫽ 0  and  r ⫽ R.  (c)  and  (d):  Wavefunction  and  probability  density  for  the
approximate molecular wave ␺⫺ formed from the antisymmetric combination of these
same orbitals.

comes  at  the  expense  of  increased  kinetic  energy.  Only  in  the  limit  R : ⬁
do the  two  energies  merge  to  form  the  (doubly  degenerate)  atomic  level
of the  separate  atoms.  As  R : 0,  continuity  requires  the  lower  of  the  two
energies  to  approach  ⫺54.4 eV,  the  ground-state  energy  of  the  united  atom
He⫹;  similarly,  the  higher  energy  goes  over  to  the  ﬁrst  excited-state  energy
of He⫹, ⫺13.6 eV.

We have come upon the quantum origins of the covalent bond. The ener-
getically  preferred  state  ␺⫹ is  referred  to  as  the  bonding  orbital, since  the
electron  in  this  state  spends  much  of  its  time  in  the  space  between  the  two
protons,  shuttling  to  and  fro  and  acting  as  a  kind  of  “glue”  that  holds  the
molecule  together.  The  more  energetic  state ␺⫺ is  the  antibonding  orbital
and  decreases  the  molecular  stability.  Notice  that  a  bonding – antibonding
orbital pair is associated with every orbital of the separated atoms, not just with
the ground state.

The  energy  of  the  bonding  orbitals  in  H 2

⫹ can  be  estimated  from

Schrödinger’s equation. For the electron in H 2

⫹ this is

⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2␺ ⫹ U(r)␺ ⫽ E␺

with U(r) the potential energy of the electron in the ﬁeld of the two protons, as
in Equation 11.16. Let us multiply every term by ␺* and integrate over the whole
space. Then the right-hand side becomes just E (assuming ␺is normalized),

E冕 兩 ␺兩2 dV ⫽ E

leaving  for  the  left-hand  side  an  expression  that  we  can  use  to  compute  the
value of E:

E ⫽冕␺* 冤⫺

ប2
2m

ⵜ2 ⫺ 冦 ke 2

兩 r 兩

⫹

ke 2

兩 r ⫺ R 兩冧冥 ␺dV

(11.19)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

394

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

If ␺ is the true molecular wavefunction, this equation furnishes the exact value
of  particle  energy  in  the  state ␺;  if ␺ is  an  approximate  wavefunction,  Equa-
tion 11.19 yields an approximation to E.

Substituting  for  ␺ the  symmetric  combination  ␺⫹ (suitably  normalized —
see  the  Chapter  11  Web  Appendix  titled  “Overlap  Integrals  of  Atomic  Wave-
functions”) gives a ﬁrst approximation to the energy of the bonding orbitals in
⫹. For the case where ␺a refers to the hydrogen-atom ground state, the mo-
H 2
lecular energy E⫹ can be shown to be

Bonding orbital of H2

ⴙ

E⫹ ⫽ ⫺1 ⫺

2

1 ⫹ ⌬ 冦 1

R

⫺

1
R

 (1 ⫹ R )e⫺2R ⫹ (1 ⫹ R )e⫺R冧

(11.20)

with ⌬ the overlap integral of atomic wavefunctions found in the Chapter 11
Web Appendix:

⌬ ⫽ 冢1 ⫹ R ⫹

R 2

3 冣 e⫺R

These expressions for E⫹ and ⌬ are given in atomic units, where the rydberg
(1 Ry ⫽ ⫺13.6 eV) is adopted as the unit of energy to go along with the bohr
unit of length.

In  the  limit  of  large  R , ⌬ : 0  and  E⫹ approaches  the  energy  of  an  iso-
lated hydrogen atom, Ea ⫽ ⫺1 Ry, as it should. As R decreases, E⫹ becomes
more and more negative, ﬁnally reaching ⫺3 Ry at R ⫽ 0, where the nuclei
coalesce.  (The  correct  value  of  ⫺4 Ry  for  the  ground  state  of  He⫹ is  not
reproduced  owing  to  the  approximation  inherent  in  our  use  of  Equation
11.17  for  the  molecular  wavefunction,  which  fails  completely  as  R : 0.)
Since E⫹ decreases steadily with R, the molecule appears to be unstable and
should collapse to R ⫽ 0 under the bonding tendency of the orbiting elec-
tron. But this overlooks the Coulomb energy of the protons, which must be
included  to  obtain  the  total  molecular  energy.  Two  protons  separated  by  a
distance R repel  each  other  with  energy  ke 2/R ,  or  2/R Ry.  The  Coulomb
repulsion  of  the  protons  offsets  the  bonding  attraction  of  the  electron
to stabilize  the  molecule  at  that  separation  for  which  the  total  energy  is
minimal.  The  total  molecular  energy  given  by  our  model  is  sketched  as
a function  of  R in  Figure  11.18.  The  minimum  comes  at  R 0 ⫽ 2.49  bohrs,
or 0.132 nm,  and  agrees  reasonably  well  with  the  observed  bond  length
for H 2

⫹, 0.106 nm.

At  the  equilibrium  separation  of  2.49  bohrs,  we  ﬁnd  E⫹ ⫽ ⫺2.13 Ry,  and
a total  molecular  energy  of  E⫹ ⫹ 2/R 0 ⫽ ⫺1.13 Ry.  The  negative  of  this,
1.13 Ry  or  15.37 eV,  represents  the  work  required  to  separate  the  molecule
into  its  constituents  and  is  the  dissociation  energy  introduced  in  Section  1.
The measured dissociation energy for H⫹ is about 16.3 eV. The bond energy,
⫹ into H and H⫹, is the difference between
or the work required to separate H 2
the molecular energy at R ⫽ ⬁ and at equilibrium. Our model predicts a bond
energy  of  15.37 eV ⫺ 13.6 eV ⫽ 1.77 eV,  which  is  somewhat  less  than  the  ac-
tual value of 2.65 eV. The difference can be attributed to our use of Equation
11.17 for the molecular wavefunction, an approximation that is best for larger
values of R .

To obtain  the  energy  of  the  antibonding  orbitals  for  H 2

⫹,  we  replace  ␺
in Equation  11.19  with  the  antisymmetric  wave ␺⫺ of  Equation  11.18  (again,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.4

ELECTRON SHARING AND THE COVALENT BOND

395

–0.7

–0.8

–0.9

–1.0

–1.1

–1.2

–1.3

–1.4

)
s
g
r
e
b
d
y
r
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

R 0

Etotal

Bond energy

R

⫹, as given by
Figure 11.18 The total molecular energy for the bonding orbital of H 2
the  approximate  wavefunction  ␺⫹ of  Equation  11.17.  The  predicted  bond  length
occurs at the point of stable equilibrium, around R ⫽ 2.5 bohrs. The predicted bond
energy is about 1.77 eV.

suitably normalized). With ␺a the hydrogen ground state, we ﬁnd for the en-
⫹
ergy of the lowest antibonding orbital in H 2

E⫺ ⫽ ⫺1 ⫺

2

1 ⫺ ⌬ 冦 1

R

⫺

1
R

 (1 ⫹ R )e⫺2R ⫺ (1 ⫹ R )e⫺R冧

(11.21)

Antibonding orbital of H2

ⴙ

For  large  separations,  E⫺ coincides  with  E⫹ at ⫺1 Ry. With  decreasing
R , however, E⫺ steadily increases and always lies above E⫹. In particular, E⫺
for  any  ﬁnite  value  of  R is  higher  than  the  energy  of  H ⫹ H⫹ in  isolation,
and  no  stable  molecular  ion  will  be  formed  in  this  state.  Inclusion  of  the
nuclear  repulsion  only  enhances  the  instability.  This  is  the  antibonding
⫹.
effect for H 2

Although  Eq.  11.21  seriously  overestimates  the  true  molecular  energy
for small  values  of  R,  the  conclusion  reached  about  the  instability  of  this
state 
is,  nonetheless,  correct.  The  true  antibonding  orbital  energy
approaches ⫺1 Ry  in  the  united  atom  limit  and  exhibits  a  broad,  shallow
minimum  near  R ⫽ 3  bohrs  (see  Fig.  11.16).  Equilibrium  cannot  be
sustained, however, when the Coulomb repulsion of the nuclei is included;
that  is,  the  curve  of  total  molecular  energy  shows  no  minimum  for  the
antibonding state.

The  previous  discussion  of  bonding  and  antibonding  orbitals  for
⫹ exempliﬁes the complexity of covalent bonding in real systems.
H 2
To illustrate  the  fundamental  ideas  without  incurring  all  the  mathematical
“baggage” that accompanies real-world applications, simpliﬁed models are of-
ten employed along with numerical methods of solution. Common to all such
models is a potential energy having two (or more) points of stable equilibrium
(attractive force centers). To explore the allowed energies and wavefunctions
in these cases, go to http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e, select QMTools Simu-
lations : Two-Center Potentials (Tutorial), and follow the on-site instructions.
You will also ﬁnd there speciﬁc applications to the covalent bond in diatomic
molecules composed of like atoms.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

396

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

The Hydrogen Molecule
⫹ gives  the  hydrogen  molecule,  H2.
The  addition  of  one  more  electron  to  H 2
The  second  electron  provides  even  more  “glue”  for  covalent  bonding  and
⫹.  Indeed,  the  bond
should  produce  a  stronger  bond  than  that  seen  in  H 2
⫹.  (Naively,  we  might
energy  for  H2 is  4.5 eV,  compared  with  2.65 eV  for  H 2
have  expected  the  bond  energy  to  double  with  the  number  of  electrons,
but the  electrons  repel  each  other — an  antibonding  effect.)  The  second
electron  also  results  in  a  measured  bond  length  for  H2 equal  to  0.074  nm,
which is noticeably shorter than the 0.1 nm found for the single-bonded mole-
⫹.
cular ion H 2

EXAMPLE 11.3 The Hydrogen Molecular Bond

Estimate  the  bond  length  and  the  bond  energy  of  H2,
assuming that each electron moves independently of the
other and is described by the approximate wavefunction
of Equation 11.17.

Solution If the electrons do not interact, the energy of
each must be the bonding energy E⫹ of Equation 11.20.
The total energy of the molecule in this independent parti-
cle model is then

Etotal ⫽

⫽

2
R
2
R

⫹ 2E⫹

⫺ 2 ⫺

4

1 ⫹ ⌬ 冦 1

R

⫺

1
R

 (1 ⫹ R )e⫺2R ⫹ (1 ⫹ R )e⫺R冧

By trial and error, we discover that the minimum energy
occurs  at  about  R 0 ⫽ 1.44 bohrs,  or  0.076 nm,  which
becomes  the  bond  length  predicted  by  our  model.  The
molecular  energy  at  this  separation  is  E 0 ⫽ ⫺3.315 Ry.
Comparing  this  with  the  total  energy  of  the  separated
hydrogen  atoms,  ⫺2 Ry,
leaves  for  the  bond  energy
1.315 Ry,  or  17.88 eV.  Due  to  our  neglect  of  electron
repulsion,  this  model  grossly  exaggerates  the  bond
energy, although it does get the bond length about right.
Even  the  latter  agreement  is  probably  fortuitous,  how-
ever, since Equation 11.17 is not expected to be accurate
even  for  noninteracting  electrons  at  nuclear  separations
as small as 1.5 bohrs.

10

0

)
V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

–10

–20

–27.2
–30

–40

Antibonding

4.5 eV

Bonding

0.074

0.1

0.2

Separation distance (nm)

Figure  11.19 Total  molecular  energy  for  the  bonding  and  antibonding  orbitals  of
H2. For both electrons to be in the bonding orbital, their spins must be opposite. The
bond energy for H2 is 4.5 eV and the bond length is 0.074 nm. Since the energy of the
antibonding  orbital  exceeds  that  of  the  isolated  H  atoms,  no  stable  molecule  can  be
formed in this state.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11.5

BONDING IN COMPLEX MOLECULES

397

So far we have not recognized that the two electrons in H2, being identical
fermions, are subject to the exclusion principle. If both electrons occupy the
bonding orbital of H2 —as we have been assuming — their spins must be opposite.
If their spins were parallel, one electron would be forced into the antibonding
orbital, where it has higher energy. Figure 11.19 shows the electronic energy
of the molecule for the two cases. These curves were obtained from laborious
calculations  that  account 
in  an  approximate  way  for  the  effect  of
electron – electron  repulsion.  The  results  imply  that  no  stable  molecule  is
formed in the parallel spin case.

11.5 BONDING IN COMPLEX MOLECULES

O P T I O N A L

⫹ and  H2 are  known  as  sigma-type molecular  bonds,
The  bonds  we  found  in  H2
denoted ␴. They arise from the overlap of atomic s states and are characterized by
an  electron  density  that  is  axially  symmetric  about  the  line  joining  the  two  atoms.
Bonding between atoms having more electrons often involves the overlap of p states
or other atomic orbitals and leads to other types of molecular bonds with their own
distinctive characteristics.

Consider  the  nitrogen  molecule,  N2,  the  simplest  molecule  to  exhibit  bonds
other than the ␴ type. The electron conﬁguration of the nitrogen atom is 1s 22s 22p 3.
The molecular bond in N2 is due primarily to the three valence electrons in the 2p
subshell; the inner s electrons are too tightly bound to their parent atoms to partici-
pate  in  the  sharing  necessary  for  bond  formation.  The  2p subshell  is  made  up  of
three atomic orbitals (m ᐉ ⫽ 1, 0, ⫺1), and each of these gives rise to a bonding and
an antibonding orbital for the molecule. The N2 molecule has six valence electrons
to accommodate, three from each N atom. With two electrons in each of the three
bonding orbitals, the N2 molecule is especially stable, with a bond energy of 9.8 eV
and a bond length of 0.11 nm.

Of  the  three  bonding – antibonding  orbital  pairs  in  N2,  however,  only  one  is  a
sigma bond. Recall that atomic p states are lobed structures with highly directional
characteristics. The electron density in the pz orbital (mᐉ ⫽ 0) is concentrated along
the z-axis; similarly, the px and py orbitals are marked by electron densities along the
x- and y-axes, respectively (Fig. 8.13). (The px and py orbitals are not eigenstates of
Lz, but are formed from the mᐉ ⫽ ⫾1 states according to the prescription of Equa-
tion 8.50 in Chapter 8). When two N atoms are brought together, one of the three
axes — say the z-axis — will become the molecular axis for N2 in order to maximize
atomic overlaps and produce the strongest bond. This is the sigma bond, because it
has axial symmetry. The px orbitals, however, also overlap to form a different kind of
bond — the pi bond (␲) — which has a plane of symmetry in the nodal plane of the
p orbitals.  The  same  is  true  of  the  py orbitals.  Figure  11.20  illustrates  the  different
kinds of bonds in the N2 molecule. The pi bonds are weaker than the sigma bond
because they involve less electron overlap.

So  far  we  have  been  discussing  only  molecules  formed  from  like  atoms.  These
homonuclear molecules exemplify the pure covalent bond. The joining of two differ-
ent atomic species to form a heteronuclear molecule produces polar covalent bonds.
The hydrogen ﬂuoride molecule, HF, is a good example. The F atom has nine elec-
trons  in  the  conﬁguration  1s 22s 22p5.  Of  the  ﬁve  2p electrons,  four  completely  ﬁll
two  of  the  2p orbitals,  leaving  one  2p electron  to  be  shared  with  the  H  atom  (the
ﬁlled  orbitals  are  especially  stable  and  do  not  signiﬁcantly  affect  the  molecu-
lar bonding in HF). When the two atoms are brought together, the 2p orbital of F
overlaps the 1s orbital of H to form a bonding – antibonding orbital pair for the HF 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Sigma and pi bonds for N2

Bonding in heteronuclear
molecules

398

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

x

x

σ

 bond

z

z

N

y

N

(a)

y N

N

(b)

x

x

x

π

 bond

z

Nodal
plane

z

y

y

y

N

N

N

N

(c)

Figure 11.20 (a) and (b): Formation of a sigma bond in N2 from the overlap of the
2pz orbitals  on  adjacent  N  atoms.  (c)  Formation  of  a  pi  bond  by  overlap  of  the  2px
orbitals on adjacent N atoms. A similar bond is formed by overlap of the 2py orbitals.

molecule. The result is an s – p bond, with both electrons occupying the more stable
bonding  orbital.  The  s – p bond  in  HF  is  polar  since  the  shared  electrons  spend
more  time  in  the  vicinity  of  the  F  atom  due  to  its  high  electronegativity.  Equiva-
lently, the bond is partly ionic, and the HF molecule shows a permanent electric di-
pole moment. The bond energy for HF is 5.90 eV, and the bond length is 0.092 nm.
The  case  of  HF  suggests  correctly  that  purely  covalent  bonds  are  found  only  in
homonuclear  molecules;  heteronuclear  molecules  always  form  bonds  with  some
degree  of  ionicity,  as  measured  by  a  dipole  moment.  The  water  molecule,  H2O,  is
another  example  of  an  s – p-bonded  structure  with  a  dipole  moment,  as  is  the  am-
monia molecule, NH3. In NH3, each of the three 2p electrons in the N atom forms
an s – p bond  with  an  H  atom.  Since  the  px, py,  and  pz atomic  orbitals  are  directed
along  mutually  perpendicular  axes,  we  would  expect  the  three  s – p bonds  to  be  at
right angles. In fact, the measured bond angle in NH3 is somewhat larger — about
107⬚ — because of the electrostatic repulsion of the H nuclei.

In  closing,  we  mention  brieﬂy  the  bonds  formed  by  the  carbon  atom.  These
bonds result from s – p hybridization, a concept that accounts for the almost end-
less  variety  of  organic  compounds.  The  C  atom  has  six  electrons  in  the  conﬁgura-
tion 1s 22s 22p 2. We might conclude that only the two 2p electrons are prominent in
molecular bonding and that carbon is divalent. The existence of hydrocarbons like
CH4 (methane), however, shows that the C atom shares all four of its second-shell
electrons, suggesting that the binding energy of the 2s electrons in the carbon atom
is not much different from that of the 2p electrons. But most surprising is the fact
that all four bonds are equivalent! There are not two s – p bonds and two s – s bonds

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

399

as we might have anticipated, but four structurally identical molecular bonds. These
bonds arise from the overlap of the 1s orbital in H with atomic orbitals in C formed
from a mixture of carbon 2s and 2p orbitals. In CH4 these mixed, or hybrid, orbitals
are represented by wavefunctions such as

␺ ⫽ ␺2s ⫹ [␺2p]x ⫹ [␺2p]y ⫹ [␺2p]z

(11.22)

Other  combinations  arise  by  subtracting,  rather  than  adding,  the  individual  wave-
functions, but all mix one 2s and three 2p atomic orbitals to give four sp 3 hybrids. In
other  carbon  compounds,  hybridization  may  involve  only  one  or  two  of  the  2p
orbitals; these are described as sp and sp 2 hybrids, respectively. It is this complexity
that gives rise to the rich variety of organic materials.

SUMMARY

Two or more atoms may combine to form molecules because of a net attractive
force between them. The resulting molecular bonds are classiﬁed according to
the bonding mechanisms and are of the following types:

1. Ionic  bonds. Certain  molecules  form  ionic  bonds  because  of  the
Coulomb  attraction  between  oppositely  charged  ions.  Sodium  chloride
(NaCl) is one example of an ionically bonded molecule.

2. Covalent  bonds. The  covalent  bond  in  a  molecule  is  formed  by  the
sharing  of  valence  electrons  of  its  constituent  atoms.  For  example,  the
two electrons of the H2 molecule are equally shared between the nuclei.
3. van der Waals bonds. This is a weak electrostatic bond between mole-
cules or atoms that do not form ionic or covalent bonds. It is responsible
for the condensation of inert gas atoms and nonpolar molecules into the
liquid phase.

4. Hydrogen bonds. This type of bonding corresponds to the attraction of

two negative ions by an intermediate hydrogen atom (a proton).

The  energy  of  a  molecule  in  a  gas  consists  of  contributions  from  the  elec-
tronic  interactions,  the  translation  of  the  molecule,  rotations,  and  vibrations.
The allowed values of the rotational energy of a diatomic molecule are given by

Erot ⫽

ប2
2ICM

ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)    ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

(11.5)

where ICM is the moment of inertia of the molecule about its center of mass
and ᐉ is an integer called the rotational quantum number.

The  allowed  values  of  the  vibrational  energy  of  a  diatomic  molecule  are

given by

Evib ⫽ (v ⫹ 1

2)ប␻    v ⫽ 0, 1, 2, ⭈  ⭈  ⭈

(11.8)

where v is the vibrational  quantum  number. The quantity ␻ is the classical
frequency of vibration and is related to ␮, the reduced mass of the molecule,
and K, the force constant of the effective spring bonding the molecule, by the
relation 

␻ ⫽ √K/␮
.

The internal state of motion of a molecule is some combination of rotation
and  vibration.  Any  change  in  the  molecular  condition  is  described  as  a  transi-
tion  from  one  rotation – vibration  level  to  another.  When  accompanied  by  the
emission or absorption of photons, these are called optical transitions. Besides

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

400

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

conserving energy, optical transitions must conform to the selection rules

⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1    and    ⌬v ⫽ ⫾1

(11.12, 11.13)

In  the  most  common  case,  the  absorption  spectrum  of  a  diatomic  molecule
consists  of  two sequences  of  lines,  corresponding  to  ⌬ᐉ ⫽ ⫾1,  with  ⌬v ⫽ ⫹1
for both sequences. Measurements made on such spectra can be used to deter-
mine the length and strength of the molecular bonds.

In Raman  scattering, the  incident  and  emergent  photons  have  different
energies,  with  the  discrepancy  attributed  to  a  change  in  the  rotation –
vibration  state  of  the  scattering  molecule.  The  colliding  photon  can  gain  or
lose  energy  in  this  process,  depending  on  whether  energy  is  delivered  to  or
extracted from the rotation – vibration state of the molecule.

Other  inelastic  photon  processes  also  can  occur  with  molecules.  Molecules
that absorb electromagnetic energy in the visible or near-ultraviolet range may
re-emit  it  at  a  longer  wavelength  in  a  process  called  ﬂuorescence. In  this
process,  the  energy  absorbed  in  vibrational  form  is  dissipated  through  colli-
sions  with  other  molecules,  leaving  less  energy  for  the  emitted  photon.  In  a
related process called phosphorescence, the transition giving rise to the emit-
ted photon has an unusually long lifetime, with the result that the emitted radi-
ation is delayed minutes — or even hours — following the initial absorption.

The electronic states of a molecule are classiﬁed as bonding or antibonding.
A  bonding  state  is  one  for  which  the  electron  density  is  large  in  the  space  be-
tween  the  nuclei.  An  electron  in  a  bonding  orbital  can  be  thought  of  as  shut-
tling rapidly from one nucleus to the other, drawing them together as a kind of
“glue.” The bonding state is energetically preferred over the antibonding state,
where the electron spends more of its time outside the bonding region. In a di-
atomic molecule composed of like atoms (homonuclear molecule), each atomic
orbital gives rise to a bonding – antibonding orbital pair for the molecule.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. Molecular  bonding  is  discussed  extensively  at  an  intro-
ductory  level  in  Chapter  24  of  J.  Brackenridge  and
R. Rosenberg, The Principles of Physics and Chemistry, New
York, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1970. This work
also includes a number of nice illustrations of molecular
bonds in various compounds.

2. For an in-depth treatment of the bonding in H2

⫹ and the
H2 molecule, see J. C. Slater, Quantum Theory of Molecules

and  Solids,  Vol.  1,  New  York,  McGraw-Hill  Book  Com-
pany, Inc., 1963.

3. An elaborate discussion of chemical bonding in organic
compounds  may  be  found  in  Chapter  9  of  K.  Krane,
Modern Physics, 2nd ed., New York, John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., 1996.

QUESTIONS

1. List  three  ways  (modes)  a  diatomic  molecule  can  store
energy internally. Which of the three modes is easiest to
excite, that is, requires the least energy? Which requires
the most energy?

2. How  do  the  effective  force  constants  for  the  molecules
listed in Table 11.2 compare with those found for typical
laboratory  springs?  Comment  on  the  signiﬁcance  of
your ﬁndings.

3. Describe hybridization, why it occurs, and what it has to
do with molecular bonding. Give an explicit example of
where it occurs.

4. Discuss  the  mechanisms  responsible  for  the  different

types of bonds that can occur to form stable molecules.

5. Explain  the  role  of  the  Pauli  exclusion  principle  in  de-
termining  the  stability  of  molecules,  using  H2 and  the
(hypothetical) species H3 as examples.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

6. Discuss  the  relationship  between  tunneling  and  the  co-
valent  bond.  From  the  viewpoint  of  possible  chemical
species,  what  would  be  the  similarities  and  differences
between  the  world  in  which  we  live  and  one  devoid  of
tunneling?

7. Distinguish  between  the  dissociation  energy  of  a  mole-
cule and its bond energy. Which of the two is expected
to be greater?

PROBLEMS

11.1 Bonding Mechanisms: A Survey 

1. Potassium iodide can be taken as a medicine to reduce
radiation  dosage  to  the  thyroid  gland,  before  or  after
exposure to radioactive iodine. In the potassium iodide
molecule, assume that the atoms K and I bond ionically
by the transfer of one electron from K to I. (a) The ion-
ization energy of K is 4.34 eV, and the electron afﬁnity of
I  is  3.06 eV.  What  energy  is  needed  to  transfer  an  elec-
tron  from  K  to  I,  to  form  K⫹ and  I⫺ ions  from  neutral
atoms? (b) A model potential energy function for the KI
molecule is the Lennard – Jones (12, 6) potential:

U(r ) ⫽ 4␧ 冤冢 ␴

r 冣12

⫺ 冢 ␴

r 冣6冥 ⫹ Ea

where r is  the  internuclear  separation  distance,  and ␴
and ␧ are  adjustable  constants.  Ea is  added  to  ensure
the  correct  asymptotic  behavior  at  large  r and  is  the
activation  energy  calculated  in  (a).  At  the  equilibrium
separation  distance  r ⫽ r 0 ⫽ 0.305 nm,  U(r)  is  a  mini-
mum,  and  dU/dr ⫽ 0. U(r0)  is  the  negative  of  the
dissociation energy: U(r0) ⫽ ⫺3.37 eV. Use the experi-
mental values for the equilibrium separation and disso-
ciation energy of KI to determine ␴ and ␧. (c) Calcu-
late the force needed to rupture the molecule.

10.2 Molecular Rotation and Vibration

2. Use  the  data  in  Table  11.2  to  calculate  the  reduced
mass of the NO molecule; then compute a value for ␮
using Equation 11.3. Compare the two results.

3. The  CO  molecule  undergoes  a  rotational  transition
from  the  ᐉ ⫽ 1  level  to  the  ᐉ ⫽ 2  level.  Using  Table
11.1, calculate the values of the reduced mass and the
bond  length  of  the  molecule.  Compare  your  results
with those of Example 11.1.

4. Use  the  data  in  Table  11.2  to  calculate  the  maximum
amplitude  of  vibration  for  (a)  the  HI  molecule  and
(b) the  HF  molecule.  Which  molecule  has  the  weaker
bond?

5. The  ᐉ ⫽ 5  to  ᐉ ⫽ 6  rotational  absorption  line  of  a  di-
atomic molecule occurs at a wavelength of 1.35 cm (in
the vapor phase). (a) Calculate the wavelength and fre-
quency of the ᐉ ⫽ 0 to ᐉ ⫽ 1 rotational absorption line.
(b) Calculate the moment of inertia of the molecule.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

401

8. In treating the rotational levels of a diatomic molecule,
why  do  we  ignore  rotation  about  the  internuclear  line?
Can you think of a case involving a triatomic molecule in
which similar considerations might apply?

9. Explain  why  the  noble  gases  tend  to  be  monatomic

rather than diatomic.

6. The  HF  molecule  has  a  bond  length  of  0.092 nm.
(a) Calculate  the  reduced  mass  of  the  molecule.
(b) Sketch the potential energy versus internuclear sep-
aration in the vicinity of r ⫽ 0.092 nm.

7. The  HCl  molecule  is  excited  to  its  ﬁrst  rotational
energy  level,  corresponding  to  ᐉ ⫽ 1.  If  the  distance
between  its  nuclei  is  0.1275 nm,  what  is  the  angular
velocity of the molecule about its center of mass?

8. The v ⫽ 0 to v ⫽ 1 vibrational transition of the HI mole-
cule  occurs  at  a  frequency  of  6.69 ⫻ 1013 Hz.  The  same
transition for the NO molecule occurs at a frequency of
5.63 ⫻ 1013 Hz. Calculate (a) the effective force constant
and  (b)  the  amplitude  of  vibration  for  each  molecule.
(c) Explain why the force constant of the NO molecule is
so much larger than that of the HI molecule.

9. Consider the HCl molecule, which consists of a hydro-
gen atom of mass 1 u bound to a chlorine atom of mass
35 u. The equilibrium separation between the atoms is
0.128 nm, and it requires 0.15 eV of work to increase or
decrease  this  separation  by  0.01 nm.  (a)  Calculate  the
four  lowest  rotational  energies  (in  eV)  that  are  possi-
ble, assuming the molecule rotates rigidly. (b) Find the
molecule’s “spring constant” and its classical frequency
of vibration. (Hint: Recall that U ⫽ Kx 2.) (c) Find the
two lowest vibrational energies and the classical ampli-
tude of oscillation corresponding to each of these ener-
gies.  (d)  Determine  the  longest  wavelength  radiation
that the molecule can emit in a pure rotational transi-
tion and in a pure vibrational transition.

1
2

10. The  hydrogen  molecule  comes  apart  (dissociates)
when  it  is  excited  internally  by  4.5 eV.  Assuming  that
this molecule behaves exactly like a harmonic oscillator
with  classical  frequency  ␻ ⫽ 8.277 ⫻ 1014 rad/s,  ﬁnd
the  vibrational  quantum  number  corresponding  to  its
4.5-eV dissociation energy.

11. As a model for a diatomic molecule, consider two iden-
tical point masses m connected by a rigid massless rod
of length R 0. Suppose that this molecule rotates about
an axis perpendicular to the rod through its midpoint.
Use the Bohr quantization rule for angular momentum
to  obtain  the  allowed  rotational  energies  in  this
approximation.  Compare  your  result  with  the  correct
quantum mechanical treatment of this model.

402

CHAPTER 11

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

 

12. For  the  model  of  a  diatomic  molecule  described  in
Problem 11, derive an expression for the minimum en-
ergy  required  to  excite  the  molecule  into  rotation
about the internuclear line, that is, about the axis joining
the  two  masses.  Assume  that  the  masses  are  uniform
spheres of radius r. Apply your result to the hydrogen
molecule,  H2,  by  taking  m equal  to  the  proton  mass
and r equal to the nuclear size, about 10 fm.

13. The  rotational  motion  of  molecules  has  an  effect  on
the  equilibrium  separation  of  the  nuclei,  a  phenome-
non known as bond stretching. To model this effect, con-
sider a diatomic molecule with reduced mass ␮, oscilla-
tor frequency ␻0, and internuclear separation R 0 when
the angular momentum is zero. The effective potential
energy for nonzero values of ᐉ is then (see Section 8.5)

Ueff ⫽ 1

2 ␮␻0

2(r ⫺ R0)2 ⫹ ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)

ប2
2␮r 2

(a)  Minimize  the  effective  potential  Ueff(r)  to  ﬁnd  an
equation  for  the  equilibrium  separation  of  the  nuclei,
R ᐉ,  when  the  angular  momentum  is  ᐉ.  Solve  this
2/ប.
equation  approximately,  assuming  ᐉ ⬍⬍ ␮␻0R 0
(b) Near the corrected equilibrium point, R ᐉ, the effec-
tive potential again is nearly harmonic and can be writ-
ten approximately as
Ueff ⬇ 1

2␮␻2(r ⫺ R ᐉ)2 ⫹ U0

Find expressions for the corrected oscillator frequency
␻ and the energy offset U0 by matching Ueff and its ﬁrst
two derivatives at the equilibrium point R ᐉ . Show that
the fractional change in frequency is given by

⌬␻
␻0

⬇

3ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2

2␮2␻2

4
0R 0

14. As  an  alternative  to  harmonic  interactions,  the  Morse

potential,

U(r ) ⫽ U0 {1 ⫺ e⫺␤(r⫺R 0)}2

can  be  used  to  describe  the  vibrations  of  a  diatomic
molecule. The parameters R 0, U0, and ␤ are chosen to
ﬁt the data for a particular atom pair. (a) Show that R 0
is  the  equilibrium  separation  and  that  the  potential
energy  far  from  equilibrium  approaches  U0.  (b)  Show
that  near  equilibrium  (r ⬇ R 0)  the  Morse  potential  is
force  constant  K ⫽ m␻2 ⫽ 2U0␤2.
harmonic,  with 
(c) The lowest vibrational energy for the Morse oscilla-
tor can be shown to be

Evib ⫽ 1

2 ប␻ ⫺

(ប␻)2
16U0

Obtain  from  this  an  expression  for  the  dissociation
energy  of  the  molecule.  (d)  Apply  the  results  of  parts
(b) and (c) to deduce the Morse parameters U0 and ␤
for  the  hydrogen  molecule.  Use  the  experimental

values  573 N/m  and  4.52 eV  for  the  effective  spring
constant  and  dissociation  energy,  respectively.  (The
measured value of R 0 for H2 is 0.074 nm.)

15. The allowed energies of vibration for the Morse oscilla-

tor can be shown to be

Evib ⫽ (v ⫹ 1

2)ប␻ ⫺ (v ⫹ 1

2)2 (ប␻)2
4U0

.

.

where v ⫽ 0, 1,
. . Obtain from this an expression
for  the  interval  separating  successive  levels  of  the
Morse  oscillator,  and  show  that  this  interval  dimin-
ishes  steadily  at  higher  energies,  as  illustrated  in
Figure  11.9b.  From  your  result,  deduce  an  upper
limit  for  the  vibrational  quantum  number  v.  What
is the  largest  vibrational  energy  permitted  for  the
Morse oscillator?

16.

17.

The  Morse  Oscillator  Spectrum.  Use  the  Java
applet  available  at  our  companion  Web  site
(http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e : QMTools  Simu-
lations : Problem 11.16) to display the ﬁrst three pure
vibrational  states  (ᐉ ⫽ 0, v ⫽ 0,  1,  2)  of  the  H2 mole-
cule in the Morse oscillator approximation to the inter-
atomic  potential.  The  number  of  Morse  vibrational
states  is  limited.  See  if  you  can  ﬁnd  the  highest-lying
pure  vibrational  state  for  this  case.  What  is  the  vibra-
tional quantum number v for this state?

Consider  higher  rotational  states  of  the  Morse
oscillator described in Problem 16. Use the Java
applet referenced there to ﬁnd the energies of the two
lowest  rotational  levels  (ᐉ ⫽ 1  and  ᐉ ⫽ 2)  associated
with the vibrational ground state of the H2 molecule in
this  model.  Compare  your  results  with  the  predictions
of  Equation  11.10  for  this  case.  Are  the  rotations  and
vibrations of the H2 molecule really independent?

18. An  H2 molecule  is  in  its  vibrational  and  rotational
ground  states.  It  absorbs  a  photon  of  wavelength
2.2112 ␮m and jumps to the v ⫽ 1, ᐉ ⫽ 1 energy level.
It  then  drops  to  the  v ⫽ 0, ᐉ ⫽ 2  energy  level,  while
emitting a photon of wavelength 2.4054 ␮m. Calculate
(a) the moment of inertia of the H2 molecule about an
axis through its center of mass, (b) the vibrational fre-
quency  of  the  H2 molecule,  and  (c)  the  equilibrium
separation distance for this molecule.

11.4 Electron Sharing and the Covalent Bond
19. A one-dimensional model for the electronic energy of a
diatomic  homonuclear  molecule  is  described  by  the
potential  well  and  barrier  shown  in  Figure  P11.19.
In the simplest case, the barrier width is shrunk to zero
(w : 0)  while  the  barrier  height  increases  without
limit  (U : ⬁)  in  such  a  way  that  the  product  Uw ap-
proaches  a  ﬁnite  value  S called  the  barrier  strength.
Such  a  barrier — known  as  a  delta  function  barrier —
can be shown to produce a discontinuous slope in the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

403

d 2f
dx2 ⬇ (1/⌬x)2{ f (x ⫹ ⌬x) ⫺ 2f (x) ⫹ f (x ⫺ ⌬x)}
where ⌬x is a small increment.)

21. Repeat  the  calculations  of  Problem  20  for  the  case  of
the neutral hydrogen molecule, H2. Take for the mole-
cular energy of H2

Etotal ⫽

2
R

⫹ 2E⫹

⫹ given in Problem
where E⫹ is the bonding energy of H2
20. Compare your result for the effective spring constant
with the experimental value for H2, about 573 N/m.

Modeling  a  Heteronuclear  Molecule.  Before  at-
tempting this problem, review the on-line tutor-
ial  at  http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e : QMTools
Simulations : Two-Center Potentials (Tutorial) and the
application  to  covalent  bonding  presented  there.  The
application  references  a  Java  applet  that  uses  a  divided
square well to model the potential energy of an electron
in  a  diatomic  molecule.  The  defaults  portray  “atomic”
wells  100 eV  high  and  2.00 Å  wide,  separated  by  a  bar-
rier  0.500 Å  wide  and  100 eV  high.  Moving  the  divider
off-center  destroys  the  identity  of  the  atomic  wells  to
either  side  and  transforms  the  model  to  one  of  a  het-
eronuclear  molecule.  Without  changing 
the  bar-
rier width  or  height,  reposition  the  divider  to  leave
atomic  wells  with  widths  1.75 Å  and  2.25 Å.  Find  the
bonding – antibonding  orbital  pair  that  derives  from
the atomic  ground  states  for  this  heteronuclear  mol-
ecule. Contrast the energy-splitting and molecular wave-
functions with those found for a homonuclear molecule,
speciﬁcally noting any similarities or differences.

The  Java  applet  referenced  in  Problem  22  can
be used to examine the behavior of an electron
initially  conﬁned  to  one  side  of  a  divided  square  well.
Here  we  use  the  applet  defaults  to  model  a  homonu-
clear molecule. Take for the initial state ⌿(x, 0) a sum of
the  bonding  and  antibonding  orbitals  that  derive  from
the  atomic  ground  state.  How  much  time,  in  seconds,
elapses  before  the  electron  can  be  said  to  have  crossed
the  divider?  The  reciprocal  of  this  time  is  the  crossing
frequency. Compare this crossing frequency with the fre-
quency ⌬E/h representing  the  energy  splitting  of  the
bonding  and  antibonding  states  in  the  mixture.  How
would your results change if the width and/or height of
the central divider were increased?

wavefunction at the barrier site L/2 given by

d␺

dx 兩L/2⫹

⫺

d␺

dx 兩L/2⫺

⫽

2mS
ប2 ␺(L/2)

Solve the wave equation in the well subject to this con-
dition  to  obtain  expressions  for  the  energies  of  the
ground  state  and  ﬁrst  excited  state  as  functions  of  the
barrier  strength  S.  Examine  carefully  the  limits  S : 0
and S : ⬁ and comment on your ﬁndings.

∞

∞

U

22.

w

0

L

L/2

Figure P11.19

20. In  Section  11.4  it  is  stated  that  the  approximate  elec-
⫹ as a function

tronic energy for the bonding state of H2
of the internuclear separation R is (in atomic units)

E⫹ ⫽ ⫺1 ⫺

2

1 ⫹ ⌬ 冦 1

R

⫺

1
R

(1 ⫹ R)e⫺2R ⫹ (1 ⫹ R)e⫺R冧

23.

To this we add the Coulomb energy of the two protons,
2/R, to get the total energy of this molecular ion, Etotal.
(a) Write a simple computer program to evaluate Etotal
for  any  given  value  of  R.  Use  your  program  to  verify
⫹ is
that the equilibrium separation of the protons in H2
R 0 ⫽ 2.49 bohrs, according to this model. (b) Use this
model  to  predict  a  value  for  the  effective  spring  con-
⫹ molecular
stant  that  governs  the  vibrations  of  the  H2
ion, and compare your result with the values reported
in  Table  11.2.  (Hint : Use  the  well-known  ﬁnite  differ-
ence approximation to the second derivative,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12
The Solid State

Chapter Outline

12.1 Bonding in Solids

Ionic Solids
Covalent Solids
Metallic Solids
Molecular Crystals
Amorphous Solids

12.2 Classical Free Electron 

Model of Metals
Ohm’s Law
Classical Free Electron Theory of Heat

Conduction

12.3 Quantum Theory of Metals

Replacement of vrms with v F
Wiedemann – Franz Law Revisited
Quantum Mean Free Path of

Electrons

12.4 Band Theory of Solids

Isolated-Atom Approach to Band

Theory

Conduction in Metals, Insulators,

and Semiconductors

Energy Bands from Electron Wave

Reﬂections

12.5 Semiconductor Devices

The p-n Junction
Light-Emitting and -Absorbing

Diodes — LEDs and Solar Cells

The Junction Transistor
The Field-Effect Transistor
The Integrated Circuit

12.6 Superconductivity
12.7 Lasers

Absorption, Spontaneous Emission,

and Stimulated Emission

Population Inversion and Laser Action
Semiconductor Lasers

Summary
WEB ESSAY The Invention of the Laser,

by S. A. Marshall

WEB ESSAY Photovoltaic Conversion, by

John D. Meakin

Matter in the solid state has been a subject of enormous fascination since the
beginnings of civilization. Primitive people were attracted to the solid state by
its  beauty,  as  in  radiant,  symmetric  gemstones,  and  by  its  utility,  as  in  metal
tools. These two attributes, utility and beauty, are just as important in physics to-
day. Industrial applications have made solid-state physics, or condensed-matter
physics, the largest subﬁeld of physics, as evidenced by the number of pages al-
located in physics journals and the number of physicists employed in this ﬁeld.
The beautiful symmetry and regularity of crystalline solids have both allowed
and  stimulated  rapid  progress  in  the  physics  of  crystalline  solids  in  the  20th
century.  Interestingly,  although  rapid  theoretical  progress  has  occurred  with
the  most  random  (gases)  and  the  most  regular  (crystalline  solids)  atomic
arrangements, much less has been done with liquids and amorphous (irregu-
lar)  solids  until  quite  recently.  Applications  such  as  solar  cells,  memory

404

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.1

BONDING IN SOLIDS

405

elements,  ﬁber-optic  waveguides,  and  xerography  have  driven  the  relatively
recent rush of interest in low-cost amorphous materials.

In this chapter we ﬁrst describe how molecules combine to form crystalline
and amorphous solids. We then introduce one of the simplest classical models
of  conductors,  the  free  electron  gas  model,  to  gain  physical  insight  into  the
processes  of  electrical  and  thermal  conduction.  Next  we  consider  the  quan-
tum  theory  of  metals  to  explain  the  deﬁciencies  of  the  classical  model.  We
describe  the  band  theory  of  solids  to  explain  the  differences  between  insula-
tors,  conductors,  and  semiconductors  and  include  a  brief  discussion  of  p-n
junctions,  semiconductor  devices,  and  superconductivity.  Finally  we  discuss
the general  principles  of  lasers  and  some  of  the  speciﬁcs  of  gas  and  semi-
conductor lasers.

12.1 BONDING IN SOLIDS

A  crystalline  solid  consists  of  a  large  number  of  atoms  arranged  in  a  regular
array,  forming  a  periodic  structure.  The  bonding  schemes  for  molecules  dis-
cussed in Chapter 11 are also appropriate for describing the bonding mecha-
nisms in solids. For example, the ions in the NaCl crystal are ionically bonded,
while  the  carbon  atoms  in  the  diamond  structure  form  covalent  bonds.
Another type of bonding mechanism is the metallic bond, which is responsible
for the cohesion of copper, silver, sodium, and other metals. Finally, the weak-
est type of bonding, van der Waals bonding, is responsible for the cohesion of
organic solids and rare gas crystals. Refer to Section 11.1 for a survey of molec-
ular bonding mechanisms.

Ionic Solids
Many  crystals  form  by  ionic  bonding,  where  the  dominant  effect  is  the
Coulomb interaction between the ions. Consider the NaCl crystal shown in
Figure 12.1, where each Na⫹ ion has six nearest-neighbor Cl⫺ ions and each

Na+

Cl –

(a)

(b)

Figure  12.1 (a)  The  crystal  structure  of  NaCl.  The  unit  cell  shown  here  represents
four NaCl units and is the smallest repeating unit having the symmetry of the crystal.
(b) In the NaCl structure, each positive sodium ion is surrounded by six negative chlo-
rine ions, and each chlorine ion is surrounded by six sodium ions.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

406

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Cl⫺ ion has six nearest-neighbor Na⫹ ions. Each Na⫹ ion is attracted to the
six  Cl⫺ ions.  The  corresponding  attractive  potential  energy  is  ⫺6ke 2/r,
is  the  Na⫹–Cl⫺ separation  and  k is  the  Coulomb  constant 
where r
k ⫽ 1/4␲⑀0. In addition, there are 12 Na⫹ ions at a distance of 
from the
Na⫹, which produce a weaker repulsive force on the Na⫹ ion. Furthermore,
beyond these 12 Na⫹ ions one ﬁnds more Cl⫺ ions that produce an attrac-
tive force, and so on. The net effect of all these interactions is an attractive
electrostatic potential energy,

√2r

Uattractive ⫽ ⫺␣k

e 2
r

(12.1)

where ␣ is a dimensionless number called the Madelung constant. The value
of ␣ depends  only  on  the  particular  type  of  crystal  lattice  or  structure.  For
example, ␣ ⫽ 1.7476  for  the  NaCl  structure.  When  the  constituent  ions  of  a
crystal are brought close together, the electrons in closed shells begin to over-
lap, which results in a repulsion between the closed shells that is partly electro-
static in origin and partly a result of the Pauli exclusion principle. This intro-
duces  a  repulsive  potential  energy  term  into  the  expression  for  the  total
potential energy of the crystal, which we write as B/r m, where m is an integer
on  the  order  of  10.  The  total  potential  energy  per  ion  pair  of  the  crystal  is
therefore of the form

Utotal ⫽ ⫺␣k

e 2
r

⫹

B
r m

(12.2)

(We do not sum over neighbors in the case of the repulsive force because this
force is negligible when ions are separated by a distance larger than the equi-
librium separation, r 0.) Figure 12.2 is a plot of the total potential energy per
ion  pair  of  the  crystal  versus  ion  separation.  The  potential  energy  has  its 

Potential energy

Repulsive potential ∝ 1/r m

Total potential

r

U0

r 0

Attractive Coulomb potential ∝ 1/r

0

+

–

Figure 12.2 Potential energy per ion pair versus ion separation for an ionic solid. U 0
is the ionic cohesive energy, and r 0 is the equilibrium separation between ions.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

minimum value U0 at the equilibrium separation where r ⫽ r 0. It is left to an
end-of-chapter problem (Problem 1) to show that B may be expressed in terms
of r0 and m and that the minimum energy U0 is

12.1

BONDING IN SOLIDS

407

U0 ⫽ ⫺␣k

e 2

r 0 冢1 ⫺

1

m 冣

(12.3)

Atomic cohesive energy

The absolute value of U 0, called the ionic cohesive energy of the solid, is the
energy required to pull the solid apart into a collection of inﬁnitely separated
positive  and  negative  ions.  The  measured  ionic  cohesive  energy  of  NaCl  is
7.84 eV per ion pair or about 760 kJ/mol. In calculating the atomic cohesive
energy, which is the energy needed to pull the solid apart into a collection of
inﬁnitely separated Na and Cl neutral atoms, we must keep in mind that one
gains 5.14 eV in going from Na⫹ to Na and one must supply 3.61 eV in order
to convert Cl⫺ to Cl. Thus the atomic cohesive energy of NaCl per atom pair
may be computed as

⫹7.84 eV ⫺ 5.14 eV ⫹ 3.61 eV ⫽ ⫹6.31 eV

The  atomic  cohesive  energy  is  an  important  comparative  measure  of  the
strengths of differently bonded solids. Table 12.1 lists measured atomic cohe-
sive energies per atom pair and melting points for a few ionic compounds.

Ionic crystals have the following general properties:
• They form relatively stable and hard crystals.
• They  are  poor  electrical  conductors  because  there  are  no  available  free

electrons.

• They have fairly high melting and boiling points since appreciable ther-
mal energy must be added to the crystal to overcome the large cohesive
energy.

• They  are  transparent  to  visible  radiation  but  absorb  strongly  in  the  in-
frared region. This occurs because the electrons form such tightly bound
shells  in  ionic  solids  that  visible  radiation  does  not  contain  sufﬁcient
energy  to  promote  electrons  to  the  next  allowed  shell  and  so  is  not  ab-
sorbed. The strong infrared absorption (at 20 to 150 ␮m) occurs because
the vibrations of the rather massive ions have a low natural frequency and
experience resonant absorption in the low-energy infrared region.

• They are generally quite soluble in polar liquids such as water. The water
molecule,  which  has  a  permanent  electric  dipole  moment,  exerts  an  at-
tractive force on the charged ions, which breaks the ionic bonds and dis-
solves the solid.

Table 12.1 Properties of Some Ionic Crystals

Equilibrium Separation

Atomic Cohesive Energy Melting Point

Crystal

LiF
NaCl
RbF
KCl
CsI

(Å)

2.01
2.82
2.82
3.15
3.95

(eV per atom pair)

8.32
6.31
7.10
6.48
5.36

(K)

1143
1074
1068
1043
621

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

408

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

(a)

Figure  12.3 (a)  Each  carbon  atom  in  diamond  is  covalently  bonded  to  four  other
carbons and the four outer carbons form a tetrahedron. (b) The crystal structure of di-
amond,  showing  the  tetrahedral  bond  arrangement.  (After  W.  Shockley,  Electrons  and
Holes in Semiconductors, New York, Van Nostrand, 1950)

(b)

Covalent Solids
As we found in Chapter 11, the covalent bond is very strong. Solid carbon, in
the form of diamond, is a crystal whose atoms are covalently bonded. Because
atomic carbon has the electron conﬁguration 1s 22s 22p 2, it lacks four electrons
with respect to a ﬁlled shell (2p6). Hence each carbon atom in diamond bonds
covalently to four other carbon atoms to form a stable closed-shell structure.

In the diamond structure, each carbon atom is covalently bonded to four
other carbon atoms at the corners of a cube, as illustrated in Figure 12.3a. Fig-
ure 12.3b shows the crystal structure of diamond. Note that each carbon atom
forms covalent bonds with four nearest-neighbor atoms. The basic structure of
diamond  is  called  tetrahedral (each  carbon  atom  is  at  the  center  of  a  regular
tetrahedron), and the angle between the bonds is 109.5⬚. Other covalent crys-
tals, such as silicon and germanium, have similar structures.

Table 12.2 gives the properties of some covalent solids. Note that the atomic
cohesive  energies  are  greater  than  for  ionic  solids,  which  accounts  for  the

Table 12.2 Properties of Some Covalent Crystals

Atomic Cohesive Energy

Melting Point

Crystal

C (diamond)
SiC
Si
Ge

(eV/atom)*

7.37
6.15
4.63
3.85

(K)

⬃4000
2870
1687
1211

*Since covalent atomic cohesive energies are given in electron volts per atom,
they should be multiplied by 2 for a proper comparison to Table 12.1.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.1

BONDING IN SOLIDS

409

Metal ion

Electron gas

Figure 12.4 The free electron
model of a metal. The negative
electron  gas  acts  as  a  kind  of
glue  to  hold  the  positive  metal
ions together.

hardness of covalent solids. Diamond is particularly hard and has an extremely
high  melting  point  (about  4000 K).  In  general,  covalently  bonded  solids  are
very hard, have large bond energies and high melting points, and are good in-
sulators, since the electrons are tightly bound in localized bonds. Because elec-
trons are so tightly bound in diamond and other covalent solids, there is insuf-
ﬁcient energy in visible light to raise electrons to excited states. Consequently,
many covalent solids do not absorb visible light and so appear transparent.

Metallic Solids
Metallic bonds are generally weaker than ionic or covalent bonds. The valence
electrons in a metal are relatively free to move throughout the material. There is
a large number of such mobile electrons in a metal, typically one or two electrons
per  atom.  The  metal  structure  can  be  viewed  as  a  lattice  of  positive  ions  sur-
rounded by a “gas” of nearly free electrons (Fig. 12.4). The binding mechanism
in a metal is the attractive force between the positive ions and the electron gas.

Metals  have  an  atomic  cohesive  energy  in  the  range  of  1  to  4 eV,  which  is
smaller than the cohesive energies of covalent solids but still large enough to pro-
duce strong solids (see Table 12.3). Visible light interacts strongly with the free
electrons  in  metals  because  these  conduction  electrons  can  move  with  large
amplitude  in  the  oscillating  electric  ﬁeld  of  the  light  wave,  both  strongly
absorbing the light wave and reradiating it. Hence visible light is absorbed and
re-emitted quite close to the surface of a metal, which accounts for both the non-
transparency to visible light and the shiny nature of metallic surfaces. In addition
to the high electrical conductivity of metals produced by the free electrons, the
nondirectional nature of the metallic bond allows many different types of metal-
lic atoms to be dissolved in a host metal in varying amounts. The resulting solid
solutions, or alloys, may be designed to have particular properties, such as high
strength, low density, ductility, resistance to corrosion, and so on.

Molecular Crystals
A  fourth  class  of  binding  can  occur  even  when  electrons  are  not  available  to
participate in bond formation, as in the cases of saturated organic molecules
(CH4) and inert gas atoms with closed electron shells. The weak electric forces
at work in this type of bonding include van der Waals forces and arise from

Table 12.3 Properties of Some Metallic Crystals

Atomic Cohesive Energy

Melting Point

Crystal

(eV/atom)*

Fe
Cu
Au
Ag
Pb
Zn

4.28
3.49
3.81
2.95
2.04
1.35

(K)

2082
1631
1338
1235
874
693

*Since  metallic  atomic  cohesive  energies  are  given  in  electron  volts
per atom, they should be multiplied by 2 for a proper comparison to
Table 12.1.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

410

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

the  attractive  force  between  electric  dipoles.  (See  the  discussion  of  van  der
Waals  bonds  in  Section  11.1.)  Some  simple  molecules  containing  hydrogen,
such as water, have permanent dipole moments (due to the built-in separation
of  positive  and  negative  centers  of  charge)  and  form  relatively  strong  bonds
known as hydrogen bonds. Ice, for example, is hydrogen bonded with a cohe-
sive energy of about 0.52 eV/molecule or 12 kcal/mol. (Note that 1 eV/mole-
cule ⫽ 23 kcal/mol.)  Actually,  hydrogen  bonding  involves  more  than  dipole
attractive forces and may be considered a sort of covalent bond where protons
are  shared  rather  than  electrons.  Two  molecules  without  permanent  dipole
moments  also  experience  ﬂuctuation-induced  dipole–dipole  attractions,  but
these van der Waals forces are much weaker. Such weak forces hold together
many organic solids with comparatively low melting and boiling points, as well
as  inert  gas  crystals.  Two  typical  cases  are  solid  methane,  with  a  cohesive  en-
ergy of about 0.10 eV/molecule and a melting point of 91 K, and solid argon,
with a cohesive energy of 0.078 eV/molecule and a melting point of 84 K.

Amorphous Solids
The apparent simplicity and regularity of crystalline solids suggest that it will
be most proﬁtable to focus attention on perfect crystals. This is the direction
we  shall  take  in  most  of  this  chapter.  However,  real  crystals  are  far  from  per-
fect,  since  they  contain  irregularities  and  impurities  that  can  have  profound
effects  on  their  strength,  conductivity,  and  other  properties.  This  gives  us
some  motivation  for  a  brief  discussion  of  crystal  defects  and  the  nature  of
amorphous solids.

It is well known that crystals of a given material form when the liquid state
of that material is cooled sufﬁciently. For example, water forms crystals when
cooled  to  0⬚C.  In  general,  more  perfect  crystals  form  if  a  liquid  is  cooled
slowly,  allowing  the  molecules  to  relax  gradually  to  states  having  minimum
potential  energy.  Conversely,  rapid  cooling  of  a  liquid  causes  many  disloca-
tions  in  the  resulting  lattice  structure.  If  the  cooling  is  rapid  enough,  almost
any liquid can form an amorphous solid (or glass) without long-range order,
as  shown  in  Figure  12.5.  Although  an  amorphous  solid  has  no  long-range
order,  there  is  extensive  short-range  order  in  that  bond  lengths  and  bond

Crystal

Glass

Gas

Figure  12.5 Two-dimensional  sketches  of  the  atoms  in  a  crystal,  a  glass,  and  a  gas.
Note that the crystal has equal bond lengths and angles, the glass has a distribution of
nearly  equal  bond  lengths  and  angles,  and  the  gas  has  a  completely  random  spatial
distribution of atoms. (After R. Zallen, The Physics of Amorphous Solids, New York, John
Wiley and Sons, 1983)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.1

BONDING IN SOLIDS

411

Pressure

Heater

Molten metal

Metallic

glass ribbon

15 m/s

Monochromatic
beam of x rays,

electrons, or neutrons

Is (  )θ

Sample

θ

2

Photographic plate
or other detector

Figure 12.7 A basic experimental setup for determining the distribu-
tion  of  atoms  in  a  powder  sample.  Rings  of  constant  intensity  on  the
photographic plate arise from the tiny, randomly oriented crystals com-
prising  the  powder.  (After  R.  Zallen,  The  Physics  of  Amorphous  Solids,
New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1983)

Massive cold disk

Figure  12.6 Preparing  an  amor-
phous metal ribbon by melt spinning.

angles  for  nearest  neighbors  are  nearly  the  same  throughout  the  solid.  Even
metals  can  be  made  to  solidify  in  an  amorphous  form  (called  a  metallic
glass) if the metal in the liquid state can be cooled by 1000 K in about 1 mil-
lisecond.  Figure  12.6  illustrates  one  clever  technique  for  achieving  cooling
rates of 106 K/s, known as melt spinning.

The  main  experimental  techniques  for  determining  the  distribution  of
atoms  in  crystalline  and  amorphous  solids  are  x-ray  diffraction,  electron  dif-
fraction,  and  neutron  diffraction.  The  primary  experimental  data  are  mea-
surements  of  the  scattered  intensity  Is(␪),  as  sketched  in  Figure  12.7.  Figure
12.8  shows  actual  photographic  records  of  the  electron  intensity  scattered
from amorphous and crystalline iron samples. Note that the regular spacing of
atoms  over  many  atomic  separations  in  the  crystalline  sample  leads  to  many
sharp diffraction lines. This is in contrast to the metallic glass sample, in which
the distribution of atomic separations and bond angles over one or two atomic
separations leads to fewer, more diffuse lines.

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.8 Electron diffraction patterns of (a) amorphous iron and (b) crystalline
iron. (From T. Ichikawa, Phys. Status, Solidi A, 19:707, 1973)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

412

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

RDF

Crystal

RDF

Glass

0

2

4

6

8

10

r (Å)

0

2

4

6

8

10

r (Å)

RDF

Gas

RDF ∝ r 2

0

2

4

6

8

10

r (Å)

Figure  12.9 Representative  radial  distribution  functions  (RDF)  for  a  substance  in
crystalline,  amorphous,  and  gas  phases.  (After  R.  Zallen,  The  Physics  of  Amorphous
Solids, New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1983)

The distribution of atoms in space, which is described by the radial dis-
tribution  function (RDF), ␳(r ),  may  be  obtained  by  taking  the  Fourier
transform  of  Is(␪).1 Note  that  ␳(r ) dr is  the  probability  of  ﬁnding  neigh-
boring  atoms  between  r and r ⫹ dr from  any  atom  chosen  as  the  origin.
Thus we expect ␳(r ) to consist of many sharp maxima for crystals, because
their  structures  consist  of  extremely  regular  shells  of  nearest-neighbor
atoms,  next-nearest-neighbor  atoms,  and  so  forth.  On  the  other  hand,  we
expect  fewer  and  broader  maxima  for  glasses  because  of  their  short-range
order  and  distribution  of  bond  lengths.  Figure  12.9  shows  schematic  illus-

Figure  12.10 RDFs  for  amorphous  and  crystalline
germanium,  calculated  from  x-ray  scattering.  (From 
R. J. Temkin, W. Paul, and G. A. N. Connell, Adv. Phys.,
22:581, 1973)

RDF

crystalline

amorphous

0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

r (Å)

1See, for example, R. Zallen, The Physics of Amorphous Solids, New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1983,
Chapter 2.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.2

CLASSICAL FREE ELECTRON MODEL OF METALS

413

Table 12.4 Examples of Technological Applications 

of Amorphous Solids

Type

Material

Use

Oxide glass
Oxide glass
Organic polymer
Chalcogenide glass

(SiO2)0.8(Na2O)0.2
(SiO2)0.9(GeO2)0.1
Polystyrene
Se, As2Se3

Amorphous silicon
Metallic glass

Si0.9H0.1
Fe0.8B0.2

Transparent window glass
Ultratransparent optical ﬁbers
Strong, low-density plastics
Photoconductive ﬁlms used for 
xerography
Solar cells
Ferromagnetic low-loss ribbons used as
transformer cores

trations  of  these  differences  in  the  radial  distribution  function  for  the
crystal,  glass,  and  gas  phases.  Note  that  the  RDFs  for  the  crystal  and  glass
phases  are  superimposed  on  a  background  equivalent  to  the  gas  RDF,
␳gas(r ) ⫽ Ar 2,  where  A is  a  constant.  The  RDFs  for  both  crystal  and  glass
approach  the  gas  RDF  for  large  r values  because  the  distribution  of  atoms
becomes  effectively  continuous  over  large  distances  and  smoothes  out  to 
an  average  value  of 
atoms  per  unit  volume,  as  in  the  gas  phase.  Because
the  volume  of  a  spherical  shell  is  4␲r 2 dr,  the  number  of  atoms  between 
r and r ⫹ dr in  the  gas  phase  is  given  by  ␳gas(r )dr ⫽ (4␲r 2 dr ).  Thus 
␳gas(r ) ⫽ Ar 2, where A ⫽ 4␲ .
n

n

n

Figure  12.10  shows  actual  RDFs  for  crystalline  and  amorphous  ger-
manium  obtained  from  x-ray  diffraction  measurements.  Note  that  the
amorphous  RDF  merges  with  the  smeared  background  after  about  four
oscillations, indicating only short-range order. However, the crystalline RDF
still  varies  sharply  after  14  oscillations.  Furthermore,  note  that  the  crys-
talline  RDF  peaks  are  not  as  sharp  as  might  be  expected  but  are  broad-
ened by  thermal  and  zero-point  vibrations  of  the  atoms  about  their  lattice
positions.

Amorphous  solids  have  many  useful  and  interesting  physical  properties,
such  as  extremely  high  optical  transparency,  extremely  high  strength,  and
low  density.  You  may  wish  to  read  Zallen  (cited  in  Suggestions  for  Further
Reading at the end of this chapter) for more information about amorphous
solids.  We  conclude  our  brief  introduction  to  this  rapidly  expanding  ﬁeld
with Table 12.4, which lists some of the technological applications of amor-
phous solids.

12.2 CLASSICAL FREE ELECTRON

MODEL OF METALS

Shortly  after  Thomson’s  discovery  of  the  electron,  Drude  and  Thomson
proposed  the  free  electron  theory  of  metals.  According  to  this  theory,  the
physical properties of a metal may be explained by modeling the metal as a
classical gas of conduction electrons moving through a ﬁxed lattice of posi-
tive  ion  cores.  Thomson,  Drude,  and  Lorentz  used  this  picture  of  a  highly

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

414

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Table 12.5 Thermal Conductivity, K, and Electrical
Conductivity, ␴, of Selected Substances
at Room Temperature

Substance

K in W ⴢ mⴚ1Kⴚ1

␴ in (⍀ ⴢ m)ⴚ1

Silver
Copper
Gold
Aluminum
Iron
Steel
Nichrome
Quartz
NaCl

427
390
314
210
63
50
14
13
7.0

62 ⫻ 106
59 ⫻ 106
41 ⫻ 106
35 ⫻ 106
10 ⫻ 106
1.4 ⫻ 106
0.9 ⫻ 106

⬍10⫺4

mobile  electron  “ﬂuid”  to  explain  the  high  electrical  and  thermal  conduc-
tivities of metals, shown in Table 12.5, with considerable success. In particu-
lar,  the  model  predicts  the  correct  functional  form  of  Ohm’s  law  and  the
remarkably simple empirical connection between the electrical and thermal
conductivities  of  a  metal  known  as  the  Wiedemann–Franz  relation.2 How-
ever, the model does not accurately predict the experimental values of elec-
trical  and  thermal  conductivities  when  classical  electronic  mean  free  paths
are  used  in  the  calculations.  In  fact,  we  shall  see  that  the  shortcomings  of
the  classical  model  can  be  remedied  only  by  taking  into  account  the  wave
nature of the electron. This involves replacing the Maxwell–Boltzmann rms
velocity  for  electrons  with  the  Fermi  velocity  (see  Section  10.5)  as  well  as
replacing  the  classical  mean  free  path  of  electrons  with  the  much  longer
quantum mean free path, which may be hundreds to thousands of times the
interatomic distance. Such long mean free paths occur because the electron
is a wave and, as such, is able to pass freely through a nearly perfect lattice,
scattering only when it encounters impurity atoms or other deviations from
crystalline regularity.

Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s law was ﬁrst established as an experimental result applicable to a wide
range of metals and semiconductors. It states that the current density in a ma-
terial is directly proportional to the applied electric ﬁeld. That is,

J ⫽ ␴E

(12.4)

where J is  the  current  density  (A/m2), ␴ is  the  electrical  conductivity  of  the
material  (⍀⫺1 m⫺1),  and  E is  the  electric  ﬁeld  (V/m).  Rather  than  viewing
Equation 12.4 simply as a proportionality between applied ﬁeld and resulting
current,  it  is  more  instructive  to  interpret  this  equation  as  a  deﬁnition  of ␴.
Interpreted in this way, Equation 12.4 tells us that a single constant, ␴, which

2The Wiedemann–Franz relation states that the ratio of thermal conductivity to electrical conduc-
tivity for metals is proportional to the temperature and that the value of the proportionality con-
stant is independent of the metal considered.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.2

CLASSICAL FREE ELECTRON MODEL OF METALS

415

depends on the material and temperature but not on applied ﬁeld or voltage, com-
pletely characterizes the electrical conduction in an ohmic solid.

We can derive Ohm’s law by considering a conductor to consist of a gas of
classical  particles  (conduction  electrons)  moving  through  a  background  of
immobile,  heavy  ions.  The  electrons  in  a  metal  move  randomly  along
straight-line  trajectories,  which  are  constantly  interrupted  by  collisions  with
lattice  ions  (see  Fig.  12.11a).  The  root  mean  square  speed  at  room  tem-
perature is fairly high (⬃105 m/s) and may be calculated from the classical
equipartition theorem:

or

1
2 mev2 ⫽ 3

2 k BT

vrms ⫽ √v2 ⫽ 冢 3k BT

me 冣1/2

(12.5)

Each  step  of  the  motion  (the  path  between  collisions)  shown  in  Figure
12.11a  is  a  “free  path”;  the  average  free  path,  or  mean  free  path, L,  is
related to the mean free time, ␶, the average time between collisions, and
to vrms by

L ⫽ vrms␶

(12.6)

In  Drude’s  original  model,  L was  taken  to  be  several  angstroms,  consistent
with the view that an electron generally travels one interatomic spacing before
bumping into a large ion.

When an electric ﬁeld is applied to the sample, an electric force is exerted
on  an  electron  during  each  interval  between  collisions,  resulting  in  a  dis-
placement  that  is  small  compared  to  the  mean  free  path.  The  cumulative
effect of these displacements may be viewed in terms of a small average drift
speed, vd, superimposed on the rather high random thermal speed, as shown
in Figure 12.11b.

Start

Finish

Finish

(a)

Start

E

τ

vd

s

(b)

Figure  12.11 (a)  Random  successive  displacements  of  an  electron  in  a  metal  with-
out an  applied  electric  ﬁeld.  (b)  A  combination  of  random  displacements  and  dis-
placements  produced  by  an  external  electric  ﬁeld.  The  net  effect  of  the  electric  ﬁeld
is to  add  together  multiple  displacements  of  length vd␶ opposite  the  ﬁeld  direc-
tion. For  purposes  of  illustration,  this  ﬁgure  greatly  exaggerates  the  size  of vd com-
pared with vrms.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

416

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

We may  derive  an  expression  for  vd by  assuming  that  the  total  displace-

ments, s, of an electron after b collisions is

s ⫽

a
2

 (t 1

2 ⫹ t 2

2 ⫹ t 3

2 ⫹ ⭈  ⭈  ⭈ ⫹ t b
2)

(12.7)

where t1, t2,  and  so  on  are  the  successive  times  between  collisions  and  a
is the  acceleration  (a ⫽ eE/me)  produced  by  the  electric  ﬁeld.  Note  that
we have  ignored  the  random  initial  velocities  of  the  electron  in  Equation
12.7,  since  these  average  to  zero.  We  may  write  Equation  12.7  in  terms  of
averages as

s ⫽

a
2

 (b)(t 2)

(12.8)

Because  the  average  value  of  t 2 is ⫽ 2␶2 (see  Problem  9),  Equation  12.8
becomes

t 2

or

s ⫽ ab␶2

s ⫽

eE
me

b␶2

(12.9)

Comparing Equation 12.9 to the expression for the displacement in terms of
the drift speed, s ⫽ bvd␶, we ﬁnd

vd ⫽

eE␶
me

(12.10)

E field

vd

A

vddt

V

Figure  12.12 The  connection  between  current  density,  J,  and  drift  velocity,  vd.  The
charge  that  passes  through  A in  time  dt is  the  charge  contained  in  the  small  paral-
lelepiped, neAvd dt.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.2

CLASSICAL FREE ELECTRON MODEL OF METALS

417

To ﬁnd  the  magnitude  of  the  current  density,  J,  when  n electrons  per
unit volume all move with speed vd, we note that in a time dt the electrons
move a distance vddt, so that nAvddt electrons cross an area A perpendicular
to  the  direction  of  electron  ﬂow  (Fig.  12.12).  Since  each  electron  has  a
charge e,  the  charge  crossing  the  area  A in  the  time  dt is neAvddt,  and  the
current density is

J ⫽

neAvd dt

Adt

⫽ nevd

Substituting vd ⫽ eE␶/me into Equation 12.11 yields

J ⫽ nevd ⫽

ne2␶
me

E

(12.11)

(12.12)

The  proportionality  of  J to E given  by  Equation  12.12  shows  that  the
classical  free  electron  model  predicts  the  observed  Ohm’s  law  depen-
dence of J on E. For this case, the conductivity, which is independent of E, is

or, using ␶ ⫽ L/vrms,

␴ ⫽

ne2␶
me

␴ ⫽

ne2L
mevrms

(12.13)

(12.14)

Substituting the Maxwell – Boltzmann rms thermal speed into Equation 12.14
yields

␴ ⫽

ne2L

(3k BTme)1/2

(12.15)

Table  12.6  lists  measured  values  of ␴ for  various  metals,  for  comparison  with
calculations  using  Equation  12.15.  Since  the  resistivity, ␳,  is  the  reciprocal  of
the conductivity, Equation 12.15 may also be written

␳ ⫽

(3k BTme)1/2

ne2L

(12.16)

Classical expressions for
conductivity and resistivity

Table 12.6 Electrical Conductivity of

Metals at 300 K

Substance

Measured ␴ in (⍀ ⴢ m)ⴚ1

Copper
Aluminum
Sodium
Iron
Mercury

59 ⫻ 106
35 ⫻ 106
22 ⫻ 106
10 ⫻ 106
1.0 ⫻ 106

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

418

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

EXAMPLE 12.1 The Classical Free Electron

Model of Conductivity in Solids

(a) Show that the rms thermal speed of electrons at 300 K
is many orders of magnitude higher than the drift speed,
vd.  To  ﬁnd  vd,  assume  that  a  copper  wire  with  a  cross
section  of  2 mm ⫻ 2 mm  carries  a  current  of  10 A,  and
that  each  copper  atom  contributes  1  free  electron. The
density  of  copper  at  room  temperature  is  8.96 g/cm3.
(b) Estimate  ␶,  the  average  time  between  collisions  for
copper at room temperature, assuming that the mean free
path  is  the  interatomic  distance,  2.6 Å.  (c) Calculate  the
conductivity  of  copper  at  room  temperature  as  a  test  of
the classical free electron gas theory, and compare this to
the measured value found in Table 12.6.

Solution (a) By Equation 12.5,

vrms ⫽ 冢 3kBT

me 冣1/2

⫽ 冤 3(1.38 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K )(300 K )

9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31kg

冥1/2

⫽ 1.17 ⫻ 105 m/s

To calculate vd we use  J ⫽ nevd, or  vd ⫽ J/ne. The num-
ber of free (conduction) electrons per cubic centimeter,
n, in copper is

Thus,

vd ⫽

J
ne

⫽

(10 A)/(4 ⫻ 10⫺6 m2)

(8.49 ⫻ 1028 m⫺3)(1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)

⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺4 m/s

The ratio of drift speed to rms speed is

vd
vrms

⫽ 1.5 ⫻ 10⫺9

(b) Using Equation 12.6, we ﬁnd for the average time be-
tween collisions

␶ ⫽

L
vrms

⫽

2.6 ⫻ 10⫺10 m
1.2 ⫻ 105 m/s

⫽ 2.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m/s

Thus,  in  this  model,  the  electrons  experience  several
hundred trillion collisions per second!

(c) Equation 12.15 gives for T ⫽ 300 K

␴ ⫽

ne 2L

(3k BTme)1/2 ⫽ 5.3 ⫻ 106 (⍀ ⭈m)⫺1

From Table 12.6 we see that this value of the conductivity
is about 10 times smaller than the measured value!

n ⫽ 冢 1 free electron

冣

mol

atom

冣冢 6.02 ⫻ 1023 atoms
63.5 g 冣
cm3 冣冢 1 mol

⫻ 冢 8.96 g

⫽ 8.49 ⫻ 1022 electrons/cm3

Although  the  classical  electron  gas  model  does  predict  Ohm’s  law,  we  see
from  Example  12.1  that  it  results  in  conductivity  values  that  differ  from
measured  values  by  an  order  of  magnitude.  Worse  yet,  the  measured  resistivity
of most  metals  is  found  to  be  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature  (see
Fig. 12.13), yet the classical electron gas model predicts a much weaker depen-
dence of ␳ on T. From Equation 12.16 we see that the classical model incor-
rectly  predicts  that  resistivity  should  be  proportional  to  the  square  root  of
the absolute  temperature.  In  Section  12.3  we  will  give  a  different  model
of electron scattering, which explains the observed linear dependence of ␳ on
T at high temperatures.

Classical Free Electron Theory of Heat Conduction
The thermal conductivity of a substance, K, is deﬁned in a way similar to elec-
trical  conductivity, ␴.  In  the  case  of  electrical  conductivity  we  found  current
density equal to conductivity times voltage gradient, or

J ⫽ ⫺␴ 

⌬V
⌬x

(12.17)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

 ( × 10–8 Ω • m)
ρ

12.2

CLASSICAL FREE ELECTRON MODEL OF METALS

419

Cu

5

4

3

2

1

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T (K)

Figure 12.13 The resistivity of pure copper as a function of temperature.

Likewise, we now have thermal current density (W/m2) equal to thermal con-
ductivity times temperature gradient, or

⌬Q
A ⌬t

⫽ ⫺K

⌬T
⌬x

(12.18)

Here ⌬Q is the thermal energy conducted through a cross-sectional area A
in  time  ⌬t between  two  planes  with  a  temperature  gradient  of  ⌬T/⌬x.  Since
good  electrical  conductors  are  also  good  conductors  of  thermal  energy,  it  is
natural to assume that the highly mobile electron gas is responsible for trans-
porting charge as well as thermal energy through the metal via random colli-
sion processes. A remarkable triumph of the classical free electron model was
to show that if free electrons were responsible for both electrical and thermal
conduction in metals, then the ratio of K/␴ should be a universal constant, the
same  for  all  metals,  and  dependent  only  on  the  absolute  temperature.  Since  such  an
unusually  simple  connection  between  K and ␴ had  already  been  observed
experimentally  (the  Wiedemann–Franz  law),  this  prediction  conﬁrmed  that
the motion of the electron gas was basically responsible for both electrical and
thermal conductivity.

Since the Wiedemann–Franz law is such a simple result, it bears considera-
tion  in  more  detail.  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases  may  be  applied  to  the  free
electron  gas  to  calculate  the  ﬂux  of  thermal  energy  (W/m2)  carried  by
electrons  moving  from  a  region  at  temperature  T ⫹ ⌬T to  a  region  at  lower
temperature T.3 Using  this  result,  one  immediately  ﬁnds  that  the  thermal

3See  C.  Kittel,  Introduction  to  Solid  State  Physics,  6th  ed.,  New  York,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  1986,
Chapter 5.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

420

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Table 12.7 Experimental
Lorentz Numbers K/␴T in
Units of 10ⴚ8 W ⴢ ⍀/K2*

Metal

273 K

373 K

Ag
Au
Cd
Cu
Ir
Mo
Pb
Pt
Sn
W
Zn

2.31
2.35
2.42
2.23
2.49
2.61
2.47
2.51
2.52
3.04
2.31

2.37
2.40
2.43
2.33
2.49
2.79
2.56
2.60
2.49
3.20
2.33

conductivity, K, depends simply on the heat capacity per unit volume, Cv, vrms,
and the mean free path, L, of the electrons, as follows:

K ⫽ 1

3CvvrmsL

(12.19)

If  we  assume  that  the  electrons  behave  as  a  classical  ideal  gas  and  obey
Maxwell–Boltzmann  statistics,  the  heat  capacity  per  mole is  found  to  be  3R/2
or 3NAkB/2, where NA is Avogadro’s number. To convert this to heat capacity
per unit volume for use in Equation 12.19, we must multiply by the ratio of the
electron density to Avogadro’s number. Thus,

Cv ⫽ (3

2k Bn

2NAk B) 冢 n

NA 冣 ⫽ 3

and Equation 12.19 becomes

K ⫽

k BnvrmsL

2

(12.20)

*From C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid
State  Physics, 2nd  ed.,  New  York,
John Wiley and Sons, 1965.

If we simply use the interatomic distance for L in Equation 12.20, we will ﬁnd
incorrect values, as in the case of electrical conductivity. However, if we form
the ratio of K to ␴, we avoid the problem of having to assign values to n and L,
as these quantities cancel. Thus,

K
␴

⫽

k BnvrmsL/2
ne2L/mevrms

⫽

k B(vrms)2me

2e 2

Substituting v 2
sult, known as the Wiedemann–Franz law:

rms ⫽ 3k BT/me into this expression gives the desired classical re-

Wiedemann–Franz law

K
␴

⫽

2
3k B
2e2 T

(12.21)

Equation 12.21 shows that the ratio of K/␴ for any metal is proportional to T
and depends only on the universal constants kB and e. This result agrees with
the empirical law of Wiedemann and Franz (1853) which states that K/␴T
has  the  same  value  for  all  metals.  The  ratio  K/␴T is  known  as  the  Lorentz
number, and  according  to  our  classical  theory,  it  has  the  same  value,
2 /2e 2 ⫽ 1.1 ⫻ 10⫺8 W ⭈ ⍀/K2, for  any  metal  at  any  temperature.  Table  12.7
3kB
shows that, indeed, the ratio of K/␴T is nearly constant from metal to metal
2/2e 2 does  not  agree
and  with  varying  temperatures,  but  that  the  value  of  3kB
precisely  with  the  measured  Lorentz  numbers.  Overall,  however,  the  agree-
ment  of  the  simple  classical  theory  with  experiment  is  good  and  is  taken  to
constitute strong evidence that the free electron gas accounts for both electri-
cal and thermal conductivity in metals.

12.3 QUANTUM THEORY OF METALS

Although  the  classical  electron  gas  model  broadly  describes  the  electrical
and thermal properties of metals, there are notable deﬁciencies in the predic-
tions of this model — in the numerical values of K and ␴, in the temperature
dependence of ␴, and in the prediction of an excess heat capacity for metals
(see  Section  10.5.)  These  deﬁciencies  can  be  rectiﬁed  by  replacing

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.3

QUANTUM THEORY OF METALS

421

the Maxwell–Boltzmann  distribution  with  the  Fermi – Dirac  distribution  for
the  conduction  electrons  in  the  metal  and  by  calculating  the  electron  mean
free path while explicitly taking the wave nature of the electron into account.
Since quantum mechanical calculations of electron mean free path are com-
plicated, we shall rely on qualitative arguments and inferences from measured
quantities to give physical insight into the surprising transparency of metals to
conduction electrons.

Replacement of vrms with vF
As we have seen in Section 10.3, the electrons in a metal must be described by
Fermi–Dirac  statistics,  and  essentially  all  energy  levels  are  ﬁlled  up  to  the
Fermi energy, EF. Because of restrictions imposed by the Pauli principle on the
quantum states of scattered electrons, one might anticipate a “bottleneck” in
electron  transport  through  a  metal  because  of  a  lack  of  empty  ﬁnal  states.
That this is not the case is illustrated in Figure 12.14, which shows the velocity
distribution  in  three  dimensions  of  conduction  electrons  in  a  metal.  Essen-
tially  all  the  electrons  have  velocities  within  a  radius  of 
in  velocity
2) ⱕ E F]. Figure 12.14b shows that the application of
space [ me(vx
an electric ﬁeld causes all the electron velocities to increase by an increment
vd. Since the shift of the electron originally at A creates an empty ﬁnal state for
the electron originally at B, there is no bottleneck. Furthermore, the net effect
of  the  E ﬁeld  is  to  leave  an  intact  core  of  states  for  electrons  with  E ⬍ E F
and to produce a displacement of those electrons near the Fermi surface hav-
ing v ⬇ v F. Thus only those electrons with v ⬇ v F are free to move and partici-
pate  in  electrical  and  thermal  conduction,  and  we  can  presumably  use  the
classical expressions for ␴ and K,

√2EF/me

1
2

2 ⫹ v y

2 ⫹ vz

␴ ⫽

ne 2L
m evrms

    and    K ⫽ 1

3CvvrmsL

vy

Electrons with
velocities at the
surface of the
sphere have
energy E F

A

vy

E

B

vd

A

vx

vx

2EF–––me

Displaced

Fermi sphere

(a)

(b)

Figure  12.14 (a)  Allowed  velocity  vectors,  or  positions  in  velocity  space,  of  conduc-
tion  electrons  in  a  metal  without  an  applied  electric  ﬁeld.  (b)  The  net  effect  of  an
applied  electric  ﬁeld  is  a  small  displacement  of  the  Fermi  sphere,  the  displaced  elec-
trons having a speed of approximately vF.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

422

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

with the Maxwell–Boltzmann rms speed replaced by the Fermi speed; thus,

and

␴ ⫽

ne2L
mev F

K ⫽ 1

3Cvv FL

(12.22)

(12.23)

Wiedemann – Franz Law Revisited
Let us test the validity of the quantum replacement of vrms with v F by recalcu-
lating K/␴T and checking for improved agreement with experiment. First we
note  that  using  a  Maxwell – Boltzmann  molar  heat  capacity  of  3R/2  for  elec-
trons in a metal is incorrect, since conduction electrons obey Fermi – Dirac sta-
tistics.  As  already  mentioned  in  Section  10.5,  only  a  fraction  of  the  electrons
within kBT of E F change energy as the temperature changes, leading to a mo-
lar heat capacity that is a small fraction of 3R/2:

C ⬇ 2 冢 k BT

EF 冣 (3

2 R)

An exact calculation is rather complicated4 but leads to a similar result:

C ⫽

␲2

3 冢 k BT

EF 冣 (3

2 R)

(12.24)

Changing C to  a  heat  capacity  per  unit  volume  and  substituting  into  K ⫽
1
Cv FL yields
3

K ⫽ 1

3 冢 ␲2

3 冣冢 k BT

EF 冣 (3

2 R) 冢 n

NA 冣 v FL

Using R ⫽ NAkB and EF ⫽ mev F

2, we ﬁnd

1
2

K ⫽

␲2

2T

3 冢 k B

mev F 冣 nL

(12.25)

Now, forming the Lorentz number K/␴T yields

K
␴T

⫽

(␲2/3)(k B

2T/mev F)(nL)

(ne2L/mev F)T

or

Quantum form of the
Wiedemann–Franz law

K
␴T

⫽

2
␲2k B
3e2 ⫽ 2.45 ⫻ 10⫺8 W ⭈ ⍀/K2

(12.26)

A  comparison  of  this  result  with  Table  12.7  shows  improved  and  excellent
agreement between theoretical and experimental Lorentz values, thus justify-
ing the replacement of vrms with v F.

4See Kittel, op. cit., Chapter 6.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.3

QUANTUM THEORY OF METALS

423

Quantum Mean Free Path of Electrons
Changes  from  the  classical  value  of  electron  mean  free  path  arise  from  the
wave  properties  of  the  electron.  Consider,  once  again,  our  familiar  copper
sample. If we simply use the interatomic distance between copper atoms as the
mean free path L for electrons, and vF for vrms in ␴ ⫽ ne 2L/mevrms, we ﬁnd a
value for ␴ that is about 200 times smaller than the measured value of the con-
ductivity. This discrepancy implies that we are using the wrong value for L and
that  the  scattering  sites  for  electrons  are  not  adjacent  ion  cores  but  more
widely separated scattering centers. These scattering centers consist of depar-
tures  from  perfect  lattice  regularity,  such  as  thermal  displacements  of  ions
from equilibrium lattice sites, dislocations, and impurity atoms. Because quan-
tum calculations of L that include these effects are complicated, let us make a
rough  estimate  of  L for  copper  at  room  temperature  by  using  the  measured
value of ␴. Solving ␴ ⫽ ne 2L/mev F for L yields

L ⫽

mev F␴

ne 2

(12.27)

Using a Fermi energy of 7.05 eV for copper (see Table 10.1) gives

v F ⫽ 冢 2EF

me 冣1/2

⫽ 冢 (2)(7.05 ⫻ 1.6 ⫻ 10⫺19 J)

9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg

冣1/2

⫽ 1.57 ⫻ 106 m/s

Substituting this value into Equation 12.27 gives

L ⫽

(9.11 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg)(1.57 ⫻ 106 m/s)(5.9 ⫻ 107 ⍀⫺1 m⫺1)

(8.49 ⫻ 1028 electrons/m3)(1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)2

⫽ 3.9 ⫻ 10⫺8 m ⫽ 390 Å

This is about 150 times the distance between copper atoms. Using ␶ ⫽ L/v F,
we can also estimate the mean free time between electronic collisions in cop-
per at room temperature:

␶ ⫽

3.90 ⫻ 10⫺8 m
1.57 ⫻ 106 m/s

⫽ 2.50 ⫻ 10⫺14 s

We can  account  for  the  unexpectedly  long  electron  mean  free  path  by
taking  the  wave  nature  of  the  electron  into  account.  Quantum  mechanical
calculations  show  that  electron  waves  with  a  broad  range  of  energies  can
pass  through  a  perfect lattice  of  ion  cores  unscattered,  without  resistance,
and with an inﬁnite mean free path. The actual resistance of a metal is due
to  the  random  thermal  displacements  (thermal  vibrations)  of  ions  about
lattice points and to other deviations from a perfect lattice, such as impurity
atoms  and  defects  that  scatter  electron  waves.  The  lack  of  electron  scatter-
ing by a perfect lattice can be understood by noting that the electron wave
generally travels through the metal unattenuated, just as does light through
a transparent crystal. Strong reﬂections of electron waves are set up only for
speciﬁc  electron  energies,  and  when  this  occurs,  the  electron  wave  cannot
travel  freely  through  the  crystal.  As  we  shall  see  in  the  next  section,  these
strong  reﬂections  occur  when  the  lattice  spacing  is  equal  to  an  integral
number  of  electronic  wavelengths,  resulting  in  a  discrete  set  of  forbidden
energy bands for electrons.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Causes of resistance
in a metal

424

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

From  a  classical  viewpoint,  the  observed  proportionality  of  resistivity  to
absolute temperature at high temperature is the result of the scattering of elec-
trons by lattice ions vibrating with larger amplitude the higher the temperature.
In the quantum view, as we saw in Chapter 10, lattice vibrations have a quantized
energy ប␻,  where  ␻ is  the  angular  frequency  of  vibration  of  the  lattice  ion.
These quantized lattice vibrations are called phonons, and for purposes of cal-
culation,  the  vibrating  lattice  ions  are  replaced  by  phonons.  The  number  of
phonons with energy ប␻ that are available at a given temperature T is denoted
by np and is proportional to the Bose–Einstein distribution function:

np ⬀

1

e ប␻/kBT ⫺1

(10.33)

At high temperatures, kBT is much greater than ប␻, and this becomes

np ⬀

k BT
ប␻

Thus the number of phonons available to scatter electrons is directly propor-
tional to T. Finally, since the number of electron scatterers is proportional to
the temperature, so is the resistivity, ␳.

In  addition  to  the  temperature-dependent  part  of  the  resistivity,  there  is
also  a  temperature-independent  contribution  to  the  resistivity  of  the  metal,
which clearly manifests itself for temperatures less than about 10 K. This resid-
ual resistivity ␳i, which remains as  T : 0, is produced by electron waves scat-
tering from impurities and structural imperfections in a given sample (see Fig-
ure  12.15).  The  parallel  nature  of  the  curves  shown  in  Figure  12.15  implies
that the resistivity caused by thermal motion of the lattice, ␳L, is independent
of the impurity concentration and that ␳i is independent of temperature. This
result is formalized in a result known as Matthiessen’s rule, which states that

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

3
–
0
1

 
•

 

R

–
–
–
–
–
–
–

)
K
0
9
2
(
R

Na

4

3

2

1

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

T

(b)

Figure 12.15

 (b) Resistance of sodium as a function of tem-
perature.  The  colored  curve  is  for  a  sodium  sample  with  a  higher  concentration  of
imperfections. (From D. K. C. MacDonald and K. Mendelssohn, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London),
A202:103, 1950)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.4

BAND THEORY OF SOLIDS

425

the resistivity of a metal may be written in the form

where ␳i depends  only  on  the  concentration  of  crystal  imperfections  and ␳L
depends only on T.

␳ ⫽ ␳i ⫹ ␳L

(12.28)

12.4 BAND THEORY OF SOLIDS

In  Sections  12.2  and  12.3  we  discussed  the  classical  and  quantum  models  of
metals, making the simplifying assumption that the metal consists of a gas of
free  electrons.  Since  good  insulators  have  enormous  resistivity  compared  to
metals (a factor of 1024 greater), their electronic conﬁgurations must be quite
different. In fact, most outer-shell electrons in an insulator are not free but are
involved  in  ionic  or  covalent  bonds,  as  discussed  earlier.  Furthermore,  in
order  to  more  fully  understand  the  electronic  properties  of  solids,  one  must
consider the effect of the lattice ions.

In the general case, there are two approaches to the determination of elec-
tronic energies in a solid. One is to follow the behavior of energy levels of iso-
lated atoms as they are brought closer and closer to form a solid. The other is
to show that energy bands arise when the Schrödinger equation is solved for
electrons subject to a periodic potential representing the lattice ions. We shall
follow  the  isolated-atom  approach  here  ﬁrst,  since  it  is  simpler  and  immedi-
ately  leads  to  an  explanation  of  the  differences  between  conductors,  insula-
tors, and semiconductors. Later in this section we shall explicitly consider the
effect  of  a  periodic  potential  on  electron  waves,  to  show  how  energy  bands
arise from another viewpoint.

Isolated-Atom Approach to Band Theory
If  two  identical  atoms  are  very  far  apart,  they  do  not  interact,  and  their  elec-
tronic energy levels can be considered to be those of isolated atoms. Suppose
the two atoms are sodium, each having an outermost 3s electron with a speciﬁc
energy. As the two sodium atoms are brought closer together, their wavefunc-
tions  overlap,  and  the  two  degenerate,  isolated  3s energy  levels  are  split  into
two different levels, as shown in Figure 12.16a. We can understand this splitting
by considering the appropriate electronic wavefunctions for the case of widely
separated atoms and the case of neighboring atoms. (For a more complete and
careful  treatment  of  this  splitting,  see  the  discussion  of  covalent  bonding  in
Section 11.4.) Figure 12.17 shows idealized isolated atom wavefunctions ␺1 and
␺2 as  well  as  the  linear  combinations  ␺1 ⫹ ␺2 and ␺1 ⫺ ␺2 that  represent
approximate  electronic  wavefunctions  for  the  two  atoms  close  together.  Note
that  an  electron  in  the  state  ␺1 ⫹ ␺2 has  a  substantial  probability  of  being
found midway between the ion cores, while in the state ␺1 ⫺ ␺2 the probability
density vanishes at the midpoint. Since the electron spends part of its time mid-
way  between  the  two  attractive  ion  cores  in  the  state ␺1 ⫹ ␺2,  the  electron  is
more  tightly  bound  (has  lower  energy)  in  the  state ␺1 ⫹ ␺2 than  in ␺1 ⫺ ␺2.
This leads to the two different 3s energy levels shown in Figure 12.16a.5

5The width of the energy band ⌬E depends on the amount of charge distribution overlap between
adjacent atoms and hence on the interatomic separation, r 0.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

426

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

␺1␺

␺2␺

y
g
r
e
n
E

␺1 + ␺2
␺ ␺

∆E

3s

r

r0
(a)

y
g
r
e
n
E

∆E

y
g
r
e
n
E

∆E

3s

r

r0
(c)

3s

r

r0
(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

␺1 – ␺2
␺ ␺

Figure  12.16 (a) The splitting of the 3s levels when two sodium atoms are brought
together. (b) The splitting when six sodium atoms are brought together. (c) The for-
mation  of  a  3s band  when  a  large  number  of  sodium  atoms  are  assembled  to  form  a
solid. Note that r 0 is the actual lattice constant.

Figure 12.17 Idealized sodium
wavefunctions  in  various  stages
of  combination.  (a)  Wavefunc-
tions  of  electrons  bound  to  two
ion  cores  at  large  separation.
(b) One  linear  combination  of
wavefunctions that is appropriate
for electrons bound to ion cores
at  small  separation  is  ␺1 ⫹ ␺2.
(c)  The  other  linear  combina-
tion is ␺1 ⫺ ␺2.

3p

3s

2p

2s

1s

N

6N

2N

2N

12.18 The 

Figure 
energy
bands of sodium are shaded gray
in this ﬁgure. The solid contains
N atoms.  Note  the  energy  gaps
between  allowed  bands  and  that
the  3s and  3p bands  overlap  in
sodium.  The  number  of  elec-
trons  in  each  energy  band  is  in-
dicated to the right of the band.

When a large number of atoms are brought together to form a solid, a similar
phenomenon  occurs.  As  the  atoms  are  brought  close  together,  the  various 
isolated-atom  energy  levels  begin  to  split.  This  splitting  is  shown  in  Figure
12.16b  for  six  atoms  in  proximity.  In  this  case  there  are  six  energy  levels  cor-
responding to six different linear combinations of isolated-atom wavefunctions.
The width of an energy band (designated ⌬E in Fig. 12.16) depends only on the
number of atoms close enough to interact strongly, which is always a small num-
ber. If we consider the total number of atoms in a solid (N ⬇ 1023 atoms/cm3),
we  ﬁnd  a  very  large  number  of  levels  (determined  by  N )  spaced  within  the
width ⌬E, so the levels may be regarded as a continuous band of energy levels
(see Fig. 12.16c). In the case of sodium, it is common to refer to the continuous
distribution of allowed energy levels as the 3s band, because it originates from
the 3s levels of individual sodium atoms. In general, a crystalline solid has nu-
merous allowed energy bands, one band arising from each atomic energy level.
Figure 12.18 shows the allowed energy bands of sodium. Note that energy gaps,
or forbidden energy regions, separate the allowed energy bands. Forbidden en-
ergy regions arise from the separation between different atomic levels and will
always  be  present  unless  individual  atomic  levels  broaden  so  much  that  they
overlap, as do the 3s and 3p bands in sodium.

If the solid contains N atoms, each energy band has N energy levels. The 1s,
2s, and 2p bands of sodium are each full of electrons, as indicated by the dark
gray-shaded areas in Figure 12.18. A level whose orbital angular momentum is
ᐉ can  hold  2(2ᐉ ⫹ 1)  electrons.  The  factor  of  2  arises  from  the  two  possible
electron-spin orientations, while the factor 2ᐉ ⫹ 1 corresponds to the number
of  possible  orientations  of  the  orbital  angular  momentum.  The  capacity  of
each band for a system of N atoms is 2(2ᐉ ⫹ 1)N electrons. Hence the 1s and
2s bands  each  contain  2N electrons  (ᐉ ⫽ 0),  while  the  2p band  contains  6N
electrons (ᐉ ⫽ 1). Because sodium has only one 3s electron and there is a total
of N atoms in the solid, the 3s band contains only N electrons and is only half
full. The 3p band, which is above the 3s band, is completely empty.

Conduction in Metals, Insulators, and Semiconductors
The  enormous  variation  in  electrical  conductivity  of  metals,  insulators,  and
semiconductors  may  be  explained  qualitatively  in  terms  of  energy  bands.  We

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

E

T  > 0

12.4

BAND THEORY OF SOLIDS

427

f FD 1

0

Metal

E = E F

E = 0

Figure  12.19 A  half-ﬁlled  band  of  a  conductor  such  as  the  3s band  of  sodium.  At 
T ⫽ 0 K, the Fermi energy lies in the middle of the band. The Fermi–Dirac probability
that an energy state E is occupied at T ⬎ 0 K is shown at the left.

shall see that the position and the electronic occupation of the highest band
or, at most, of the highest two bands determine the conductivity of a solid.

Metals. We can  understand  electrical  conduction  in  metals  by  considering
the  half-ﬁlled  3s band  of  sodium.  Figure  12.19  shows  this  typical  half-ﬁlled
metallic band at  T ⫽ 0 K, where the shaded region represents levels that are
ﬁlled  with  electrons.  Since  electrons  obey  Fermi–Dirac  statistics,  all  levels
below the Fermi energy, EF, are ﬁlled with electrons, while all levels above EF
are empty. In the case of sodium, the Fermi energy lies in the middle of the
band. At temperatures greater than 0 K, some electrons are thermally excited
to levels above EF (as shown by the Fermi–Dirac distribution to the left of Fig.
12.19), but overall there is little change from the 0-K case. If an electric ﬁeld
is  applied  to  the  metal,  electrons  with  energies  near  the  Fermi  energy
can  gain  a  small  amount  of  additional  energy  from  the  ﬁeld  and  reach
nearby  empty  energy  states. Thus  electrons  are  free  to  move  with  only  a
small  applied  ﬁeld  in  a  metal  because  there  are  many  unoccupied  energy
states very close to occupied energy states.

Insulators. Now consider the two highest-energy bands of a material having
the  lower  band  completely  ﬁlled  with  electrons  and  the  higher  completely
empty at 0 K (see Fig. 12.20). It is common to refer to the separation between
the outermost ﬁlled and empty bands as the energy gap, Eg, of the material.
The  lower  band  ﬁlled  with  electrons  is  called  the  valence  band, and  the
upper,  empty  band  is  the  conduction  band. The  Fermi  energy  is  at  the
midpoint  of  the  energy  gap,  as  shown  in  Figure  12.20.  Since  the  energy
gap for an insulator is large (⬃10 eV) compared to k BT at room temperature
(k BT ⫽ 0.025 eV at 300 K), the Fermi–Dirac distribution predicts that very few
electrons  will  be  thermally  excited  into  the  upper  band  at  normal  tempera-
tures, as can be seen by the small value of f FD at the bottom of the conduction
band in Figure 12.20. Although an insulator has many vacant states in the
conduction  band  that  can  accept  electrons,  there  are  so  few  electrons
actually occupying conduction-band states at room temperature that the
overall contribution to electrical conductivity is very small, resulting in
a high resistivity for insulators.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

428

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

E

Conduction band

T  > 0

Eg

Energy gap

f FD 1

0

Valence band

Insulator
≈ 10 eV
Eg

E = E F

E = 0

Figure 12.20 An insulator at T ⫽ 0 K has a ﬁlled valence band and an empty conduc-
tion band. The Fermi level lies midway between these bands. The Fermi–Dirac proba-
bility that an energy state E is occupied at T ⬎ 0 K is shown to the left.

Table 12.8 Energy-Gap
Values for Some 
Semiconductors*

Eg(eV)

Crystal

0 K

300 K

Si
Ge
InP
GaP
GaAs
CdS
CdTe
ZnO
ZnS

1.17
0.744
1.42
2.32
1.52
2.582
1.607
3.436
3.91

1.14
0.67
1.35
2.26
1.43
2.42
1.45
3.2
3.6

*From C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid
State Physics, 6th ed., New York, John
Wiley and Sons, 1986.

Semiconductors. Now  consider  a  material  that  has  a  much  smaller  energy
gap,  on  the  order  of  1 eV.  Such  materials  are  called  semiconductors;
Table 12.8 shows the energy gaps for some representative semiconductors. At
T ⫽ 0 K, all electrons are in the valence band, and there are no electrons in
the conduction band. Thus semiconductors are poor conductors at low temper-
atures. At ordinary temperatures, however, the situation is quite different. As
shown in Figure 12.21, the populations of the valence and conduction bands
are altered. Because the Fermi level, E F, is located at about the middle of the
gap for a semiconductor and Eg is small, appreciable numbers of electrons are
thermally excited from the valence band to the conduction band. Since there
are many empty nearby states in the conduction band, a small applied poten-
tial can easily raise the energy of the electrons in the conduction band, result-
ing in a moderate current. Because thermal excitation across the narrow gap
is more probable at higher temperatures, the conductivity of semiconductors
depends strongly on temperature and increases rapidly with temperature. This
contrasts  sharply  with  the  conductivity  of  a  metal,  which  decreases  slowly with
temperature (see Section 12.3).

E

0

T > 0

1

f F D

Conduction band

Eg

E F

Valence band

Semiconductor

Eg

≈ 1 eV

Figure  12.21 The  band  structure  of  a  semiconductor  at  ordinary  temperatures 
(T ⬇ 300 K). Note that the energy gap is much smaller than in an insulator and that
many electrons occupy states in the conduction band.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

12.4

BAND THEORY OF SOLIDS

429

 

Energy

electrons

+

holes

Conduction band

Narrow forbidden gap

+

+

Valence band

Applied E field

Figure 12.22 An intrinsic semiconductor. The electrons move toward the left and the
holes move toward the right when the applied electric ﬁeld is to the right as shown.

It is important to point out that there are both negative and positive charge
carriers  in  a  semiconductor.  When  an  electron  moves  from  the  valence  band
into the conduction band, it leaves behind a vacant valence electron site, or so-
called hole, in the otherwise ﬁlled valence band. This hole (electron-deﬁcient
site)  appears  as  a  positive  charge,  ⫹e.  The  hole  acts  as  a  charge  carrier  in  the
sense  that  a  valence  electron  from  a  nearby  site  can  transfer  into  the  hole,
thereby ﬁlling it and leaving a hole behind in the electron’s original place. Thus
the hole migrates through the valence band. In a pure crystal containing only
one  element  or  compound,  there  are  equal  numbers  of  conduction  electrons
and holes. Such combinations of charges are called electron–hole pairs, and a
pure semiconductor that contains such pairs is called an intrinsic semiconduc-
tor (see Fig. 12.22). In the presence of an electric ﬁeld, the holes move in the
direction of the ﬁeld and the conduction electrons move opposite the ﬁeld.

EXAMPLE 12.2

Estimate  the  electric  ﬁeld  strength  required  to  produce
conduction  in  diamond,  an  excellent  insulator  at  room
temperature.  Assume  a  mean  free  path  of  5 ⫻ 10⫺8 m
and an energy gap of 7 eV in diamond.

Solution If  an  electron  in  diamond  is  to  conduct,  it
must  be  supplied  with  7 eV  of  energy  from  the  electric
ﬁeld.  Since  the  electron  generally  loses  most  of  its
excess  energy  in  each  collision,  the  field  must  supply

7 eV  in  a  single mean  free  path.  Thus,  for  an  electron
to gain  7 eV  in  a  distance  L,  we  require  an  electric
ﬁeld of

E ⫽

V
L

⫽

7 V

5 ⫻ 10⫺8 m

⫽ 1.4 ⫻ 108 V/m

This is an enormous ﬁeld compared to the ﬁeld required
to produce conduction in metals.

Energy Bands from Electron Wave Reﬂections
We now take a completely different approach to understanding the origin of
energy  bands  in  solids.  This  approach  involves  modifying  the  free  electron
wavefunctions to take into account the scattering of electron waves by the peri-
odic crystal lattice.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

430

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Recall that a completely free electron moving in the ⫹x direction is repre-

sented by a traveling wave with wavenumber k ⫽ 2␲/␭, described by

⌿free ⫽ Ae i(kx⫺␻t)

According  to  de  Broglie,  the  wave  carries  momentum  p ⫽ បk and  energy 
E ⫽ ប␻. Furthermore, the energy of the free electron as a function of k is

E ⫽

p2
2me

⫽

ប2k2
2me

Energy

– k

0

+ k

Figure  12.23 Energy  versus
wavenumber k for  a  free  elec-
tron, where k ⫽ 2␲/␭.

and a plot of E versus k yields a parabola (see Fig. 12.23). From Fig. 12.23 we
see that allowed energy values are distributed continuously from zero to inﬁn-
ity, and there are no breaks or gaps in energy at particular k values.

Now  consider  what  happens  to  a  traveling  electron  wave  when  it  passes
through a one-dimensional crystal lattice with atomic spacing a. We start with
incident  electron  waves  of  very  long  wavelength,  or  small  k,  and  low  energy,
traveling to the right as in Figure 12.24a. In this case, waves reﬂected from suc-
cessive atoms and traveling to the left are all slightly out-of-phase and cancel out
on  average.  Thus  the  electron  wave  does  not  get  reﬂected,  and  the  electron
moves  through  the  lattice  like  a  free  particle.  If,  however,  we  make  the  elec-
tron  wavelength  shorter  and  shorter,  when  we  reach  the  condition  ␭ ⫽ 2a,

λ

a>>

a

Reflected waves average to 0

(a)

λ

 = 2a

a

a

Reflected waves from adjacent

atoms are in-phase and reinforce each other

(b)

1

2

Constructive interference
λ
Path difference = 2a = n

(c)

Figure  12.24 (a)  Reﬂection  of  electron  waves  when  ␭ ⬎⬎ a.  (b)  Reﬂection  of
electron  waves  when  ␭ ⫽ 2a.  (c)  Constructive  interference  of  waves  reﬂected  from
atoms 1 and 2.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.4

BAND THEORY OF SOLIDS

431

waves  reﬂected  from  adjacent  atoms  will  be  in-phase,  as  shown  in  Figure
12.24b, and there will be a strong reﬂected wave. This occurs because the path
length  difference  is  2a for  a  wave  reﬂected  to  the  left  directly  from  atom  1
compared to a wave that travels from 1 to 2 and then is reﬂected back to 1, as
shown in Figure 12.24c. The longest wavelength at which constructive interfer-
ence of reﬂected waves occurs is thus

2a ⫽ ␭

In general, constructive interference also occurs at other, shorter wavelengths,

2a ⫽ ⫾n␭

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(12.29)

where  the  negative  sign  arises  from  reﬂection  from  the  atom  to  the  left  of
atom  1.  In  terms  of  wavenumber  k,  Equation  12.29  predicts  strong  reﬂected
electron waves when

k ⫽ ⫾

n␲
a

n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .

(12.30)

Thus,  for  k ⫽ ⫾n␲/a the  electron  wavefunctions  are  not  just  waves  traveling
to  the  right  but  are  composed  of  equal  parts  of  waves  traveling  to  the  right
(incident) and to the left (reﬂected). Since the waves traveling left and right
can  be  added  or  subtracted,  we  have  two  different  possible  standing  wave
types, denoted by ⌿⫺ and ⌿⫹:

⌿⫺ ⫽ Bei(kx⫺␻t ) ⫺ Bei(⫺kx⫺␻t)
⌿⫹ ⫽ Bei(kx⫺␻t) ⫹ Bei(⫺kx⫺␻t)

(12.31)

(12.32)

where Bei(kx⫺␻t) describes a wave traveling to the right and Bei(⫺kx⫺␻t) a wave
traveling to the left. Using Euler’s identity, ei␪ ⫽ cos␪ ⫹ i sin␪, one can show
that for k ⫽ ⫾␲/a, ⌿⫺ and ⌿⫹ take the more useful forms

⌿⫺ ⫽ ⫾2Bie⫺i␻t sin

␲x
a

⌿⫹ ⫽ 2Be⫺i␻t cos 

␲x
a

(12.33)

(12.34)

The  key  point  is  that  ⌿⫺ has  a  slightly  higher energy  than  ⌿free,  and  ⌿⫹ has
a slightly lower energy than  ⌿free, at  k ⫽ ␲/a. This leads to a discontinuity in
energy,  or  a  band  gap,  at  k ⫽ ␲/a as  shown  in  Figure  12.25.  To  show  that
the ⌿⫺ state  has  a  higher  energy  than  the  ⌿⫹ state,  we  must  consider  both
kinetic  and  potential  energies  of  the  electron  in  these  states.  The  kinetic
energy  of  the  electron  is  the  same  in  both  states,  since  both  have  the  same
magnitude  of  momentum,  p ⫽ បk ⫽ ប␲/a.  Thus  the  average  kinetic  energy
of both ⌿⫹ and ⌿⫺ is

具K 典 ⫽ 冬 p2

2me 冭 ⫽

ប2k2
2me

⫽

ប2␲2
2mea2

The potential energies of the two states are different, however, since ⌿⫹ and
⌿⫺ distribute the electrons differently with respect to the positions of the posi-
tive ion cores. Figure 12.26 shows the distributions of electronic charge for the
case of a traveling wave and the two standing wave cases, ⌿⫹ and ⌿⫺. They are

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

432

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

E

Forbidden bands

π
2
– —
a

π
– –
a

0

π
–
a

π
2
—
a

k

Figure  12.25 Energy  versus  wavenumber  for  a  one-dimensional  lattice  with  atomic
separation a. The E versus k curve for the free electron case is shown dashed. Note the
forbidden bands corresponding to impossible energy states for the electron.

calculated from the probability densities as follows:

⌿*

⌿*

free⌿free ⫽ [Aei(kx⫺␻t)]*[Aei(kx⫺␻t)] ⫽ 兩 A 兩2
a 冥*冤2Be⫺i␻t cos 
a 冥*冤⫾2Bie⫺i␻t sin 

⫹⌿⫹ ⫽ 冤2Be⫺i␻t cos 
⫺⌿⫺ ⫽ 冤⫾2Bie⫺i␻t sin 

⌿*

␲x

␲x

␲x

a 冥 ⫽ 4兩 B 兩2 cos2 ␲x

a

␲x

a 冥 ⫽ 4兩 B 兩2 sin2 ␲x

a

Note that the traveling wave solution distributes electronic charge uniformly
along the lattice. On the other hand, ⌿⫺ concentrates electronic charge midway

␺2Ψ

␺  2Ψ

–

␺  2Ψ

+

␺     2
Ψ

free

x

a

Positive ions

Figure  12.26 Probability  densities  of  standing  waves  and  traveling  (free)  electron
waves in a one-dimensional lattice. Note that the state ⌿⫹ places the electron over the
positive ion and consequently has the lowest potential energy.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.5

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

433

between the ions, while ⌿⫹ concentrates electronic charge right over the positive
ion cores, minimizing the electron’s potential energy.6 Thus we would expect the
average potential energy of the electron in the state ⌿⫹ to be somewhat below
the free electron energy, and the average potential energy in the state ⌿⫺ to be a
bit above the free electron energy. This difference in potential energy between
⌿⫹ and ⌿⫺ leads  to  a  difference  in  total  energy,  since  the  kinetic  energies  of
⌿⫹ and ⌿⫺ are the same. Thus the total energy of the electron in the state ⌿⫹ at
k ⫽ ␲/a shown  in  Figure  12.25  lies  slightly  below the  free  electron  energy
parabola, and the total energy of the state ⌿⫺ lies slightly above the free electron
energy. Also, Figure 12.25 shows that the overall effect of the lattice is to intro-
duce forbidden gaps in the free electron E versus k plot at values of k ⫽ ⫾n␲/a.

12.5 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

The p-n Junction
In order to make devices, one must be able to fabricate semiconductors with
well-deﬁned regions of different conductivity. Both the type (positive or nega-
tive) and number of carriers in a semiconductor may be tailored to the needs
of a particular device by the addition of speciﬁc impurities in a process called
doping. For  example,  when  an  atom  with  ﬁve  valence  electrons,  such  as
arsenic, is added to a semiconductor from Group IV of the periodic table, four
valence  electrons  participate  in  the  covalent  bonds  and  one  electron  is  left
over  (see  Fig.  12.27a).  This  extra  electron  is  nearly  free  and  has  an  energy
level that lies within the energy gap, just below the conduction band, as shown
in Figure 12.27b. Such a pentavalent atom in effect donates an electron to the

–

= Semiconductor atoms

= Impurity atom with
   five valance electrons

–

= Extra electron from
   impurity atom

(a)

Conduction

band
–
–

Ed

Eg

Donor levels

Valence

band

≈ 1 eV
≈ 0.05 eV

Eg

Ed

(b)

Figure  12.27 (a)  A  two-dimensional  representation  of  a  semiconductor  containing  a
donor atom (colored spot). (b) An energy-band diagram of a semiconductor in which the
donor levels lie within the forbidden gap, just below the bottom of the conduction band.

6Recall  that  the  electron’s  electrical  potential  energy  is  the  work  done  by  an  external  force  to
move the electron to a particular point. To move the electron to a positive ion requires the mini-
mum external work. Thus the electron has the minimum potential energy in this position.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

434

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

semiconductor and is referred to as a donor atom. Since the energy spacing
between the donor levels and the bottom of the conduction band is very small
(typically about 0.05 eV), a small amount of thermal energy causes an electron
in  these  levels  to  move  into  the  conduction  band.  (Recall  that  the  average
thermal energy of an electron at room temperature is k BT ⬇ 0.025 eV.) Semi-
conductors  doped  with  donor  atoms  are  called  n-type  semiconductors be-
cause the charge carriers are negatively charged electrons.

If  the  semiconductor  is  doped  with  atoms  having  three  valence  electrons,
such as indium and aluminum, the three electrons form covalent bonds with
neighboring atoms, leaving an electron deﬁciency, or hole, in the fourth bond
(see  Fig.  12.28a).  The  energy  levels  of  such  impurities  also  lie within  the  en-
ergy gap, just above the valence band, as indicated in Figure 12.28b. Electrons
from the valence band have enough thermal energy at room temperature to
ﬁll these impurity levels, leaving behind a hole in the valence band. Because a
trivalent atom in effect accepts an electron from the valence band, such impu-
rities  are  referred  to  as  acceptors. A  semiconductor  doped  with  trivalent
(acceptor)  impurities  is  known  as  a p-type  semiconductor because  the
charge  carriers  are  positively  charged  holes.  When  conduction  is  dominated
by acceptor or donor impurities, the material is called an extrinsic semicon-
ductor or impurity semiconductor. The typical range of doping densities for
n - or p -type semiconductors is 1013 to 1019 cm⫺3.

Now  consider  what  happens  when  a  p-type  semiconductor  is  joined  to  an
n-type semiconductor to form a p-n junction. We ﬁnd that the completed junc-
tion consists of three distinct semiconductor regions, as shown in Figure 12.29a: a
p-type region, a depletion region, and an n-type region. The depletion region
may be visualized as arising when the two halves of the junction are brought to-
gether and mobile donor electrons diffuse to the p side of the junction, leaving
behind immobile positive ion cores. (Conversely, holes diffuse to the n side and
leave a region of ﬁxed negative ion cores.) The region extending several mi-
crons  from  the  junction  is  called  the  depletion  region  because  it  is

+

= Semiconductor atoms

= Impurity atom with
   three valance electrons

+

= Hole, or electron
   deficiency in a bond

(a)

Conduction

band

Eg

Acceptor levels

Ea

+

+

Valence

band

≈ 1 eV
≈ 0.05 eV

Eg

Ea

(b)

Figure  12.28 (a)  A  two-dimensional  representation  of  a  semiconductor  contain-
ing an  acceptor  atom  (colored  spot).  (b)  An  energy-band  diagram  of  a  semiconduc-
tor in  which  the  acceptor  levels  lie  within  the  forbidden  gap,  just  above  the  top  of
the valence band.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.5

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

435

Depletion

Fixed ion 

cores

p

+

+

+

–

–

–

–

–

–

+

+

+

+
E
+

+

n

–

–

–

xp0

x = 0

xn0

+

0

–

E

V

x

x

x

V0

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure  12.29 (a)  The  physical  arrangement  of  a  p -n junction.  (b)  Built-in  electric
ﬁeld versus x for the p -n junction. (c) Built-in potential versus x for the p -n junction.

depleted of mobile charge carriers. It also contains a built-in electric ﬁeld on
the order of 103 to 105 V/cm, which serves to sweep mobile charge out of this re-
gion and keep it truly depleted. This electric ﬁeld creates a potential barrier V 0
that prevents the further diffusion of holes and electrons across the junction and
ensures zero current through the junction when no external voltage is applied.

Perhaps the most notable feature of the p -n junction is its ability to pass cur-
rent in only one direction. Such diode action is easiest to understand in terms
of  the  potential  diagram  in  Figure  12.29c.  If  a  positive  external  voltage  is
applied to the p side of the junction, the overall barrier is decreased, resulting
in  a  current  that  increases  exponentially  with  increasing  forward  voltage  or
bias. For reverse bias (a positive external voltage applied to the n side of the
junction),  the  potential  barrier  is  increased,  resulting  in  a  very  small  reverse
current that quickly reaches a saturation value, I0, with increasing reverse bias.
The current–voltage relation for an ideal diode is

I ⫽ I0(eqV/kBT ⫺ 1)

(12.35)

where q is  the  electronic  charge,  kB is  Boltzmann’s  constant,  and  T is  the
temperature in kelvins. Figure 12.30 shows a plot of an I–V characteristic for a
real  diode,  along  with  a  schematic  of  a  diode  under  forward  bias.  Region
1 shows  reverse-bias  operation,  region  2  ordinary  forward  bias,  and  region
3 the  extreme  forward  bias  needed  for  a  p -n junction  laser.  We  treat  p -n
junction lasers in Section 12.7.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

436

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

V

+

–

A

I

p

n

Forward bias

I (mA)

50

40

30

20

10

3

2

≈ 20 Aµ

I 0

–1.0

– 0.5

0.5

1.0

1
Reverse bias

Forward bias

V (volts)

Figure 12.30 The characteristic curve for a real diode.

EXAMPLE 12.3 Forward and Reverse

Currents in a Diode

Calculate the ratio of the forward current to the reverse
current  for  a  diode  described  by  Equation  12.35  for  an
applied voltage across the diode of ⫹1.0 V (forward bias)
and ⫺1.0 V (reverse bias).

Taking kBT ⫽ 0.025 eV at room temperature gives

If
Ir

⫽

I0(e(1.0 eV)/(0.025 eV) ⫺ 1)
I0(e⫺(1.0 eV)/(0.025 eV) ⫺ 1)

⫽

(e40 ⫺ 1)
(e⫺40 ⫺ 1)

Solution

Iforward
Ireverse

⫽

I0(e⫹qV/kBT ⫺ 1)
I0(e⫺qV/kBT ⫺ 1)

⫽ ⫺2.4 ⫻ 1017

Light-Emitting and -Absorbing
Diodes — LEDs and Solar Cells
Light  emission  and  absorption  in  semiconductors  is  similar  to  light  emission
and  absorption  by  gaseous  atoms,  except  that  discrete  atomic  energy  levels
must be replaced by bands in semiconductors. As shown in Figure 12.31a, an
electron  excited  electrically  into  the  conduction  band  can  easily  recombine
with a hole (especially if the electron is injected into a p -type region), emitting
a photon of band-gap energy. Examples of p -n junctions that convert electrical
input  to  light  output  are  light-emitting  diodes  (LEDs)  and  injection  lasers.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

electrons
holes

+

12.5

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

437

Eg

Conduction

band

hf = Eg

Absorbed
photon

Eg

Conduction

band

+

+

Valence

band

+

Valence

band

(a) Light emission

(b) Light absorption

Figure  12.31 (a)  Light  emission  from  a  semiconductor.  (b)  Light  absorption  by  a
semiconductor.

Conversely,  an  electron  in  the  valence  band  may  absorb  a  photon  and  be
promoted  to  the  conduction  band,  leaving  a  hole  behind  (see  Fig.  12.31b).
Devices in which light-generated electrons and holes are separated by a junc-
tion  ﬁeld  and  collected  as  current  are  called  solar  cells or photovoltaic
devices. They are described in detail in an essay by John Meakin on our Web
site http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e.

The Junction Transistor
The 
invention  of  the  transistor  by  American  physicists  John  Bardeen
(1908 – 1991), Walter Brattain (1902 – 1987), and William Shockley (1910 – 1989)
in 1948 totally revolutionized the world of electronics and led to a Nobel prize,
shared  by  the  three  men,  in  1956.  By  1960  the  transistor  had  replaced  the
vacuum tube in many electronic applications, giving rise to a multibillion-dollar

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

438

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Emitter

Base Collector

n

p

p

(a)

Emitter

Collector

Base

(b)

Figure 12.32 (a) The pnp tran-
sistor  consists  of  an  n region
(base)  sandwiched  between  two
p regions  (the  emitter  and  the
collector).  (b)  The  circuit  sym-
bol for the pnp transistor.

industry that produces such popular devices as pocket radios, handheld organiz-
ers, computers, CD and DVD players, cell phones, and electronic games.

The  junction  transistor  consists  of  a  semiconducting  material  with  a  very
narrow n region sandwiched between two p regions, called the pnp transistor,
or  a  p region  sandwiched  between  two  n regions,  called  the  npn transistor.
Because the operations of the two transistors are essentially the same, we shall
describe only the pnp transistor.

Figure 12.32 shows the structure of the pnp transistor together with its cir-
cuit symbol. The outer regions of the transistor are called the emitter and the
collector, and the narrow central region is called the base. Note that the conﬁgu-
ration contains two junctions. One junction is the interface between the emit-
ter and the base, and the other is that between the base and the collector.

Suppose  a  voltage  is  applied  to  the  transistor  such  that  the  emitter  is  at  a
higher  potential  than  the  collector.  (This  is  accomplished  with  battery  Vec in
Figure 12.33.) If we think of the transistor as two diodes back to back, we see
that  the  emitter–base  junction  is  forward-biased  and  the  base–collector  junc-
tion  is  reverse-biased.  Because  the  p -type  emitter  is  heavily  doped  relative  to
the  base,  nearly  all  of  the  current  consists  of  holes  moving  across  the 
emitter–base junction. Most of these holes do not recombine in the base be-
cause  it  is  very  narrow.  The  holes  are  ﬁnally  accelerated  across  the  reverse-
biased base–collector junction, producing the current Ic in Figure 12.33.

Although  only  a  small  percentage  of  holes  recombine  in  the  base,  those
that do limit the emitter current to a small value, because positive charge car-
riers accumulate in the base and prevent holes from ﬂowing into this region.
To prevent this limitation of current, some of the positive charge on the base
must  be  drawn  off;  this  is  accomplished  by  connecting  the  base  to  a  second
battery,  Veb in  Figure  12.33.  Those  positive  charges  that  are  not  swept  across
the  collector–base  junction  leave  the  base  through  this  added  pathway.  This
base current, Ib, is very small, but a small change in it can signiﬁcantly change
the larger collector current, Ic. If the transistor is properly biased, the collector
(output) current is directly proportional to the base (input) current, and the
transistor acts as a current ampliﬁer. This condition may be written

Ic ⫽ ␤Ib

(12.36)

Ic

c

b

e

p

n

+

p

+

+

+

+

+

+

Ie

RL

Output load

–

+

Vec

Ib

RB

Input
signal

Veb

–

+

Figure 12.33 A small base current, Ib, controls a large collector current, Ic. Note that
Ie ⫽ I b ⫹ Ic, I b ⬍⬍ Ic, and Ic ⫽ ␤I b, where ␤ ⬇ 10 to 100.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.5

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

439

(a)

(b)

(a) Jack Kilby, co-inventor of the integrated circuit, is surrounded by devices containing
integrated  circuits  at  the  Texas  Instruments  headquarters.  (Roger  Ressmeyer/CORBIS)
(b) Robert Noyce, former Sematech chief executive, holding up a semiconductor wafer
at Sematech in Austin, Texas in 1989. (AP photo/David Breslaner)

where ␤, the current gain, is typically in the range from 10 to 100. Thus the
transistor may be used to amplify a small time-varying signal. The small voltage
to be ampliﬁed is placed in series with the battery Veb as shown in Figure 12.33.
The  time-dependent  input  signal  produces  a  small  variation  in  the  base  cur-
rent. This variation results in a large change in collector current and hence a
large change in voltage across the output resistor.

The Field-Effect Transistor (FET)
During the 1960s, the electronics industry converted many electronic applica-
tions from the junction transistor to the ﬁeld-effect transistor (FET), which is
easier to manufacture and uses much less power than the junction transistor.
Figure  12.34  shows  the  structure  of  a  very  common  device,  the  MOSFET, or
metal-oxide-semiconductor  ﬁeld-effect  transistor. You are likely using mil-
lions of MOSFET devices as switches when you are working on your new laptop.
There are three metal connections to the transistor—the source, drain, and
gate. The source and drain are connected to n -type semiconductor regions at
either end of the structure. These regions are connected by a narrow channel
of  additional  n -type  material,  the  n channel.  The  source  and  drain  regions
and the n channel are embedded in a p -type substrate material. This forms a
depletion region, as in the junction diode, along the bottom of the n channel.
(Depletion  regions  also  exist  at  the  junctions  underneath  the  source  and
drain  regions,  but  we  will  ignore  these  because  the  operation  of  the  device
depends  primarily  on  the  behavior  in  the  channel.)  The  gate  is  separated
from the n channel by a layer of insulating silicon dioxide. Thus, it does not
make electrical contact with the rest of the semiconducting material.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

440

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

n channel

Silicon dioxide
Gate

Source

n

p

Drain

n

p-type substrate

Depletion region

(a)

+–

∆VSD

Gate

I

p

(b)

Output

+–

+–

∆VSD

∆VSG

Gate

I

E

p

(c)

Drain

Drain

n

n

Source

Source

n

n

Figure 12.34 (a) The structure of a metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistor
(MOSFET). (b) A source–drain voltage is applied, with the result that current exists in
the circuit. (c) A gate voltage is applied. The gate voltage can be used to control the
source–drain current, so that the MOSFET acts as an ampliﬁer.

Imagine that a voltage source ⌬VSD is applied across the source and drain as
shown  in  Figure  12.34b.  With  this  situation,  electrons  will  ﬂow  through  the
upper region of the n channel. Electrons cannot ﬂow through the depletion
region  in  the  lower  part  of  the  n channel  because  this  region  is  depleted  of
charge  carriers.  Now  a  second  voltage  ⌬VSG is  applied  across  the  source  and
gate as in Figure 12.34c. The positive potential on the gate electrode results in
an  electric  ﬁeld  below  the  gate  that  is  directed  downward  in  the  n channel.
(This is the ﬁeld in “ﬁeld-effect.”) This electric ﬁeld exerts upward forces on
electrons in the region below the gate, causing them to move into the n chan-
nel.  This  causes  the  depletion  region  to  become  smaller,  widening  the  area
through  which  there  is  current  between  the  top  of  the  n channel  and  the
depletion region. As the area widens, the current increases.

If  a  varying  voltage  is  applied  to  the  gate,  the  area  through  which  the
source–drain current exists varies in size according to the varying gate voltage.
A  small  variation  in  gate  voltage  results  in  a  large  variation  in  current  and  a
correspondingly large voltage across the resistor in Figure 12.34c. Therefore,
the MOSFET acts as a voltage ampliﬁer. A circuit consisting of a chain of such
transistors  can  result  in  a  very  small  initial  signal  from  a  microphone  being
ampliﬁed enough to drive powerful speakers at an outdoor concert.

The MOSFET can be used as a switch by reversing the potential difference
⌬VSG in Figure 12.34c. In this case, increasing the voltage causes the n channel

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.5

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES

441

to decrease in size. If this voltage is large enough to completely block the area
through which electrons pass, the current falls to zero. Thus the MOSFET can
be viewed as a low-power switch: A very low input current in the source–gate
circuit  essentially  opens  and  closes  the  source–drain  circuit  by  changing  the
resistance  of  the  source–drain  by  several  orders  of  magnitude.  This  very  low
power  switching  behavior  is  especially  useful  in  integrated  circuits  with  mil-
lions of transistors, where power dissipation is a major problem.

The Integrated Circuit
The  integrated  circuit  (IC),  invented  independently  by  Americans  Jack  Kilby
(b. 1923; Nobel prize, 2000) at Texas Instruments in late 1958 and Robert Noyce
(1927 – 1992) at Fairchild Camera and Instrument in early 1959, has justly been
called  the  most  remarkable  technology  ever  to  hit  mankind.  ICs  have  started  a
second industrial revolution and are found at the hearts of computers, watches,
cameras, automobiles, aircraft, robots, space vehicles, and all sorts of communica-
tion and switching networks. In simplest terms, an integrated circuit is a collec-
tion of interconnected transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors fabricated on
a single piece of silicon, affectionately known as a chip. State-of-the-art chips eas-
ily contain several million components in a 1-cm2 area (Fig. 12.35).

Interestingly, integrated circuits were invented partly in an effort to achieve
circuit  miniaturization  and  partly  to  solve  the  interconnection  problem
spawned by the transistor. In the era of vacuum tubes, the relatively great power
and size of individual components severely limited the number of components
that could be interconnected in a given circuit. With the advent of the tiny, low-
power,  highly  reliable  transistor,  design  limits  on  the  number  of  components
disappeared and were replaced by the challenge of wiring together hundreds
of thousands of components. The magnitude of this problem can be appreci-
ated when one considers that second-generation computers (consisting of dis-
crete  transistors)  contained  several  hundred  thousand  components  requiring
more than a million hand-soldered joints to be made and tested.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

442

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Figures 12.36 and 12.37 show pictures of the ﬁrst ICs that contained multi-
ple electronic devices on a single piece of silicon. Noyce’s IC also shows inter-
connections  between  devices  fabricated  as  part  of  the  chip  manufacturing  process.
In  addition  to  solving  the  interconnection  problem,  ICs  possess  the  advan-
tages  of  miniaturization  and  fast  response,  two  attributes  that  are  critical  for
high-speed  computers.  The  fast  response  is  actually  also  a  product  of  the
miniaturization and close packing of components, because the response time
of a circuit depends on the time it takes for electrical signals traveling at about
1 ft/ns to pass from one component to another. This time is reduced by the
closer packing of components. Additional information on the history, theory
of  operation,  and  fabrication  of  chips  may  be  found  in  the  Suggestions  for
Further Reading at the end of this chapter.

Figure  12.38a  illustrates  the  dramatic  advances  made  in  chip  technology
since  Intel  introduced  the  ﬁrst  microprocessor  in  1971.  Figure  12.38b  is  a
graph of the logarithm of the number of transistors in a chip as a function of
the  year  in  which  the  chip  was  introduced.  Because  this  growth  follows  an

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

s
r
o
t
s
i
s
n
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

4004

8008
8080

8086 286

0
1970

Centrino

Pentium 4

Pentium

Pentium 3

386486

Pentium 2

12.6

SUPERCONDUCTIVITY

443

Centrino

Pentium 4

Pentium 3

Pentium 2

486

Pentium

386

286

8086

8080

8008

8

7

6

5

4

s
r
o
t
s
i
s
n
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
f
o
m
h
t
i
r
a
g
o
L

 

4004

3
1970

1975 1980

1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

1975 1980

1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.38 Dramatic advances in chip technology related to computer microchips
manufactured  by  Intel.  (a)  A  plot  of  the  number  of  transistors  on  a  single  computer
chip versus year of manufacture. (b) A plot of the logarithm of the number of transis-
tors in part (a). The fact that this plot is approximately a straight line shows that the
growth is exponential.

approximately straight line, we conclude that that the growth is exponential.
“Moore’s law,” proposed in 1965 by Gordon Moore, a cofounder of Intel with
Noyce, claims that the number of transistors per square inch on integrated cir-
cuits  should  double  every  18  months.  The  doubling  time  in  Figure  12.38b  is
longer  than  18  months  because  this  graph  shows  only  the  total  number  of
transistors and does not take into account the shrinking size of the integrated
circuit over the years. When the density of transistors per square centimeter is
graphed, the results are similar to those predicted by Moore’s law.

12.6 SUPERCONDUCTIVITY

There is a class of metals and compounds known as superconductors whose
electrical resistance R decreases to virtually zero below a certain temperature
Tc, called the critical temperature (Table 12.9). Let us now look at these amazing
materials  with  inﬁnite  conductivity  in  greater  detail,  using  what  we  have  just
learned about the properties of solids to help us understand the behavior of
superconductors.

We start by examining the Meissner effect, a phenomenon in which mag-
netic  ﬁelds  are  expelled  from  the  interior  of  superconductors.  Simple  argu-
ments based on the laws of electricity and magnetism can be used to show that
the magnetic ﬁeld inside a superconductor cannot change with time. Accord-
ing  to  Ohm’s  law,  the  resistance  of  a  conductor  is  given  by  R ⫽ ⌬V/I, where
⌬V is the potential difference across the conductor and I is the current in the
conductor. Because the potential difference ⌬V is proportional to the electric
ﬁeld inside the conductor, the electric ﬁeld is proportional to the resistance of
the conductor. Therefore, because R ⫽ 0 for a superconductor at or below its
critical temperature, the electric ﬁeld in its interior must be zero. Now re-
call that Faraday’s law of induction can be expressed as

冖 E ⭈ ds ⫽ ⫺

d ⌽B
dt

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Table 12.9 Critical 
Temperatures for 
Various Superconductors

Material

Zn
Al
Sn
Hg
Pb
Nb
Nb3Sn
Nb3Ge
YBa2Cu3O7
Bi – Sr – Ca – Cu – O
Tl – Ba – Ca – Cu – O
HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8

Tc(K)

0.88
1.19
3.72
4.15
7.18
9.46
18.05
23.2
92
105
125
134

444

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

T > Tc

T < Tc

i

(b)

(a)

Figure 12.39 A superconductor in the form of a long cylinder in the presence of an
external  magnetic  ﬁeld.  (a)  At  temperature  above  Tc,  the  ﬁeld  lines  penetrate  the
cylinder because it is in its normal state. (b) When the cylinder is cooled to T ⬍ Tc and
becomes superconducting, magnetic ﬂux is excluded from its interior by the induction
of surface currents.

That is, the line integral of the electric ﬁeld around any closed loop is equal
to the  negative  rate  of  change  in  the  magnetic  ﬂux  ⌽B through  the  loop.
Because E is  zero  everywhere  inside  the  superconductor,  the  integral  over
any closed  path  inside  the  superconductor  is  zero.  Therefore,  d ⌽B/dt ⫽ 0;
this tells us that the magnetic ﬂux in the superconductor cannot change.
From  this  information,  we  conclude  that  B ⫽ ⌽B/A must  remain  constant
inside the superconductor.

Before  1933,  it  was  assumed  that  superconductivity  was  a  manifestation  of
perfect conductivity. If a perfect conductor is cooled below its critical tempera-
ture in the presence of an applied magnetic ﬁeld, the ﬁeld should be trapped
in the interior of the conductor even after the external ﬁeld is removed. In ad-
dition, the ﬁnal state of the perfect conductor should depend on which occurs
ﬁrst,  the  application  of  the  ﬁeld  or  the  cooling  to  below  Tc.  If  the  ﬁeld  is
applied after the material has been cooled, the ﬁeld should be expelled from
the  superconductor.  If  the  ﬁeld  is  applied  before  the  material  is  cooled,  the
ﬁeld  should  not  be  expelled  once  the  material  has  been  cooled.  In  1933,
however,  W.  Hans  Meissner  and  Robert  Ochsenfeld  discovered  that  when  a
metal becomes superconducting in the presence of a weak magnetic ﬁeld, the
ﬁeld is expelled. Thus, the same ﬁnal state B ⫽ 0 is achieved whether the ﬁeld
is applied before or after the material is cooled below its critical temperature.

The  Meissner  effect  is  illustrated  in  Figure  12.39  for  a  superconducting
material  in  the  shape  of  a  long  cylinder.  Note  that  the  ﬁeld  penetrates  the
cylinder when its temperature is greater than Tc (Fig. 12.39a). As the tempera-
ture  is  lowered  to  below  Tc,  however,  the  ﬁeld  lines  are  spontaneously  ex-
pelled  from  the  interior  of  the  superconductor  (Fig.  12.39b).  Thus,  a  super-
conductor  is  more  than  a  perfect  conductor  (resistivity  ␳ ⫽ 0);  it  is  also  a
perfect  diamagnet  (B ⫽ 0).  The  property  that  B ⫽ 0  in  the  interior  of  a  su-
perconductor is as fundamental as the property of zero resistance. If the mag-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.6

SUPERCONDUCTIVITY

445

Figure 12.40 A small permanent magnet levitated above a pellet of the YBa2CU3O7⫺␦
superconductor  cooled  to  the  temperature  of  liquid  nitrogen,  77 K.  (Courtesy  of  IBM
Research)

nitude of the applied magnetic ﬁeld exceeds a critical value Bc, deﬁned as the
value  of  B that  destroys  a  material’s  superconducting  properties,  the  ﬁeld
again penetrates the sample.

Because  a  superconductor  is  a  perfect  diamagnet  having  a  negative mag-
netic susceptibility, it repels a permanent magnet. In fact, one can perform a
demonstration  of  the  Meissner  effect  by  ﬂoating  a  small  permanent  magnet
above  a  superconductor  and  achieving  magnetic  levitation,  as  seen  in  Figure
12.40. Recall from your study of electricity that a good conductor expels static
electric  ﬁelds  by  moving  charges  to  its  surface.  In  effect,  the  surface  charges
produce an electric ﬁeld that exactly cancels the externally applied ﬁeld inside
the conductor. In a similar manner, a superconductor expels magnetic ﬁelds
by  forming  surface  currents.  To  see  why  this  happens,  consider  again  the
superconductor  shown  in  Figure  12.39.  Let  us  assume  that  the  sample  is  ini-
tially at a temperature T ⬎ Tc as illustrated in Figure 12.39a, so that the mag-
netic ﬁeld penetrates the cylinder. As the cylinder is cooled to a temperature
T ⬍ Tc,  the  ﬁeld  is  expelled,  as  shown  in  Figure  12.39b.  Surface  currents
induced  on  the  superconductor’s  surface  produce  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  that
exactly  cancels  the  externally  applied  ﬁeld  inside  the  superconductor.  As
you would expect, the surface currents disappear when the external magnetic
ﬁeld is removed.

A successful theory of superconductivity in metals was published in 1957 by
American  physicists  John  Bardeen,  Leon  N.  Cooper  (b.  1930),  and  J.  Robert
Schreiffer (b. 1931) and is generally called BCS theory, based on the ﬁrst let-
ters  of  their  last  names.  This  theory  led  to  a  Nobel  Prize  in  Physics  for  the
three scientists in 1972 (the second Nobel prize for Bardeen!). In this theory,
two  electrons  can  interact  via  distortions  in  the  array  of  lattice  ions  so  that

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

446

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

there is a net attractive force between the electrons.7 As a result, the two elec-
trons are bound into an entity called a Cooper pair. The Cooper pair behaves
like  a  particle  with  integral  spin.  Recall  that  particles  with  integral  spin  are
bosons. (Particles with half-integer spins are fermions.) An important feature of
bosons is that they do not obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Consequently, at
very low temperatures, it is possible for all bosons in a collection of such parti-
cles  to  be  in  the  lowest  quantum  state.  As  a  result,  the  entire  collection  of
Cooper  pairs  in  the  metal  is  described  by  a  single  wavefunction. Above
the energy level associated with this wavefunction is an energy gap equal to the
binding energy of a Cooper pair. Under the action of an applied electric ﬁeld,
the  Cooper  pairs  experience  an  electric  force  that  causes  them  to  move
through the metal. A random-scattering event of a Cooper pair from a lattice
ion represents resistance to the electric current. Such a collision changes the
energy  of  the  Cooper  pair  because  some  energy  is  transferred  to  the  lattice
ion. But there are no available energy levels below that of the Cooper pair (it
is already in the lowest energy level), and none available above, because of the
energy gap. As a result, collisions are forbidden and there is no resistance to
the movement of Cooper pairs.

in  Switzerland.  In 

An  important  development  in  physics  that  elicited  much  excitement  in
the scientiﬁc  community  was  the  discovery  of  high-temperature  copper
oxide–based superconductors. The excitement began with a 1986 publication by
J. Georg Bednorz (b. 1950) and K. Alex Müller (b. 1927), scientists at the IBM
their  seminal  paper,8
Zurich  Research  Laboratory 
Bednorz and Müller reported strong evidence for superconductivity at 30 K in
an  oxide  of  barium,  lanthanum,  and  copper.  They  were  awarded  the  Nobel
Prize for Physics in 1987 for their remarkable discovery. Shortly thereafter, a new
family  of  compounds  was  open  for  investigation,  and  research  activity  in  the
ﬁeld  of  superconductivity  proceeded  vigorously.  In  early  1987,  groups  at  the
University of Alabama at Huntsville and the University of Houston announced
superconductivity  at  about  92 K  in  an  oxide  of  yttrium,  barium,  and  copper
(YBa2Cu3O7).  Later  that  year,  teams  of  scientists  from  Japan  and  the  United
States  reported  superconductivity  at  105 K  in  an  oxide  of  bismuth,  strontium,
calcium,  and  copper.  More  recently,  scientists  have  reported  superconductivity
at  temperatures  as  high  as  150 K  in  an  oxide  containing  mercury.  Today,  one
cannot rule out the possibility of room-temperature superconductivity, and the
mechanisms responsible for the behavior of high-temperature superconductors
are  still  under  investigation.  The  search  for  novel  superconducting  materials
continues both for scientiﬁc reasons and because practical applications become
more probable and widespread as the critical temperature is raised.

While  BCS  theory  was  very  successful  in  explaining  superconductivity  in
metals, there is currently no widely accepted theory for high-temperature su-
perconductivity. This remains an area of active research. The interested reader
should  see  our  companion  Web  site  http://info.brookscole.com/mp3e  for  a

7A  highly  simpliﬁed  explanation  of  this  attraction  between  electrons  is  as  follows.  Around  one
electron, the attractive Coulomb force causes surrounding positively charged lattice ions to move
slightly inward toward the electron. As a result, there is a higher concentration of positive charge
in this region than elsewhere in the lattice. A second electron is attracted to the higher concen-
tration of positive charge.
8J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller, Z. Phys. B, 64:189, 1986.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.7

LASERS

447

detailed treatment of superconductivity, including discussions of magnetism in
matter, Type I and II superconductors, BCS theory, Josephson tunneling, high-
temperature superconductivity, and superconducting devices.

12.7 LASERS

Lasers  provide  an  interesting  example  of  the  basic  principles  of  the  interac-
tion of radiation with atoms. Because of this and because of the large number
of engineering applications of lasers — such as CD-ROMs, precision surveying
and  length  measurement,  precision  cutting  and  shaping  of  materials,  and
communication by optical ﬁbers — it is worthwhile to discuss the principles of
operation of lasers in some detail.

Absorption, Spontaneous Emission, and
Stimulated Emission
To understand  the  operation  of  a  laser,  we  must  become  familiar  with  the
processes  that  describe  the  emission  and  absorption  of  radiation  by  atoms.
Although  it  would  be  stretching  the  truth  to  say  that  Einstein  anticipated  the
laser, he laid the foundations for the device with his explanation in 1917 of the
processes  of  atomic  absorption,  spontaneous  emission,  and  stimulated  emis-
sion.9 Einstein showed that an atom can absorb a photon of energy, hf, from a
radiation ﬁeld and make a transition from a lower energy state, E1, to a higher
state, E2, where E2 ⫺ E1 ⫽ hf. Let us set the probability of absorption per unit
time per atom equal to B12u( f , T ), where B12 is Einstein’s coefﬁcient of absorp-
tion and u( f, T ) is the energy density per unit frequency in the radiation ﬁeld.
The probability of absorption of radiation is thus assumed to be proportional
to the density of radiation. Once excited, an atom in state 2 is observed to have
a deﬁnite probability per second of making a spontaneous transition (that is,
one not induced by radiation) back to level 1. The spontaneous transition rate
may be characterized by the coefﬁcient A21 (transitions per unit time) or by the
spontaneous emission lifetime, t s ⫽ 1/A21 (time per transition).

In addition to spontaneous emission, which is independent of the radiation
density, another kind of emission can occur that is dependent on the radiation
density. If a photon of energy hf interacts with an atom when it is in level 2, the
electric ﬁeld associated with this photon can stimulate or induce atomic emis-
sion  such  that  the  emitted  electromagnetic  wave  (photon)  vibrates  in-phase
with  the  stimulating  wave  (photon)  and  travels  in  the  same  direction.  Two
such  photons  are  said  to  be  coherent. We may  set  the  stimulated  transition
rate per atom equal to B 21u( f, T ), where B 21 is Einstein’s coefﬁcient of stimu-
lated  emission.  Figure  12.41  summarizes  the  three  processes  of  absorption,
spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission.10

9A. Einstein, “Zur Quanten Theorie der Strahlung (On the Quantum Theory of Radiation),” Phys.
Zeit., 18:121–128, 1917.
10Although  spontaneous  emission  has  no  classical  analog  and  is  a  truly  quantum  effect  (arising
from quantization of the radiation ﬁeld), absorption and stimulated emission do have classical
analogs. If the atom–photon interaction is modeled as a charged harmonic oscillator driven by
an electromagnetic wave, the classical oscillator can either absorb energy from the wave or give
up energy, depending on the relative phases of oscillator and wave.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Spontaneous transition

448

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

Energy

E2

E1

hf

Absorption

(a)

E2 – E1 = hf

E2

hf

E1

Spontaneous

emission

(b)

2 hfout

E2

E1

hfin

Stimulated
emission

(c)

Figure  12.41 The  processes  of  (a)  absorption  and  (b)  spontaneous  emission.  The
lifetime  of  the  upper  state  is  t s,  and  the  photon  is  emitted  in  a  random  direction.
(c) Stimulated  emission.  In  this  process,  the  emitted  photons  are  in  phase  with  the
stimulating photon, and all have the same direction of travel.

Next, following Einstein, consider a mixture of atoms and radiation in ther-
mal equilibrium at temperature T. The populations N 1 and N 2 of the energy
levels E1 and E 2 obey the Boltzmann relation (discussed in Chapter 10).

N2
N1

⫽ e⫺(E2⫺E1)/kBT ⫽ e⫺hf/kBT

(12.37)

This equilibrium ratio of populations represents a case of dynamic equilibrium
in  which  the  number  of  atomic  transitions  per  second  up  (from  E 1 to E 2)  is
balanced by the number of spontaneous and stimulated transitions per second
down (from E 2 to E 1). Since the number of atoms making transitions is pro-
portional  to  the  population  of  the  starting  level  as  well  as  to  the  transition
probability, we may write

Number of atoms going from 1 to 2 per unit time ⫽ N1u( f, T )B12

where u( f, T ) is the radiation energy density per unit frequency ( J/m3 ⭈ Hz).

Number of atoms going from 2 to 1 per unit time by stimulated emission

⫽ N2u( f, T )B21

For spontaneous emission there is no dependence on the radiation ﬁeld, and
we merely have

Number of atoms going from 2 to 1 per unit time spontaneously ⫽ N2A21

Since the number of upward transitions per unit time must equal the number
of downward transitions per unit time, we have

N1u( f , T )B12 ⫽ N2[B21u( f , T ) ⫹ A21]

(12.38)

Using Equation 12.37, this becomes

u( f, T ) ⫽

A21

B12ehf/kBT ⫺ B21

(12.39)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.7

LASERS

449

Relation of Einstein
coefﬁcients of stimulated
emission, absorption, and
spontaneous emission

Population inversion

Equation 12.39 is an expression for the radiation density per unit frequency of
a system of atoms and radiation in equilibrium at temperature T expressed in
terms of Einstein coefﬁcients A21, B12, and B21. But Planck’s blackbody radia-
tion law (Chapter 3) provides us with an expression for a system of radiation
and oscillators in thermal equilibrium:

u( f, T ) ⫽

8␲hf 3

1

c 3

(ehf/kBT ⫺ 1)

(3.9)

Comparing Equations 12.39 and 3.9, we ﬁnd the interesting results

B21 ⫽ B12 ⫽ B

(12.40)

and

A21
B

⫽

8␲hf 3

c3

(12.41)

Equation 12.40 states that any atom that has a ﬁnite probability per unit time
of absorption has an equal probability of stimulated emission. Equation 12.41
shows that the process of spontaneous emission dominates the process of stim-
ulated emission at higher frequency.

Population Inversion and Laser Action
Since B12 ⫽ B 21,  there  is  an  equal  probability  that  a  photon  will  cause  an
upward (absorption) or downward (stimulated emission) atomic transition.
When  light  is  incident  on  a  system  of  atoms  in  thermal  equilibrium,  there
is usually  a  net  absorption  of  energy  since,  according  to  the  Boltzmann
distribution,  there  are  more  atoms  in  the  ground  state  than  in  excited
states. However, if one can invert the situation so that there are more atoms
in  an  excited  state  than  in  a  lower  state — a  condition  called  population
inversion — ampliﬁcation  of  photons  can  result.  Under  the  proper  condi-
tions,  a  single  input  photon  can  result  in  a  cascade  of  stimulated  photons,
all  of  which  are  in-phase,  traveling  in  the  same  direction  and  of  the  same
frequency  as  the  input  photon.  Since  the  device  that  does  this  is  a  light
ampliﬁer,  it  is  called  a  laser, an  acronym  for  light ampliﬁcation  by  stimu-
lated emission of radiation.

Although there are many different types of lasers, most lasers have certain

essential features:

• An energy source capable of producing either pulsed or continuous popu-
lation  inversions.  In  the  case  of  the  helium–neon  gas  laser,  the  energy
source is an electrical discharge that imparts energy by electron – atom col-
lisions. In the case of the ruby crystal laser, the population inversion is pro-
duced by intense ﬂashes of broadband illumination from ﬂash lamps. The
process of excitation with intense illumination is called optical pumping.
• A lasing medium with at least three energy levels: a ground state; an inter-
mediate  (metastable)  state  with  a  relatively  long  lifetime,  t s;  and  a  high-
energy  pump  state  (Fig.  12.42).  To  obtain  population  inversion,  t s must
be  greater  than  t 2,  the  lifetime  of  the  pump  state  E 2.  Note,  too,  that
ampliﬁcation  cannot  be  obtained  with  only  two  levels,  because  such  a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

450

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

E 2 (pump state), t 2

Fast decay

E1 (metastable state), t s > t 2

hf0

Pump
input

hf

Laser output

Figure 12.42 A three-level laser system. t 2 is the lifetime of the state E 2, and ts is the
lifetime of the state E1.

E 0 (ground state)

system  cannot  support  a  population  inversion.  At  most,  with  extremely
intense  optical  pumping  we  can  increase  the  population  of  the  upper
state in a two-level system until it equals the population of the lower state.
Further  pumping  serves  only  to  excite  as  many  downward  transitions  as
upward  transitions,  since  the  probability  of  absorption  is  equal  to  the
probability of stimulated emission for a given transition. For a population
inversion to be produced, energy absorption must occur for a transition
different from  the  transition  undergoing  stimulated  emission—thus  the
need for at least a three-level system.

• A method of containing the initially emitted photons within the laser so
that  they  can  stimulate  further  emission  from  other  excited  atoms.  In
practice this is usually achieved by placing mirrors at the ends of the las-
ing  medium  so  that  photons  make  multiple  passes  through  the  laser.
Thus the laser may be thought of as an optical resonator or oscillator with
two opposing reﬂectors at right angles to the laser beam. The oscillation
consists of a plane wave bouncing back and forth between the reﬂectors.
The  oppositely  traveling  plane  waves,  in  turn,  generate  a  highly  mono-
chromatic  standing  wave,  which  is  strongest  at  resonance  when  an  inte-
gral  number  of  half-wavelengths  just  ﬁts  between  the  reﬂectors  (Fig.
12.43).  To  extract  a  highly  collimated  beam  from  the  laser,  one  of  the
parallel  mirrors  is  made  slightly  transmitting  so  that  a  small  amount  of
energy leaks out of the cavity.

These three features of lasers lead to several unique characteristics of laser
light  that  make  it  a  much  more  powerful  technological  tool  than  light  from
ordinary  sources.  These  unique  characteristics  are  high  monochromaticity,
strong  intensity,  spatial  coherence,  and  low  beam  divergence.  Table  12.10
shows  typical  values  of  these  quantities  for  a  low-power  gas  laser.  In  com-
parison  with  a  single  emission  line  in  a  strong  conventional  light  source,
the He–Ne  laser  is  about  100  times  more  monochromatic,  generates  about
100  times  more  beam  power,  and  has  about  1000  times  more  exit  irradiance
(power  per  unit  area).  The  beam  divergence,  or  spread,  is  measured  in
milliradians  (mrad).  A  1.0-mrad  laser  would  have  a  beam  diameter  of  1 cm
at a distance of 10 m.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Mirror 1

0

m = 1

Mirror 2

Direction of propagation

m = 2

12.7

LASERS

451

L

w

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.43 Cavity modes in a laser. (a) Longitudinal modes have L ⫽ m␭/2, where m
is an integer, ␭ is the laser wavelength in the laser material, and L is the distance between
the two mirrors. (b) Modes with transverse components can exist if both ends and sides of
the laser are made reﬂective. Arrows show the direction of propagation of light rays.

Semiconductor Lasers
One of the most important light sources for ﬁber-optic communication is the
semiconductor laser. This laser is eminently suited to ﬁber-optic communica-
tion because of its small size (maximum dimension several tenths of a millime-
ter), high efﬁciency (25 to 30%), simplicity, long lifetime (p -n junctions have
estimated working lifetimes of about 100 years), ease of modulation (through
control  of  the  junction  current),  and  fast  response  (extending  well  into  the
GHz range). Figure 12.44 shows a typical gallium arsenide (GaAs) p -n junction
laser  along  with  nominal  operating  values.  The  ﬁrst  semiconductor  laser  was
made  of  GaAs  and  operated  at  0.842  ␮m  in  the  IR.11,12 Shortly  thereafter,

Table 12.10 Typical He-Ne Gas Laser Characteristics

Monochromaticity

Beam Power

Beam Diameter 

at Laser Exit

Beam 

Divergence

632.81 ⫾ 0.002 nm

10 mW

0.50 mm

1.0 mrad

Irradiance at Laser Exit

to a 10-␮m Diameter

Irradiance for a Beam Focused 

5100 mW/cm2

1.27 ⫻ 107 mW/cm2

11R. N. Hall, G. E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J. Soltys, and R. O. Carlson, “Coherent Light Emission

from GaAs Junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 9:336, 1962.

12M. I. Nathan, W. P. Dumke, G. Burns, F. H. Dill, and G. Lasher, “Stimulated Emission of Radia-

tion from GaAs p -n Junctions,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 1:62, 1962.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

452

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

I (Input current)

Metal
contact

a

a

Coherent
photons

L

p-type

n-type

d

I

Typical values
L = 0.3 mm
a = 0.1 mm
d = 2.0  m
λ
 = 840 nm

µ

I (at 300 K) = 20 A
Input power = 136 W
Light output power = 9 W

Figure 12.44 A gallium arsenide p -n junction laser.

Holonyak and Bevacqua reported the operation of a visible GaAs p -n junction
laser,13 and the laser was on its way to becoming an important part of semicon-
ductor device technology.

Semiconductor lasers are similar to other lasers in that they require a popu-
lation  inversion  between  quantum  levels  in  order  to  produce  laser  action.
They are notably different from gas lasers in that (a) discrete energy levels in
gas  lasers  become  energy  bands in  semiconductors,  and  (b)  optical  pumping
and  electrical  discharge  in  conventional  lasers  are  replaced  by  injection
pumping in  semiconductors.  In  injection  pumping,  large  forward  currents
are passed through the laser diode, and electrons and holes are injected into p
and n regions, respectively, where they recombine and emit radiation. Let us
brieﬂy sketch the main points needed to understand semiconductor lasers.

In semiconductors, the discrete energy levels found in isolated atoms widen
into bands because of the perturbations caused by neighboring atoms. We are
basically interested in the two outermost energy bands, known as the valence
(v) and conduction (c) bands. In a semiconductor such as silicon in thermal
equilibrium  at  room  temperature,  the  valence  band  is  ﬁlled  with  electrons
and the conduction band, where electrons can move freely, contains no elec-
trons. Since the two levels are separated by a forbidden energy region or gap,
Eg ⫽ 1.1 eV,  very  few  electrons  possess  enough  thermal  energy  at  room  tem-
perature  to  cross  the  gap  and  carry  a  current  in  the  material.  Hence  silicon,
like  other  semiconductors,  is  normally  a  poor  conductor  of  electricity.  How-
ever,  light,  heat,  or  electrical  energy  added  to  a  semiconductor  can  promote
electrons into the conduction band (c band) and increase the conductivity of
a semiconductor. The hole (vacancy) left by the electron in the valence band
(v band)  plays  an  equally  important  role  in  conduction  in  a  semiconductor,
since it behaves as a positive charge moving opposite in direction to the con-
duction  electron.  In  fact,  the  hole  actually  completes  the  current  path

13N. Holonyak, Jr., and S. F. Bevacqua, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1:82, 1962.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

12.7

LASERS

453

Empty
conduction band

Conduction e –

e –

Eg = 1.1 eV

Forbidden gap

Generation

Recombination

Hole

hf = Eg

Emitted light

Electrons

Filled
valence band

hf  ≥ Eg

+

+

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.45 (a) Energy bands in pure silicon at 0 K. (b) Generation and recombina-
tion of electron–hole pairs in silicon.

through the semiconductor. This process of the creation of an electron–hole
pair is called pair generation. An electron in the c band can also “fall into” a
hole and recombine with it, emitting light of band-gap energy in the process.
Both of these important processes are indicated schematically in Figure 12.45.
If  the  thermal  equilibrium  situation  of  empty  c band  and  full  v band  is  dis-
turbed by intense optical or electrical excitation, a semiconductor population
inversion can be set up, with the v band empty of electrons (full of holes) to a
depth X and the c band full of electrons to a height Y. As can be seen in Figure
12.46, once a few spontaneously emitted photons with energy Eg induce stimu-
lated  emission  at  Eg ,  stimulated  emission  eventually  far  exceeds  absorption
since photons with energy Eg lack sufﬁcient energy to be absorbed. Ultimately,
the dominance of the rate of stimulated emission over the rate of absorption
leads to line narrowing and laser action.

Other  Types  of  Semiconductor  Lasers. For  simplicity,  we  have  described
only  the  basic  GaAs  injection  laser.  To  leave  the  reader  with  the  impression
that this is the most important laser would be a serious distortion of the truth,

c  band

Y

Eg

Ee

Ea

Electrons

v -band

X

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

(a) Thermal equilibrium

(b) After intense optical 
or electrical pumping

Figure  12.46 A  population  inversion  in  a  semiconductor.  Note  that  Ee,  the  emission
energy,  is  equal  to  Eg and  that  Ea,  the  absorption  energy,  is  equal  to  Eg ⫹ X ⫹ Y.  The
absorption  energy  is  Eg ⫹ X ⫹ Y,  and  not  just  Eg ⫹ X,  because  electrons  obey  the  Pauli
exclusion principle. Thus electrons must absorb enough energy to occupy states above Y.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

454

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

for  the  present  ﬁeld  of  semiconductor  lasers  is  enormously  rich  and  varied.
The GaAs laser is a single-homojunction laser (one junction fabricated from a
single  compound),  but  many  current  lasers  are  double-heterojunction  (DH)
lasers,  such  as  the  PbTe–PbSnTe  and  the  GaAs–AlGaAs  lasers.14 When  two
junctions are formed in the laser, the injected carriers are conﬁned to a nar-
rower region so that a lower threshold current is required for laser action, per-
mitting continuous laser operation at room temperature. In addition, by vary-
ing  the  amount  of  Sn  or  Al  in  the  ternary  alloy,  one  can  vary  the  band-gap
energy and, consequently, the laser wavelength. Also, GaAs–AlGaAs multilayer
junctions are relatively easy to fabricate since AlGaAs layers may be grown epi-
taxially on GaAs layers. DH lasers can be formed with many other compounds,
including  quaternary  alloys,  and  tunable  semiconductor  lasers  can  be  made
whose emission wavelengths can be varied by changes in the applied pressure
or magnetic ﬁeld. These techniques have resulted in semiconductor lasers that
span  the  broad  range  from  0.3  to  40 ␮m.  These  and  other  developments  in
the ﬁeld of semiconductor lasers, which is a truly fascinating combination of
optics,  material  science,  and  device  physics,  are  treated  more  extensively  in
some of the Suggestions for Further Reading cited at the end of this chapter.

SUMMARY

Bonding  mechanisms  in  solids  can  be  classiﬁed  in  a  manner  similar  to  that
used  to  describe  bonding  of  atoms  to  form  molecules.  Ionic  solids, such  as
NaCl,  are  formed  by  the  net  attractive  coulomb  force  between  positive  and
negative ion neighbors. Ionic crystals are fairly hard, have high melting points,
and have strong cohesive energies of several electron volts. Covalent  solids,
such as diamond, form when valence electrons are shared by adjacent atoms,
producing  bonds  of  great  stability.  Covalent  solids  are  generally  very  hard,
have high melting points, and possess the highest cohesive energies, ranging
up to 8 eV per atom. Metallic solids are held together by the metallic bond,
which  arises  from  the  attractive  force  between  the  positive  ion  cores  and  the
electron  “gas.”  This  electron  gas  acts  as  a  kind  of  “cement”  to  hold  the  ion
cores together. Generally, metallic solids are softer and have lower cohesive en-
ergies than covalent solids. The most weakly bound solids are molecular crys-
tals, which are held together by van der Waals or dipole–dipole forces. Molec-
ular  crystals,  such  as  solid  argon,  have  low  melting  points  and  low  cohesive
energies on the order of 0.1 eV per molecule.

The  classical  free  electron  model  of  metals  is  generally  successful  in
explaining  the  electrical  and  thermal  properties  of  metals.  According  to  this
theory, a metal is modeled by a gas of conduction electrons moving through a
ﬁxed lattice of ion cores. Taking into account the collisions of electrons with
the  lattice,  the  classical  free  electron  model  predicts  that  metals  will  obey
Ohm’s law, J ⫽ ␴E, with the electrical conductivity ␴ given by

␴ ⫽

ne2L

(3k BTme)1/2

(12.15)

14PbSnTe and AlGaAs are called ternary (three-component) alloys. They are crystalline solid solu-

tions with Sn and Al randomly replacing some Pb and Ga atoms, respectively.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

455

where n is  the  concentration  of  conduction  electrons,  L is  the  electronic
mean free path, T is the absolute temperature, and me is the mass of the elec-
tron. The classical model may also be applied to heat conduction by electrons
in metals to show that K/␴, where K is the thermal conductivity, is a universal
constant  for  all  metals  and  depends  only  on  the  absolute  temperature
(Wiedemann – Franz law.) The classical model yields for this ratio

K
␴

⫽

2
3k B
2e2 T

(12.21)

Although  the  classical  electron  gas  model  broadly  describes  the  electrical
and thermal properties of metals, there are notable deﬁciencies in its predic-
tions — namely,  in  the  numerical  values  of  ␴ and K and  in  the  temperature
dependence of ␴. These deﬁciencies may be rectiﬁed by taking into account
the  wave  nature  and  indistinguishability  of  electrons,  by  replacing  the
Maxwell–Boltzmann  distribution  with  the  Fermi – Dirac  distribution.  When
this is done, Equation 12.21 for K/␴ takes the new form

K
␴

⫽

2
␲2k B
3e2 ⌻ ⫽ 2.45 ⫻ 10⫺8 T

(12.26)

and  shows  excellent  agreement  with  experimental  values.  The  correct  quan-
tum expression for the conductivity of a metal is

␴ ⫽

ne 2L
mev F

where v F is the Fermi speed and L is the quantum mean free path, which is
usually several hundred times the metal’s interatomic distance. This unusually long
mean free path occurs because electron waves can pass through a lattice of
ions  without  appreciable  scattering,  since  they  scatter  only  from  widely
spaced  crystal  imperfections,  such  as  thermal  displacements  of  ions  and
impurity  atoms.  The  observed  temperature  dependence  of  ␴ can  also  be
explained  as  the  result  of  electron  scattering  from  thermal  lattice  vibra-
tions, or phonons.

When  many  atoms  are  brought  together,  the  individual  atomic  levels
form a set of allowed bands separated by forbidden energy regions, or gaps.
One  can  understand  the  properties  of  metals,  insulators,  and  semiconduc-
tors in terms of the band theory of solids. The highest occupied band of a
metal is partially ﬁlled with electrons. Therefore, many electrons are free to
move throughout the metal and contribute to the conduction current when
raised in energy a small amount by a small applied electric ﬁeld. In an insu-
lator at T ⫽ 0 K, the valence band is completely ﬁlled with electrons and the
conduction  band  is  empty.  The  region  between  the  valence  band  and  the
conduction band is called the energy gap of the material. The energy gap
of an insulator is of the order of 10 eV. Because this gap is large compared
to kBT at  ordinary  temperatures,  very  few  electrons  are  thermally  excited
into  the  conduction  band,  which  explains  the  small  electrical  conductivity
of an insulator.

A semiconductor is  a  material  with  a  small  energy  gap,  of  the  order  of
1 eV, and  a  valence  band  that  is  ﬁlled  at  0  K.  Because  of  this  small  energy
gap,  a  signiﬁcant  number  of  electrons  can  be  thermally  excited  from  the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

456

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

valence  band  into  the  conduction  band  as  temperature  increases,  thereby
producing  a  semiconductor  conductivity  that  increases with  temperature.
The  electrical  properties  of  a  semiconductor  can  be  modiﬁed  by  adding
donor  atoms  with  ﬁve  valence  electrons  (such  as  arsenic)  or  by  adding
acceptor  atoms  with  three  valence  electrons  (such  as  boron).  A  semicon-
ductor  doped  with  donor  atoms  is  called  an  n-type  semiconductor, and
one doped with acceptor atoms is called p-type. The energy levels of these
donor  and  acceptor  atoms  fall  within  the  energy  gap  of  the  material,  the
donor levels falling just below the conduction band and the acceptor levels
just above the valence band.

When a p-type material is joined to an n-type material, a p-n junction is
formed with the current–voltage characteristics of a diode. If a p-n junction
is  operated  under  strong  forward  bias,  electrons  can  be  injected  into  the 
p -type  material  and  holes  into  the  n -type  material,  where  they  recombine
with  holes  and  electrons,  respectively,  emitting  photons  with  band-gap  en-
ergy. This is the principle of operation of the light-emitting diode (LED)
and  the  injection  laser. If  a  p -n junction  absorbs  a  photon  with  energy
greater than or equal to the band gap, an electron may be promoted to the
conduction band (leaving a hole in the valence band), thereby producing a
current. Devices in which light-generated electrons and holes are separated
by  a  built-in  junction  ﬁeld  and  collected  as  current  are  called  solar  cells.
Other semiconductor devices that have revolutionized life in the latter half
of  the  20th  century  are  the transistor and  the  integrated  circuit  (IC).
The  transistor  is  a  small,  low-power,  highly  reliable  amplifying  device  that
basically  consists  of  two  p -n junctions  placed  back  to  back.  The  integrated
circuit,  which  is  the  heart  of  the  small  computer,  consists  of  millions  of
interconnected transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors fabricated on a
single chip of silicon. Interestingly, integrated circuits were invented partly
in an effort to achieve greater miniaturization and partly to solve the inter-
connection problem spawned by the transistor.

Superconductivity occurs when the resistance of a sample falls suddenly to
zero at some critical temperature Tc . At Tc magnetic ﬁeld lines are also com-
pletely  expelled  from  the  interior  to  give  B ⫽ 0  inside  the  superconductor,
a phenomenon  known  as  the  Meissner  effect.  BCS  theory  explains
superconductivity  in  terms  of  the  formation  of  pairs  of  free  electrons,  called
Cooper pairs. Cooper pairs can move unhindered through the lattice without
scattering from lattice ions.

The  processes  of  atomic  absorption,  spontaneous  emission,  and  stimulated
emission  are  crucial  to  an  understanding  of  laser  action.  By  considering  a
group of atoms and radiation in thermal equilibrium and balancing the rate of
upward transitions against the rate of downward transitions, one can show that

and

B21 ⫽ B12 ⫽ B

A21
B

⫽

8␲hf 3

c3

(12.40)

(12.41)

where B12 is Einstein’s coefﬁcient of absorption, B 21 is Einstein’s coefﬁcient of
stimulated  emission,  and  A21 is  the  probability  of  spontaneous  emission  per
second per atom.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

QUESTIONS

457

Ampliﬁcation  of  the  light  from  a  particular  atomic  transition  and  genera-
tion  of  an  intense,  monochromatic,  coherent,  and  highly  collimated  beam
(laser action) may be achieved if certain conditions are met:

• The lasing medium must contain at least three energy levels: a ground state,

an intermediate state with a long lifetime, and a high-energy pump state.

• There  must  be  an  electrical  or  optical  energy  source  capable  of  “pump-
ing” atoms into excited states faster than they leave, so that a population
inversion is produced.

• There must be a method of conﬁning the ﬁrst wave of emitted photons

within the laser so that they can stimulate further emission.

Actual  lasers  include  solid-state  crystalline  lasers  such  as  the  ruby  laser,  gas
lasers  such  as  the  He – Ne  laser,  and  semiconductor  lasers  such  as  the  GaAs
laser. The most important light source for optical signal processing is the semi-
conductor laser. This laser is essentially a p -n junction operated under strong
forward bias. Typical advantages of these lasers are small size, high efﬁciency,
simplicity, ease of modulation, and fast response.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. R.  Zallen,  The  Physics  of  Amorphous  Solids,  New  York,
John  Wiley  and  Sons,  1983.  A  comprehensive  treat-
ment  of  amorphous  solids  at  a  senior  undergraduate
level.  Great  care  is  exercised  in  introducing  new  con-
cepts  verbally  before  launching  into  mathematical
arguments.

2. T. R. Reid, The Chip: How Two Americans Invented the Mi-
crochip  and  Launched  a  Revolution,  New  York,  Simon  and
Schuster,  1984.  An  informal,  nonmathematical,  ex-
tremely interesting chip history.

3. B.  G.  Streetman,  Solid  State  Electronic  Devices,  2nd  ed.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1980. A comprehen-
sive treatment of devices at the junior-senior undergrad-
uate level.

4. W.  Shockley,  Electrons  and  Holes 

in  Semiconductors,
Melbourne,  FL,  Krieger  Publishing  Co.,  1950.  The  clas-
sic  “granddaddy”  text  on  semiconductors.  Although
somewhat  dated,  the  book  is  a  marvelous  compendium
of  Shockley’s  insights  in  the  ﬁeld  of  semiconductor
physics. It starts out at a very clear introductory level and

QUESTIONS

about halfway through reaches advanced undergraduate
and graduate levels.

5. C.  Kittel,  Introduction  to  Solid  State  Physics,  7th  ed.,  New
York,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  1996.  A  detailed,  compre-
hensive, up-to-date treatment of solid-state physics at the
senior  or  graduate  level.  It  contains  many  useful  tables
of the properties of solids.

Readings on Lasers
6. C. K. N. Patel, “High-Power Carbon Dioxide Lasers,” Sci.

Amer., August 1968, pp. 22–23.

7. A.  L.  Schawlow,  “Laser  Light,”  Sci.  Amer.,  September

1968, pp. 120–126.

More advanced treatments of lasers may be found in

8. J. I. Pankove, Optical Processes in Semiconductors, New York,

Dover Publications, 1971.

9. S.  M.  Sze,  Physics  of  Semiconductor  Devices,  2nd  ed.,  New

York, John Wiley and Sons, 1981.

1. Explain  how  the  energy  bands  of  metals,  semiconduc-
tors,  and  insulators  account  for  the  following  general
optical  properties:  (a)  Metals  are  opaque  to  visible
light.  (b)  Semiconductors  are  opaque  to  visible  light
but  transparent  to  infrared  (many  IR  lenses  are  made
of germanium). (c) Many insulators, such as diamond,
are transparent to visible light.

2. Table 12.8 shows that the energy gaps for semiconduc-
tors  decrease  with  increasing  temperature.  What  ac-
counts for this behavior?

3. The resistivity of most metals increases with increasing
temperature, whereas the resistivity of a semiconductor
decreases  with  increasing  temperature.  What  explains
this difference in behavior?

4. Discuss  the  differences  among  the  band  structures  of
metals,  insulators,  and  semiconductors.  How  does  the
band structure model enable you to better understand
the electrical properties of these materials?

5. Discuss  the  electrical,  physical,  and  optical  properties

of ionically bonded solids.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

458

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

6. Discuss  the  electrical  and  physical  properties  of  cova-

15. How are the equations governing heat ﬂow and charge

lently bonded solids.

ﬂow similar for metals?

7. When  a  photon  is  absorbed  by  a  semiconductor,  an
electron–hole pair is said to be created. Give a physical
explanation  of  this  concept,  using  the  energy  band
model as the basis for your description.

8. In  a  semiconductor  such  as  silicon,  pentavalent  atoms
such  as  arsenic  are  donor  atoms,  and  trivalent  atoms
such as indium are acceptors. Inspect the periodic table
shown on the endpapers, and determine which other ele-
ments would be considered either donors or acceptors.

9. Explain  how  a  p -n junction  diode  operates  as  a  recti-

ﬁer, as a solar cell, and as a LED.

10. What  are  the  basic  assumptions  made  in  the  classical
free  electron  theory  of  metals?  How  does  the  energy
band model differ from the classical free electron the-
ory in describing the properties of metals?

11. Explain  the  similarities  of  electrical  conduction  and

heat conduction in metals.

16. Radiative emission by an atom can be spontaneous or
stimulated.  Distinguish  between  these  two  processes,
identifying  the  characteristic  features  of  each.  De-
scribe the role(s) each one plays in the operation of a
laser.

17. Why must a lasing medium possess at least three energy

levels?

18. Since the light from semiconductor lasers can be mod-
ulated easily, these lasers are of great use in light-wave
communication  systems.  Show  that  laser  communica-
tion  systems  possess  a  great  advantage  over  microwave
communication  systems  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  in-
formation  that  can  be  carried.  (Hint: If  each  speech
channel  requires  a  bandwidth  of  5 kHz,  calculate  the
number of channels carried by a laser beam of 1016 Hz
and by a microwave beam of 1010 Hz.)

19. Discuss  the  main  criteria  that  must  be  met  to  achieve

12. Discuss  the  differences  between  crystalline  solids,

laser action in a three-level system.

amorphous solids, and gases.

13. Discuss the physical sources of electrical resistance in a
metal. Does the resistance depend upon the strong re-
ﬂections set up when the lattice spacing is equal to an
integral number of electronic wavelengths?

14. Does it seem reasonable that the average of the square
of a quantity is greater than the square of the average?
(Recall from Section 12.2 that 

t 2 ⫽ 2␶2

t ⫽ ␶

and 

.)

PROBLEMS

12.1 Bonding in Solids

1. Show that the minimum potential energy of an ion pair

in an ionic solid is

U 0 ⫽ ⫺␣k

e 2

r 0 冢1 ⫺

1

m 冣

where r 0 is the equilibrium separation between ions, ␣
is  the  Madelung  constant,  and  the  repulsive  potential
energy  between  ions  is  B/r m. 兩U 0兩 is  called  the  ionic
cohesive energy and is the energy required to separate to
inﬁnity an ion pair originally at a separation of r 0 in the
crystal. Hint :

dU

dr 兩r⫽r0

⫽ 0

2. Show  that  the  angle  between  carbon  bonds  shown  in

Figure 12.3a is 109.5⬚.

3. Calculate the ionic cohesive energy for NaCl, using Equa-

tion 12.3. Take ␣ ⫽ 1.7476, r 0 ⫽ 0.281 nm, and m ⫽ 8.

4. LiCl, which has the same crystal structure as NaCl, has
r 0 ⫽ 0.257 nm  and  has  a  measured  ionic  cohesive  en-
ergy of 199 kcal/mol. (a) Find the integral value of m

20. What  are  the  three  fundamental  ways  in  which  light
(photons)  interacts  with  matter  (atoms)?  Brieﬂy  ex-
plain each.

21. Assuming  that  K is  a  positive  constant  in  Equation
12.18, explain why there is a negative sign in this equa-
tion.

22. Explain why Cooper pairs do not scatter from positive

lattice ions in a metal.

that best agrees with the measured value 199 kcal/mol.
(b) Is the value of U 0 very sensitive to a change in m?
Compute  the  percent  change  in  U 0 when m increases
by 1.

5. Consider  a  one-dimensional  chain  of  alternating  posi-
tive  and  negative  ions.  Show  that  the  potential  energy
of an ion in this hypothetical crystal is

U(r) ⫽ ⫺k␣

e2
r

where ␣ ⫽ 2 ln 2 (the Madelung constant), and r is the
interionic spacing. [Hint: Make use of the series expan-
sion for ln(1 ⫹ x).]

6. (a) Show that the force on an ion in an ionic solid can

be written

F ⫽ ⫺k␣ 

e 2

r 2 冤1 ⫺ 冢 r 0

r 冣m⫺1冥

where r 0 is  the  equilibrium  separation  and  ␣ is  the
Madelung constant. (Hint : Make use of the value of B
found  in  Problem  1.)  (b)  Imagine  that  an  ion  in  the
solid is displaced a small distance x from r 0, and show

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

that  the  ion  experiences  a  restoring  force  F ⫽ ⫺Kx,
where

K ⫽

k␣e 2
3  (m ⫺ 1)
r 0

(c)  Use  the  result  of  (b)  to  estimate  the  frequency  of
vibration  of  an  Na⫹ ion  in  NaCl.  Take  m ⫽ 8  and  use
the  value  ␣ ⫽ 1.7476.  (d)  At  what  wavelength  would
the  Na⫹ ion  absorb  incident  radiation?  Is  this  wave-
length in the UV, visible, or IR part of the spectrum?

7. (a)  Calculate  the  ionic  cohesive  energy  for  KCl,
which has the same crystal structure as NaCl. Take r 0 ⫽
0.314 nm and m ⫽ 9. (b) Calculate the atomic cohesive
energy  of  KCl  by  using  the  facts  that  the  ionization
energy of potassium is 4.34 eV (that is, K ⫹ 4.34 eV :
K⫹ ⫹ e)  and  that  the  electron  afﬁnity  of  chlorine  is
3.61 eV (Cl⫺ ⫹ 3.61 eV : Cl ⫹ e).

8. The Madelung constant for the NaCl structure may be
found  by  summing  an  inﬁnite  alternating  series  of
terms giving the electrostatic potential energy between
an Na⫹ ion and its 6 nearest Cl⫺ neighbors, its 12 next-
nearest  Na⫹ neighbors,  and  so  on  (see  Fig.  12.1a).
(a) From this expression, show that the ﬁrst three terms
of the inﬁnite series for the Madelung constant for the
NaCl  structure  yield  ␣ ⫽ 2.13.  (b)  Does  this  inﬁnite
series converge rapidly? Calculate the fourth term as a
check.

12.2 Classical Free Electron Model of Metals

9. Consider  a  group  of  N electrons,  all  of  which  experi-
ence a collision with lattice ions at t ⫽ 0. One can show
that the number of electrons that suffer their next col-
lision  between  t and t ⫹ dt follows  the  exponentially
decreasing distribution

n(t )dt ⫽

Ne⫺t/␶

␶

dt

where ␶ is  the  mean  free  time.  (a)  Show  that

n(t )dt ⫽ N

, as expected. (b) Show that this distribu-

冕⬁

0
tion leads to 

t ⫽ ␶

. Hint:

t ⫽

n 1t1 ⫹ n 2t2 ⫹ ⭈  ⭈  ⭈ ⫹ n ftf

N

⫽

1

N 冕⬁

0

t ⭈ n(t) dt

(c)  Show,  similarly,  that 
rivation of Equation 12.9.

t 2 ⫽ 2␶2

,  as  stated  in  the  de-

10. Silver has a density of 10.5 ⫻ 103 kg/m3 and a resistivity
of  1.60 ⫻ 10⫺8 ⍀ ⭈ m  at  room  temperature.  (a)  On  the
basis of the classical free electron gas model, and assum-
ing that each silver atom contributes one electron to the
electron  gas,  calculate  the  average  time  between  colli-
sions of the electrons. (b) Calculate the mean free path
from ␶ and the electron’s thermal velocity. (c) How does
the mean free path compare to the lattice spacing?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

459

11. The  contribution  of  a  single  electron  or  hole  to  the
electric  conductivity  of  a  semiconductor  can  be  ex-
pressed  by  an  important  property  called  the  mobility.
The  mobility,  ␮,  is  deﬁned  as  the  particle  drift  speed
per  unit  electric  ﬁeld  or,  in  terms  of  a  formula, 
␮ ⫽ vd/E.  Note  that  mobility  describes  the  ease  with
which charge carriers drift in an electric ﬁeld and that
the mobility of an electron, ␮n, may be different from
the  mobility  of  a  hole,  ␮p,  in  the  same  material.  (a)
Show that the current density may be written in terms
of  mobility  as  J ⫽ ne␮nE,  where ␮n ⫽ e␶/me.  (b)  Show
that  when  both  electrons  and  holes  are  present,  the
conductivity may be expressed in terms of ␮p and ␮n as
␴ ⫽ ne␮n ⫹ pe␮p, where n is the electron concentration
and p is  the  hole  concentration.  (c)  If  a  germanium
sample  has  ␮n ⫽ 3900 cm2/V ⭈ s,  calculate  the  drift
speed  of  an  electron  when  a  ﬁeld  of  100 V/cm  is  ap-
plied. (d) A pure (intrinsic) sample of germanium has
␮n ⫽ 3900 cm2/V ⭈ s  and  ␮p ⫽ 1900 cm2/V ⭈ s.  If  the
hole  concentration  is  equal  to  3.0 ⫻ 1013 cm⫺3,  calcu-
late the resistivity of the sample.

12. Gallium  arsenide  (GaAs)  is  a  semiconductor  material
of  great  interest  for  its  high  power-handling  capabili-
ties  and  fast  response  time.  (a)  Calculate  the  drift
speed of electrons in GaAs for a ﬁeld of 10 V/cm if the
electron mobility is ␮n ⫽ 8500 cm2/V ⭈ s. (See Problem
11  for  the  deﬁnition  of  ␮.)  (b)  What  percent  of  the
electron’s  thermal  speed  at  300 K  is  this  drift  speed?
(c)  Assuming  an  effective  electron  mass  equal  to  the
free electron mass, calculate the average time between
electron  collisions.  (d)  Calculate  the  electronic  mean
free path.

12.3 Quantum Theory of Metals
13. Assuming  that  conduction  electrons  in  silver  are  de-
scribed  by  the  Fermi  free  electron  gas  model  with 
E F ⫽ 5.48 eV, repeat the calculations of Problem 10.

14. Sodium  is  a  monovalent  metal  having  a  density  of
0.971 g/cm3, an atomic weight of 23.0 g/mol, and a re-
sistivity  of  4.20 ␮⍀ ⭈ cm  at  300 K.  Use  this  information
to calculate (a) the free electron density; (b) the Fermi
energy, E F, at 0 K; (c) the Fermi velocity, v F; (d) the av-
erage time between electronic collisions; (e) the mean
free  path  of  the  electrons,  assuming  that  E F at  0 K  is
the same as E F at 300 K; and (f) the thermal conductiv-
ity.  For  comparison  to  (e),  the  nearest-neighbor  dis-
tance in sodium is 0.372 nm.

12.4 Band Theory of Solids
15. The energy gap for Si at 300 K is 1.14 eV. (a) Find the
lowest-frequency photon that will promote an electron
from  the  valence  band  to  the  conduction  band  of  sili-
con. (b) What is the wavelength of this photon?

16. From  the  optical  absorption  spectrum  of  a  certain
semiconductor,  one  ﬁnds  that  the  longest  wavelength

460

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

 

of radiation absorbed is 1.85 ␮m. Calculate the energy
gap for this semiconductor.

17. The  simplest  way  to  model  the  energy-level  splitting
that  is  produced  when  two  originally  isolated  atoms
are brought close together is with two ﬁnite wells. In
this  model,  the  Coulomb  potential  experienced  by
the outermost electron in each atom is approximated
by  a  one-dimensional  ﬁnite  square  well  of  depth  U
and width a. The energy levels for two atoms close to-
gether may be found by solving the time-independent
Schrödinger  equation  for  a  potential  consisting  of
two  ﬁnite  wells  separated  by  a  distance  b.  (a)  Start
this  problem  by  “warming  up”  with  a  solution  to  the
single ﬁnite well shown in Figure P12.17a. Justify the

(a)

Potential

U

I

II

E < U

III

x = 0

Ψ

I = Ae Kx

x

x = a
Kh = [2m(U – E)]1/2

Ψ

II = B cos kx + C sin kx

kh = (2m E)1/2

Ψ

III = De –Kx

(b)

Potential

U

I

II

III

IV

x = 0

a

a + b

2a + b

E < U
V

x

Ψ

I = Ae Kx

Kh = [2m(U – E)]1/2

Ψ

II = B cos kx + C sin kx

kh = (2m E)1/2

Ψ

III = De Kx + E ′e –Kx

Ψ

IV = F cos kx + G sin kx

Ψ

V = He –Kx

Figure P12.17 (a) Potential and eigenfunctions for a sin-
gle  ﬁnite  well  of  depth  U,  where  E ⬍ U.  (b)  Potential  and
eigenfunctions for two ﬁnite wells. The width of each well is
a, and the wells are separated by a distance b.

solutions  listed  for  regions  I,  II,  and  III,  and  apply
the standard boundary conditions (␺ and d␺/dx con-
tinuous at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ a) to obtain a transcenden-
tal  equation  for  the  bound-state  energies.  (b)  Solve
numerically  for  the  bound-state  energies  when  an
electron  is  confined  to  a  well  with  U ⫽ 100  eV  and 
a ⫽ 1 Å. You should ﬁnd two bound states at approxi-
mately 19 and 70 eV. (c) Now consider the ﬁnite wells
separated by a distance b, as shown in Figure P12.17b.
Impose  the  conditions  of  continuity  in ␺ and d␺/dx
at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ a to obtain
2e⫺2Ka[cos ka ⫹ 1

2(K/k ⫺ k/K )sin ka]

(k/K ⫹ K/k)sin ka

D
E ⬘

⫽

Show that the boundary conditions at x ⫽ a ⫹ b yield

F
G

⫽

(D/E⬘)e ␤[cos ␣ ⫺ (K/k)sin ␣] ⫹ e⫺␤[cos ␣ ⫹ (K/k)sin ␣]
(D/E⬘)e ␤[sin ␣ ⫹ (K/k)cos ␣] ⫹ e⫺␤[sin ␣ ⫺ (K/k)cos ␣]

where ␣ ⫽ k(a ⫹ b)  and  ␤ ⫽ K(a ⫹ b).  The  boundary
conditions at x ⫽ 2a ⫹ b yield

F
G

⫽

cos k(2a ⫹ b) ⫹ (K/k)sin k(2a ⫹ b)
sin k(2a ⫹ b) ⫺ (K/k)cos k(2a ⫹ b)

Thus, the two expressions for F/G may be set equal and
the expression for D/E ⬘ used to obtain a transcenden-
tal equation for the energy E. (d) Solve for the bound-
state  energies  when  U ⫽ 100  eV  and  a ⫽ b ⫽ 1  Å.  You
should observe twofold splitting of the bound-state en-
ergies found at 19 and 70 eV for the single well.

12.5 Semiconductor Devices
18. One can roughly calculate the weak binding energy of
a donor electron as well as its orbital radius in a semi-
conductor on the basis of the Bohr theory of the atom.
Recall that for a single electron bound to a nucleus of
charge Z,  the  binding  energy  of  the  ground  state  is
given by

ke2Z 2
2a0

⫽ 13.6Z 2 eV

(4.36)

and the ground-state radius by

r 1 = a 0/Z

(4.35)

For  the  case  of  a  phosphorus  donor  atom  in  silicon,
the outermost donor electron is attracted by a nuclear
charge of Z ⫽ 1. However, because the phosphorus nu-
cleus is embedded in the polarizable silicon, the effec-
tive nuclear charge seen by the electron is reduced to
Z/␬,  where  ␬ is  the  dielectric  constant.  (a)  Calculate
the  binding  energy  of  a  donor  electron  in  Si(␬ ⫽ 12)
and  Ge(␬ ⫽ 16),  and  compare  to  the  thermal  energy
available  at  room  temperature.  (b)  Calculate  the  ra-
dius  of  the  ﬁrst  Bohr  orbit  of  a  donor  electron  in  Si

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

and  Ge.  How  does  the  Bohr  orbit  radius  compare  to
the  nearest-neighbor  distance  in  Si(2.34  Å)  and  in
Ge(2.43 Å)?

12.7 Lasers
19. Cavity  modes  in  lasers.  Under  high  resolution  and  at
threshold  current,  the  emission  spectrum  from  a  GaAs
laser is seen to consist of many sharp lines, as shown in
Figure  P12.19.  Although  one  line  generally  dominates
at higher currents, let us consider the origin and spac-
ing of the multiple lines, or modes, shown in this ﬁgure.
Recall  that  standing  waves  or  resonant  modes  corre-
sponding to the sharp emission lines are formed when
an  integral  number  m of  half-wavelengths  ﬁts  between
the cleaved GaAs surfaces. If L is the distance between
cleaved  faces,  n is  the  index  of  refraction  of  the  semi-
conductor, and ␭is the wavelength in air, we have

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i
 

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

836

837
(nm)

λ

838

Figure  P12.19 A  high-resolution  emission  spectrum  of
the GaAs laser, operated just below the laser threshold.

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

461

m ⫽

L

␭/2n

(a)  Show  that  the  wavelength  separation  between
adjacent modes (the change in wavelength for the case
⌬m ⫽ ⫹1) is

兩 ⌬␭兩 ⫽

␭2

2L 冢n ⫺ ␭ 

dn

d␭冣

(Hint: Since m is large and we want the small change in
wavelength  that  corresponds  to  ⌬m ⫽ 1,  we  can  con-
sider m to be a continuous function of ␭ and differenti-
ate m ⫽ 2Ln/␭). (b) Using the following typical values
for GaAs, calculate the wavelength separation between
adjacent  modes.  Compare  your  results  to  Figure
P12.19.

␭ ⫽ 837 nm

2L ⫽ 0.60 nm

n ⫽ 3.58

dn/d␭ ⫽ 3.8 ⫻ 10⫺4 (nm)⫺1冧 at ␭ ⫽ 837 nm

(c)  Estimate  the  mode  separation  for  the  He–Ne  gas
laser  using  ␭ ⫽ 632.8  nm,  2L ⫽ 0.6  m,  n ⬇ 1,  and
dn/d␭ ⫽ 0. On the basis of this calculation and the re-
sult of part (b), what is the controlling factor in mode
separation in both solids and gases?

20. How  monochromatic  is  a  laser? The  natural  line  width
emitted by a collection of Cr3⫹ ions in ruby in thermal
equilibrium at 290 K is about 0.4 nm for the 694.4-nm
line.  This  is  the  thermal  line  width.  Show  that  the  emis-
sion  from  a  ruby  laser  is  much  more  monochromatic
than  694.4 ⫾ 0.2  nm  if  laser  emission  is  conﬁned  to 
a  single-cavity  mode.  Take  the  length  of  the  ruby 
between  polished  faces  to  be  10  cm,  n ⫽ 1.8,  and
dn/d␭⬇ 0. (See Problem 19.)

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

21. A thin rod of superconducting material 2.50 cm long is
placed into a 0.540-T magnetic ﬁeld with its cylindrical
axis  along  the  magnetic  ﬁeld  lines.  (a)  Sketch  the  di-
rections  of  the  applied  ﬁeld  and  the  induced  surface
current. (b) Find the magnitude of the surface current
on the curved surface of the rod.

22. Determine the current generated in a superconducting
ring  of  niobium  metal  2.00 cm  in  diameter  when  a
0.020 0-T magnetic ﬁeld directed perpendicular to the
ring  is  suddenly  decreased  to  zero.  The  inductance  of
the ring is 3.10 ⫻ 10⫺8 H.

23. A  convincing  demonstration  of  zero  resistance. A  direct  and
relatively  simple  demonstration  of  zero  dc  resistance
can be carried out using the four-point probe method.
The probe shown in Figure P12.23 consists of a disk of
YBa2Cu3O7 (a  high-Tc superconductor)  to  which  four
wires  are  attached  by  indium  solder.  Current  is  main-
tained through the sample by applying a dc voltage be-
tween points a and b, and it is measured with a dc am-
meter.  The  current  can  be  varied  with  the  variable
resistance R.  The  potential  difference  ⌬Vcd between c
and d is  measured  with  a  digital  voltmeter.  When  the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

462

CHAPTER 12

THE SOLID STATE

Superconductor

c

d

a

b

A

V

R

Figure  P12.23 Circuit  diagram  used  in  the  four-point
probe measurement of the dc resistance of a sample. A dc
digital ammeter is used to measure the current, and the po-
tential  difference  between  c and d is  measured  with  a  dc
digital voltmeter. Note that there is no voltage source in the
inner loop circuit where ⌬Vcd is measured.

Table P12.23 Current Versus Potential 
Difference ⌬Vcd Measured in a Bulk 
Ceramic Sample of YBa2Cu3O7ⴚ␦
at Room Temperature

I (mA)

⌬Vcd (mV)

57.8
61.5
68.3
76.8
87.5
102.2
123.7
155

1.356
1.441
1.602
1.802
2.053
2.398
2.904
3.61

probe  is  immersed  in  liquid  nitrogen,  the  sample
quickly cools to 77 K, below the critical temperature of
the material, 92 K. The current remains approximately
constant, but ⌬Vcd drops abruptly to zero. (a) Explain this
observation on the basis of what you know about super-
conductors. (b) The data in Table P12.23 represent ac-
tual values of ⌬Vcd for different values of I taken on the
sample  at  room  temperature.  A  6-V  battery  in  series
with a variable resistor R supplied the current. The val-
ues of R ranged from 10 ⍀ to 100 ⍀. The data are from
the author’s [RAS] laboratory. Make an I–⌬V plot of the
data,  and  determine  whether  the  sample  behaves  in  a
linear manner. From the data obtain a value for the dc
resistance  of  the  sample  at  room  temperature.  (c)  At
room temperature it is found that ⌬Vcd ⫽ 2.234 mV for
I ⫽ 100.3 mA,  but  after  the  sample  is  cooled  to  77 K,
⌬Vcd ⫽ 0  and  I ⫽ 98.1 mA.  What  do  you  think  might
cause the slight decrease in current?

24. Under  pressure,  liquid  helium  can  solidify  as  each
atom bonds with four others, and each bond has an av-
erage energy of 1.74 ⫻ 10⫺23 J. Find the latent heat of
fusion for helium in joules per gram. (The molar mass
of He is 4.00 g/mol.)

25. A diode, a resistor, and a battery are connected in a se-
ries  circuit.  The  diode  is  at  a  temperature  for  which
kBT ⫽ 25.0  meV  and  has  a  saturation  current  of 
1.00 ␮A. The resistance of the resistor is 745 ⍀, and the
battery  maintains  a  constant  potential  difference  of
2.42 V.  (a)  Find  graphically  the  current  in  the  loop.
Proceed  as  follows:  On  the  same  axes,  draw  graphs  of
the current in the diode I D and the current in the wire
I W versus the voltage across the diode ⌬V . Choose val-
ues of ⌬V ranging from 0 to 0.250 V in steps of 0.025 V.
Determine  the  value  of  ⌬V at  the  intersection  of  the
two  graph  lines,  and  calculate  the  corresponding  cur-
rents I D and I W. Do they agree? (b) Find the ohmic re-
sistance  of  the  diode,  which  is  deﬁned  as  the  ratio
⌬V/I D.  (c)  Find  the  dynamic  resistance  of  the  diode,
which is deﬁned as the derivative d(⌬V )/dI D.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13
Nuclear Structure

Chapter Outline

13.1 Some Properties of Nuclei

Charge and Mass
Size and Structure of Nuclei
Nuclear Stability
Nuclear Spin and Magnetic Moment
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

13.2 Binding Energy and Nuclear Forces
13.3 Nuclear Models

Liquid-Drop Model
Independent-Particle Model
Collective Model

13.4 Radioactivity
13.5 Decay Processes

Alpha Decay
Beta Decay
Carbon Dating
Gamma Decay

13.6 Natural Radioactivity
Four Radioactive Series
Determining the Age of the Earth

Summary

In 1896, the year that marks the birth of nuclear physics, the French physi-
cist Henri Becquerel (1852 – 1908) discovered radioactivity in uranium com-
pounds.  Following  his  discovery,  scientists  did  a  great  deal  of  research  in
attempts  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  radiation  emitted  by  radioactive
nuclei. Pioneering work by Ernest Rutherford showed that the emitted radi-
ation  was  of  three  types,  which  he  called  alpha,  beta,  and  gamma  rays.
Rutherford  classiﬁed  the  rays  according  to  the  nature  of  the  electric
charges they possessed and their abilities to penetrate matter and ionize air.
Later  experiments  showed  that  alpha  rays  are  helium  nuclei,  beta  rays  are
electrons, and gamma rays are high-energy photons.

In  1911  Rutherford  and  his  students  Geiger  and  Marsden  performed  a
number  of  important  scattering  experiments  involving  alpha  particles.  The
experiments established that the nucleus of an atom can be regarded as essen-
tially a point mass and point charge and that most of the atomic mass is con-
tained  in  the  nucleus.  Subsequent  studies  revealed  the  presence  of  a  previ-
ously  unknown  short-range  type  of  force,  the  nuclear  force,  which  is
predominant  at  distances  of  less  than  approximately  10⫺14 m  and  is  zero  at
great distances.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

463

464

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Other milestones in the development of nuclear physics include:
• The observation of nuclear reactions in 1930 by Cockroft and Walton, us-

ing artiﬁcially accelerated particles

• The  discovery  of  the  neutron  in  1932  by  Chadwick  and  the  conclusion

that neutrons make up about half of the nucleus

• The discovery of artiﬁcial radioactivity in 1933 by Joliot and Irene Curie
• The discovery of nuclear ﬁssion in 1938 by Meitner, Hahn, and Strassmann
• The development of the ﬁrst controlled ﬁssion reactor in 1942 by Fermi

and his collaborators

In  this  chapter  we  discuss  the  properties  and  structure  of  the  atomic  nu-
cleus.  We  ﬁrst  describe  the  basic  properties  of  nuclei,  then  discuss  nuclear
forces and binding energy, nuclear models, and the phenomenon of radioac-
tivity. Finally, we examine the processes by which nuclei decay.

13.1 SOME PROPERTIES OF NUCLEI

All  nuclei  are  composed  of  two  types  of  particles:  protons  and  neu-
trons. The  only  exception  is  the  ordinary  hydrogen  nucleus,  which  is  a
single  proton.  In  describing  the  atomic  nucleus,  we  must  use  the  follow-
ing quantities:

• The atomic  number, Z (sometimes  called  the  charge  number),  which

equals the number of protons in the nucleus

• The neutron number, N, which equals the number of neutrons in the

nucleus.

• The mass  number, A,  which  equals  the  number  of  nucleons  (neu-

trons plus protons) in the nucleus.

In  representing  nuclei,  it  is  convenient  to  have  a  system  of  symbols  to
show how many protons and neutrons are present. The symbol used is  A
Z X,
where  X  represents  the  chemical  symbol  for  the  element.  For  example,
56
26Fe(iron) has a mass number of 56 and an atomic number of 26; it there-
fore  contains  26  protons  and  30  neutrons.  When  no  confusion  is  likely  to
arise,  we  omit  the  subscript  Z because  the  chemical  symbol  can  always  be
used to determine Z.

The nuclei of all atoms of a particular element contain the same number of
protons  but  often  contain  different  numbers  of  neutrons.  Nuclei  that  are
related in this way are called isotopes.

The isotopes of an element have the same Z value but different N and A
values.

Ernest Rutherford (1871 – 1937),
a  physicist  from  New  Zealand,
was  awarded  a  Nobel  prize  in
1908  for  discovering  that  atoms
can  be  broken  apart  by  alpha
rays  and  for  studying  radioactiv-
ity. “On consideration, I realized
that 
this  scattering  backward
must be the result of a single col-
lision, and when I made calcula-
tions I saw that it was impossible
to  get  anything  of  that  order  of
magnitude unless you took a sys-
tem in which the greater part of
the mass of the atom was concen-
trated in a minute nucleus. It was
then  that  I  had  the  idea  of  an
atom with a minute massive cen-
ter  carrying  a  charge.”  (Photo
courtesy of AIP Niels Bohr Library)

Isotopes

6C  isotope  is  about  98.9%,  whereas  that  of  the  13

The  natural  abundances  of  isotopes  can  differ  substantially.  For  example,
11
6C, 12
6C are four isotopes of carbon. The natural abundance
of the  12
6C  isotope  is  only
about  1.1%.  Some  isotopes  do  not  occur  naturally  but  can  be  produced
in the  laboratory  through  nuclear  reactions.  Even  the  simplest  element,
hydrogen,  has  isotopes:  1
1H,  deu-
terium; and 3

1H,  the  ordinary  hydrogen  nucleus;  2

6C, 13

6C, and  14

1H, tritium.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.1

SOME PROPERTIES OF NUCLEI

465

Charge and Mass
The  proton  carries  a  single  positive  charge,  equal  in  magnitude  to  the  elec-
tron  charge  (where  e ⫽ 1.602 177 3 ⫻ 10⫺19 C).  The  neutron  is  electrically
neutral, as its name implies. Because the neutron has no charge, it is more dif-
ﬁcult to detect.

Atomic  mass (the  mass  of  an  atom  containing  a  nucleus  and  Z elec-
trons)  can  be  measured  with  great  precision  with  the  mass  spectrometer.
The proton is approximately 1836 times as massive as the electron, and the
masses of the proton and the neutron are almost equal. It is convenient to
deﬁne, for atomic masses, the atomic mass unit, u, in such a way that the
mass  of  the  isotope  12C  is  exactly  12 u.  That  is,  the  mass  of  an  atom  is
measured  relative  to  the  mass  of  an  atom  of  the  neutral  carbon-12  isotope
(the nucleus plus six electrons). Thus the mass of 12C is exactly 12 u, where
1 u ⫽ 1.660 540 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg.  The  proton  and  neutron  each  have  a  mass  of
approximately 1 u, and the electron has a mass that is only a small fraction
of an atomic mass unit:

mass of proton ⫽ 1.007 276 5 u

mass of neutron ⫽ 1.008 664 9 u

mass of electron ⫽ 0.000 548 579 90 u

Because the rest energy of a particle is given by E ⫽ mc 2, it is often conve-
nient to express the atomic mass unit in terms of its rest-energy equivalent. For
one atomic mass unit, we have

E ⫽ mc2 ⫽ (1.660 540 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg) 

(2.997 924 6 ⫻ 108 m/s)2
(1.602 177 3  ⫻ 10⫺19 J/eV)

⫽ 931.494 3 MeV

As  noted  in  Chapter  2,  physicists  often  express  mass  in  terms  of  the  unit
MeV/c 2, so here the mass of 1 u is

1 u ⬅ 931.494 3 

MeV

c2

Table 13.1 gives the masses of the proton, neutron, and electron in different
units. The masses and some other properties of selected isotopes are provided
in Appendix B.

Table 13.1 Masses of the Proton, Neutron, and Electron 

in Various Units

Mass

Particle

Proton
Neutron
Electron

kg

u

MeV/c2

1.672 623 ⫻ 10⫺27
1.674 929 ⫻ 10⫺27
9.109 390 ⫻ 10⫺31

1.007 276
1.008 665
5.48 579 9 ⫻ 10⫺4

938.272 3
939.565 6

0.510 999 1

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

466

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

EXAMPLE 13.1 The Atomic Mass Unit

Use  Avogadro’s  number  to  show  that  the  atomic  mass
unit is 1 u ⫽ 1.66 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg.

Since one atom of 12C is deﬁned to have a mass of 12 u,
we ﬁnd that

Solution We know  that  exactly  12 g  of  12C  contains
Avogadro’s  number  of  atoms.  Avogadro’s  number,  N A,
has  the  value  6.02 ⫻ 1023 atoms/mol.  Thus  the  mass  of
one carbon atom is

mass of one 12C atom ⫽

0.012 kg

6.02 ⫻ 1023 atoms

⫽ 1.99 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg

1 u ⫽

1.99 ⫻ 10⫺26 kg

12

⫽ 1.66 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg

Size and Structure of Nuclei
The size and structure of nuclei were ﬁrst investigated in Rutherford’s scattering
experiments, discussed in Section 4.2. In those experiments, Rutherford directed
positively  charged  nuclei  of  helium  atoms  (alpha  particles)  at  a  thin  piece  of
metal  foil.  As  the ␣ particles  moved  through  the  foil,  they  often  passed  near  a
metal nucleus. Because of the positive charge on both the incident particles and
the nuclei, particles were deﬂected from their straight-line paths by the Coulomb
repulsive force. In fact, some particles were even deﬂected backward, through an
angle of 180⬚ from the incident direction. Those particles were apparently mov-
ing directly toward a nucleus in a head-on collision course.

Rutherford employed an energy calculation and found an expression for the
distance, d,  at  which  a  particle  approaching  a  nucleus  is  turned  around  by
Coulomb repulsion. In such a head-on collision, the kinetic energy of the incom-
ing  alpha  particle  must  be  converted  completely  to  electrical  potential energy
when the particle stops at the point of closest approach and turns around (Fig.
13.1). If we equate the initial kinetic energy of the alpha particle to the electrical
potential energy of the system (␣particle plus target nucleus), we have

1
2 mv2 ⫽ k

q1q2

r

⫽ k

(2e)(Ze)

d

Solving for d, the distance of closest approach, we get

d ⫽

4kZe2
mv2

From  this  expression,  Rutherford  found  that  7-MeV  ␣ particles  approached
nuclei to within 3.2 ⫻ 10⫺14 m when the foil was made of gold. Thus the radius
of the gold nucleus must be less than this value. For silver atoms, the distance
of closest approach was found to be 2 ⫻ 10⫺14 m. From these results, Ruther-
ford concluded that the positive charge in an atom is concentrated in a small
sphere  with  a  radius  of  approximately  10⫺14 m,  which  he  called  the  nucleus.
Because  such  small  dimensions  are  common  in  nuclear  physics,  a convenient
length unit is the femtometer (fm), sometimes called the fermi, deﬁned as

1 fm ⬅ 10⫺15 m

In  the  early  1920s  it  was  known  from  the  work  of  Rutherford,  Bohr,  and
Moseley  that  the  nucleus  contained  Z protons  with  a  charge  ⫹Ze but  had  a

2e
+ +

v =  0

Ze
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

d

Figure  13.1 An  alpha  particle
on  a  head-on  collision  course
with a nucleus of charge Ze. Be-
cause of the Coulomb repulsion
between the like charges, the al-
pha particle approaches to a dis-
tance d from the nucleus, called
the distance of closest approach.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.1

SOME PROPERTIES OF NUCLEI

467

mass approximately equal to that of A protons, where A ⬵ 2Z. To account for
the  nuclear  mass,  Rutherford  proposed  that  the  nucleus  contained  (A ⫺ Z)
neutral  proton – electron  combination  particles  in  addition  to  the  Z protons.
He  called  the  hypothetical  combination  particle  a  neutron.  This  hypothesis
prompted an experimental search to conﬁrm the existence of the neutron in
a  free  state  outside  the  nucleus — a  search  that  culminated  in  1932.  In  that
year, the important experimental work of the British physicist James Chadwick
(1891 – 1974) clearly showed the existence of a particle with a charge of zero
and a mass of approximately 1 u. Chadwick (Fig. 13.2) was awarded the 1935
Nobel prize for this basic discovery.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Although Rutherford’s idea that the neutron was a neutral proton – electron
combination led to the important search for the neutron, both it and the idea
that electrons exist inside the nucleus and can leak out in beta decay have since
been abandoned. The current view is that the neutron is a fundamental particle,
not a proton – electron combination, and that the ␤ particles (electrons) emitted
in radioactive nuclear decay are created at the moment of decay. As mentioned
in  Chapter  5  (see  Example  5.9),  if  electrons  were  conﬁned  in  the  nucleus,  the
uncertainty principle would require them to possess unrealistically large kinetic
energies compared to the energies actually observed in beta decay.

Another  argument  against  electrons  in  the  nucleus  concerns  the  magnetic
moments of nuclei, which are observed to be approximately 2000 times smaller
than the magnetic moment of the electron. As we saw in Chapter 9, the magnetic
moment  of  the  electron  is  of  the  order  of  a  Bohr  magneton,  ␮B ⫽ eប/2m e,
where m e is the mass of the electron. Thus, if the same kind of theory accounts
for the magnetic moment of a nucleus and there are no electrons in the nucleus,
we expect the nuclear magnetic moment to be of the order of a nuclear magne-
ton, ␮n ⫽ eប/2mp,  where  mp is  the  mass  of  a  proton.  Since  m p is  about  2000
times me, this model accounts for the observed size difference between nuclear
and electronic magnetic moments. If there were electrons in the nucleus, their
much  larger  moments  would  dominate  and  nuclei  would  have  magnetic  mo-
ments of the order of eប/2me, in disagreement with actual observations.

Table 13.2 lists important properties of the electron, proton, and neutron.
This table presents yet another reason for discarding the idea that a neutron is
a  bound  electron – proton  pair:  The  spin  of  the  neutron  is 
and  cannot  be
1
composed from the electron and proton spins, both of which are  .
2

Since the time of Rutherford’s scattering experiments, a multitude of other
experiments  have  shown  that  most  nuclei  are  approximately  spherical  and
have an average radius of

1
2

r ⫽ r 0A1/3

(13.1)

Nuclear radius

Table 13.2 Masses, Spins, and Magnetic Moments

of the Proton, Neutron, and Electron

Particle

Mass (MeV/c2)

Spin

Magnetic Moment

Proton
Neutron
Electron

938.28
939.57

0.510 99

1
2
1
2
1
2

2.7928␮n
⫺1.9135␮n
⫺1.0012␮B

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

468

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

where A is  the  mass  number  and  r 0 is  a  constant  equal  to  1.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m.
Because  the  volume  of  a  sphere  is  proportional  to  the  cube  of  its  radius,
it follows  from  Equation  13.1  that  the  volume  of  a  nucleus  (assumed  to
be spherical)  is  directly  proportional  to  A,  the  total  number  of  nucle-
ons. This  suggests  that  all  nuclei  have  nearly  the  same  density. When
the nucleons  combine  to  form  a  nucleus,  they  combine  as  though  they
were tightly  packed  spheres  (Fig.  13.3).  This  fact  has  led  to  an  analogy
between  the  nucleus  and  a  drop  of  liquid,  in  which  the  density  of  the
drop is  independent  of  its  size.  We  shall  discuss  the  liquid-drop  model
in Section 13.3.

Figure 13.3 A nucleus can be
modeled  as  a  cluster  of  tightly
packed  spheres,  each  of  which
is a nucleon.

EXAMPLE 13.2 The Volume and Density 

of a Nucleus

Find  (a)  an  approximate  expression  for  the  mass  of  a
nucleus  of  mass  number  A,  (b)  an  expression  for  the
volume of this nucleus in terms of the mass number, and
(c) a numerical value for its density.

Solution (a)  The  mass  of  the  proton  is  approximately
equal to that of the neutron. Thus, if the mass of one of
these  particles  is  m,  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  is  approxi-
mately Am.

(b)  Assuming  that  the  nucleus  is  spherical  and  using

Equation 13.1, we ﬁnd that the volume is

V ⫽ 4

3 ␲r 3 ⫽ 4

3 ␲r 0

3 A

(c) The nuclear density can be found as follows:

␳n ⫽

mass

volume

⫽

Am
4
3 ␲r 0

3 A

⫽

3m
3
4␲r 0

Taking r 0 ⫽ 1.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m and m ⫽ 1.67 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg, we
ﬁnd that

␳n ⫽

3(1.67 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg)

4␲(1.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m)3 ⫽ 2.3 ⫻ 1017 kg

m3

The nuclear density is approximately 2.3 ⫻ 1014 times as
great as the density of water (␳water ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 103 kg/m3)!

Nuclear Stability
The  nucleus  consists  of  a  closely  packed  collection  of  protons  and  neutrons.
Like charges (the protons) in proximity exert very large repulsive electrostatic
forces  on  each  other,  which  should  cause  the  nucleus  to  ﬂy  apart.  However,
nuclei are stable because of the presence of the nuclear force. This is an attrac-
tive  force,  with  a  very  short  range  (about  2 fm),  that  acts  between  all nuclear
particles. The protons attract each other via the nuclear force, and at the same
time they repel each other through the Coulomb force. The attractive nuclear
force also acts between pairs of neutrons and between neutrons and protons.

There  are  approximately  260  stable  nuclei;  hundreds  of  other  nuclei  have
been observed but these are unstable. Figure 13.4 is a plot of N versus Z for some
stable nuclei. Note that light nuclei are most stable if they contain equal numbers
of protons and neutrons — that is, if N ⫽ Z. Furthermore, heavy nuclei are more
stable if the number of neutrons exceeds the number of protons. We can under-
stand this by recognizing that as the number of protons increases, the strength of
the Coulomb force increases, which tends to break the nucleus apart. As a result,
more neutrons are needed to keep the nucleus stable, since neutrons experience
only  attractive  nuclear  forces.  Eventually,  the  repulsive  forces  between  protons
cannot be compensated for by the addition of more neutrons; this occurs when
Z ⫽ 83. Elements that contain more than 83 protons do not have stable nuclei.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.1

SOME PROPERTIES OF NUCLEI

469

N = Z

130

120

110

100

N
 
r
e
b
m
u
n
n
o
r
t
u
e
N

 

 90

 80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Atomic number Z

Figure 13.4 A plot of neutron number N versus atomic number Z for the stable nu-
clei  (solid  points).  The  dashed  line,  corresponding  to  the  condition  N ⫽ Z,  is  called
the line of stability. The shaded area shows radioactive nuclei.

Interestingly, most stable nuclei have even values of A. In fact, certain values
of Z and N correspond to unusually high stability in nuclei. These values of N
and Z, called magic numbers, are

Z or N ⫽ 2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, 126

(13.2)

For example, the helium nucleus (two protons and two neutrons), with Z ⫽ 2
and N ⫽ 2,  is  very  stable.  The  unusual  stability  of  nuclei  with  progressively
larger magic numbers suggests a shell structure for the nucleus that is similar
to atomic shell structure. In Section 13.3 we brieﬂy treat the shell model of the
nucleus, which explains magic numbers.

Nuclear Spin and Magnetic Moment
In  Chapter  9  we  discussed  the  fact  that  an  electron  has  an  intrinsic  angular
momentum associated with its spin. A nucleus, like an electron, has an intrin-
sic angular momentum that arises from relativistic properties. The magnitude
of the nuclear angular momentum is 
, where I is a quantum num-
ber called the nuclear spin and may be an integer or a half-integer. Nuclear
angular  momentum  is  the  total  angular  momentum  of  all  the  nucleons,

√I(I ⫹ 1) ប

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

470

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

I =

3
2

     15

2

h

I z

3
2 h

1
2 h

– h

1
2

– h

3
2

Figure  13.5 The  possible  ori-
entations of the nuclear angular
momentum  and  its  projections
along  the  z-axis  for  the  case
I ⫽ 3
2

.

Larmor frequency

Nuclear magnetic resonance

including  both  orbital  and  spin  angular  momentum  of  each  nucleon.  The
maximum component of the angular momentum projected along the z-axis is
Iប.  Figure  13.5  illustrates  the  possible  orientations  of  the  nuclear  angular
momentum and its projections along the z-axis for the case where 

.

The  nuclear  angular  momentum  has  a  nuclear  magnetic  moment  associ-
ated with it, similar to that of the electron. The magnetic moment of a nucleus
is  measured  in  terms  of  the  nuclear  magneton ␮n,  a  unit  of  magnetic  mo-
ment deﬁned as

I ⫽ 3
2

␮n ⬅ e ប
2m p

⫽ 5.05 ⫻ 10⫺27 J/T

(13.3)

where mp is the proton mass. This deﬁnition is analogous to that of the Bohr
magneton, ␮B, which corresponds to the spin magnetic moment of a free elec-
tron  (Section  9.2).  Note  that  ␮n is  smaller  than  ␮B by  a  factor  of  approxi-
mately 2000 due to the large difference in masses of the proton and electron.

The magnetic moment of a free proton is approximately 2.7928␮n. Unfor-
tunately,  there  is  no  general  theory  of  nuclear  magnetism  that  explains  this
value. Another surprising point is that a neutron also has a magnetic moment,
with a value of ⫺1.9135␮n. The fact that the neutron has a magnetic moment
is  evidence  that  the  uncharged  neutron  has  an  internal  charge  distribution.
The  minus  sign  indicates  that  this  moment  is  opposite  the  spin  angular  mo-
mentum of the neutron.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Nuclear  magnetic  moments  (as  well  as  electronic  magnetic  moments)  precess
when placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld. The frequency at which they precess,
called  the  Larmor  precessional  frequency, ␻L,  is  directly  proportional  to  the
magnetic ﬁeld. This precession is sketched in Figure 13.6a, where the magnetic
ﬁeld is along the z-axis. For example, the Larmor frequency of a proton in a 1-T
magnetic  ﬁeld  is  42.577  MHz.  The  potential  energy  of  a  magnetic  dipole  mo-
ment ␮ in an external magnetic ﬁeld B is given by ⫺␮ⴢ B. When the magnetic
moment ␮ is  lined  up  with  the  ﬁeld  as  closely  as  quantum  physics  allows,  the
potential energy of the dipole moment in the ﬁeld has its minimum value, E min.
When ␮ is as antiparallel as possible, the potential energy has its maximum value,
1
E max. Figure 13.6b shows these two energy states for a nucleus with a spin of  .
2

It is possible to observe transitions between these two spin states through a
technique called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). A constant magnetic
ﬁeld (B in Fig. 13.6a) is introduced to align magnetic moments, along with a
second,  weak,  oscillating  magnetic  ﬁeld  oriented  perpendicular  to  B.  When
the frequency of the oscillating ﬁeld is adjusted to match the Larmor preces-
sional frequency, a torque acting on the precessing moments causes them to
“ﬂip” between the two spin states. These transitions result in a net absorption
of energy by the spin system, an absorption that can be detected electronically.
Figure 13.7 is a sketch of the apparatus used in NMR. The absorbed energy is
supplied  by  the  generator  producing  the  oscillating  magnetic  ﬁeld.  Nuclear
magnetic  resonance  and  a  related  technique  called  electron  spin  resonance
are extremely important methods of studying nuclear and atomic systems and

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

B

z

13.1

SOME PROPERTIES OF NUCLEI

471

E max

µ

B

∆E = Emax – Emin

µ

Y
G
R
E
N
E

B = 0

(a)

µ

Emin

B >  0

(b)

Figure 13.6 (a) When a nucleus is placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld, B, the mag-
netic moment precesses about the magnetic ﬁeld with a frequency proportional to the
ﬁeld. (b) A nucleus with spin  can occupy one of two energy states when placed in an
external magnetic ﬁeld. The lower energy state E min corresponds to the case where the
spin is aligned with the ﬁeld as much as possible according to quantum mechanics, and
the  higher  energy  state  E max corresponds  to  the  case  where  the  spin  is  opposite  the
ﬁeld as much as possible.

1
2

how those systems interact with their surroundings. Figure 13.8 shows a typical
NMR spectrum.

A  widely  used  diagnostic  technique  called  magnetic  resonance  imaging
(MRI) is  based  on  nuclear  magnetic  resonance.  Because  about  two-thirds  of
the atoms in the human body are hydrogen, which gives a strong NMR signal,
MRI works exceptionally well for viewing internal tissues. In MRI, the patient
is placed inside a large solenoid that supplies a spatially varying magnetic ﬁeld.
Because of the gradient in the magnetic ﬁeld, protons in different parts of the

Tunable
oscillator

N

S

Sample

Resonance

signal

Oscilloscope

Figure  13.7 An  experimental  arrangement  for  nuclear  magnetic  resonance.  The
radio-frequency  magnetic  ﬁeld  of  the  coil,  provided  by  the  variable-frequency  oscilla-
tor,  must  be  perpendicular  to  the  dc  magnetic  ﬁeld.  When  the  nuclei  in  the  sample
meet the resonance condition, the spins absorb energy from the ﬁeld of the coil, and
this absorption changes the Q of the circuit in which the coil is included. Most modern
NMR spectrometers use superconducting magnets at ﬁxed ﬁeld strengths and operate
at frequencies of approximately 200 MHz.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

472

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Frequency

Figure 13.8 An NMR spectrum of 31P in a bridged metallic complex containing plat-
inum. The lines that ﬂank the central strong peak are due to the interaction between
31P and other distant 31P nuclei. The outermost set of lines is due to the interaction be-
tween 31P  and  neighboring  platinum  nuclei.  The  spectrum  was  recorded  at  a  ﬁxed
magnetic ﬁeld of about 4 T, and the mean frequency was 200 MHz.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

body precess at different frequencies, and so the resonance signal can provide
information on the positions of the protons. A computer is used to analyze the
position information to provide data for the construction of a ﬁnal image. Fig-
ure 13.9 shows an MRI scan of a human brain.

Another advantage of MRI over other imaging techniques is that it causes
minimal  damage  to  cellular  structures.  Photons  associated  with  the  radio-
frequency  signals  used  in  MRI  have  energies  of  only  about  10⫺7 eV.  Because
molecular bond strengths are much greater (approximately 1 eV), the radio-
frequency  radiation  causes  little  cellular  damage.  In  comparison,  x  rays  and
gamma rays have energies ranging from 104 to 106 eV and can cause consider-
able cellular damage.

13.2 BINDING ENERGY AND NUCLEAR FORCES

The total mass of a nucleus is always less than the sum of the masses of its nu-
cleons. Because mass is a measure of energy, the total energy of the bound
system (the nucleus) is less than the combined energy of the separated
nucleons. This difference in energy is called the binding  energy  of the nu-
cleus and can be thought of as the energy that must be added to a nucleus to
break it apart into its components. Therefore, in order to separate a nucleus
into its constituent protons and neutrons, energy must be put into the system.
Conservation of energy and the Einstein mass – energy equivalence relation-

ship show that the binding energy of any nucleus of mass MA is

Binding energy of a nucleus

Eb(MeV) ⫽ [ZM(H) ⫹ Nm n ⫺ MA] ⫻ 931.494

MeV

u

(13.4)

where M(H) is the atomic mass of hydrogen, MA represents the atomic mass of
the  element  A
ZX, mn is  the  mass  of  the  neutron,  and  the  masses  are  all
expressed in atomic mass units. Note that the mass of the Z electrons included

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

in  the  ﬁrst  term  in  Equation  13.4  cancels  with  the  mass  of  the  Z electrons
included in the term MA, within a small difference associated with the atomic
binding  energy  of  the  electrons.  Since  atomic  binding  energies  are  typically
several electron volts and nuclear binding energies are several MeV, this differ-
ence is negligible.

13.2

BINDING ENERGY AND NUCLEAR FORCES

473

EXAMPLE 13.3 The Binding Energy 

of the Deuteron

Calculate the binding energy of the deuteron, which con-
sists  of  a  proton  and  a  neutron,  given  that  the  atomic
mass of the deuteron is M2 ⫽ 2.014102 u.

Solution We know  that  the  atomic  mass  of  hydrogen
and the mass of the neutron are

M(H) ⫽ 1.007 825 u

mn ⫽ 1.008 665 u

Using Eq. 13.4, we ﬁnd for the deuteron binding energy

Eb ⫽ [M(H) ⫹ mn ⫺ M2] ⫻ 931.494 MeV/u

⫽ [2.016 490 u ⫺ 2.014 102 u] ⫻ 931.494 MeV/u

Eb ⫽ [0.002 388 u] ⫻ 931.494 MeV/u

⫽ 2.224 MeV

This  result  tells  us  that  in  order  to  separate  a  deuteron
into  its  constituent  parts  at  rest  (a  proton  and  a  neu-
tron),  it  is  necessary  to  add  2.224 MeV  of  energy  to  the
deuteron.  One  way  of  supplying  the  deuteron  with  this
energy is by bombarding it with energetic particles.

If the binding energy of a nucleus were zero, the nu-
cleus  would  separate  into  its  constituent  protons  and
neutrons  without  the  addition  of  any  energy;  that  is,  it
would spontaneously break apart.

A plot of binding energy per nucleon, Eb/A, as a function of mass number
for various stable nuclei is shown in Figure 13.10. Except for the lighter nuclei,
the average binding energy per nucleon is about 8 MeV. For the deuteron, the
average  binding  energy  per  nucleon  is  Eb/A ⫽ 2.224/2 MeV ⫽ 1.112 MeV.
Note  that  the  curve  in  Figure  13.10  peaks  in  the  vicinity  of  A ⫽ 60.  That  is,
nuclei with mass numbers greater or less than 60 are not as tightly bound as

Region of greatest

stability

r
e
p
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 

i

g
n
d
n
B

i

V
e
M

 
,

n
o
e
l
c
u
n

 

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0
0

50

100

150

200

250

Mass number A

Figure 13.10 A plot of binding energy per nucleon versus mass number for the sta-
ble nuclei shown in Figure 13.4.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

474

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Saturation of nuclear forces

those  near  the  middle  of  the  periodic  table.  The  higher  values  of  binding
energy  near  A ⫽ 60  imply  that  energy  is  released  when  a  heavy  nucleus  with
A ⬇ 200  splits  or  ﬁssions  into  several  lighter  nuclei  that  lie  near  A ⫽ 60.
Energy  is  released  in  ﬁssion  because  the  ﬁnal  state,  consisting  of  two  lighter
fragments,  is  more  tightly  bound,  or  lower  in  energy,  than  the  original
nucleus.  Similarly,  energy  can  be  released  when  two  light  nuclei  with A ⱕ 20
combine or fuse to form one heavier nucleus. These two important processes,
ﬁssion and fusion, are considered in detail in Chapter 14.

Another  important  feature  of  Figure  13.10  is  that  the  binding  energy  per
nucleon is approximately constant for A ⬎ 20. In this case, the nuclear forces
between  a  particular  nucleon  and  all  the  other  nucleons  in  the  nucleus  are
said  to  be  saturated;  that  is,  a  particular  nucleon  forms  attractive  bonds  with
only a limited number of other nucleons. Because of the short-range character
of the nuclear force, these other nucleons can be viewed as being the nearest
neighbors in the close-packed structure shown in Figure 13.3. If every nucleon
could  interact  with  every  other  nucleon,  each  nucleon  would  form  (A ⫺ 1)
bonds, and the binding energy per nucleon would be proportional to (A ⫺ 1)
rather than constant as observed.

The general features of the nuclear binding force have been revealed in a

wide variety of experiments. We summarize them as follows.

• The attractive nuclear force is a different kind of force from the common
forces of electromagnetism and gravitation, and since it dominates the re-
pulsive Coulomb force between protons in the nucleus, it is stronger than
the electromagnetic force.

• The nuclear force is a short-range force that rapidly falls to zero when the
separation  between  nucleons  exceeds  several  fermis.  Evidence  for  the
limited  range  of  nuclear  forces  comes  from  scattering  experiments  and
from 
forces  already  mentioned.  The
neutron – proton (n – p) potential energy plot of Figure 13.11a, obtained

the  saturation  of  nuclear 

p–p system

1

2

3

4

5

6

r (fm)

)
V
e
M

(
 
)
r
(
U

20

0

–20

–40

–60

n–p system

1

2

3

4

5

6

r (fm)

)
V
e
M

(
 
)
r
(
U

20

0

–20

–40

–60

(a)

(b)

Figure 13.11 (a) Potential energy versus separation for the neutron – proton system.
(b)  Potential  energy  versus  separation  for  the  proton – proton  system.  The  difference
in the  two  curves  is  due  mainly  to  the  Coulomb  repulsion  in  the  case  of  the
proton – proton interaction.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.2

BINDING ENERGY AND NUCLEAR FORCES

475

Charge independence of the
nuclear force

Particle exchange model

by  scattering  neutrons  from  a  target  containing  hydrogen,  shows  the
short range of the nuclear force. The depth of the n – p potential energy
is 40 to 50 MeV and contains a strong repulsive component that prevents
the nucleons from approaching much closer than 0.4 fm. Another inter-
esting feature of the nuclear force is that its size depends on the relative
spin  orientations  of  the  nucleons,  as  shown  by  scattering  experiments
performed with spin-polarized beams and targets.

• From n – n, n – p, and p – p scattering experiments and other indirect evi-
dence,  it  is  found  that  the  nuclear  force  is  independent  of  the  electric
charge  of  the  interacting  nucleons.  As  might  be  expected  from  this
“charge-blind” character of the nuclear force, the nuclear force does not
affect electrons, and so it enables energetic electrons to serve as point-like
probes of the charge density of nuclei. The charge independence of the
nuclear force also means that the main difference between the n – p and
p – p interactions is that the p – p potential energy consists of a superposi-
tion of  nuclear  and  coulomb  interactions,  as  shown  in  Figure  13.11b.  At
distances less than 2 fm, p – p and n – p potential energies are nearly iden-
tical,  but  at  distances  greater  than  this,  the  p – p  potential  has  a  positive
energy barrier, with a maximum of about 1 MeV at 4 fm.

Although the preceding “laundry list” of observed properties of the nuclear
force  may  be  interesting,  it  leaves  unanswered  the  deeper  question  of  what
mechanism accounts for the powerful nuclear force. One model that success-
fully  explains  the  nuclear  force  is  the  exchange  force  model. According  to
this model, two nucleons — a proton and a neutron, for example — experience
an attractive force when one spontaneously emits a particle and the other ab-
sorbs that particle. From a classical point of view, the emitting and absorbing
nucleons are both strongly attracted to the exchanged particle as if connected
to it by elastic bands or springs. Since both nucleons are strongly attracted to
the same particle, they appear to be strongly attracted to each other.

You  may  wonder  how  the  exchange  of  a  particle  of  mass  m between  the
proton  and  neutron  can  occur  without  violating  conservation  of  energy  and
conservation of momentum. A violation of energy conservation must occur if a
proton at rest with energy m pc 2 emits a particle of mass m with energy mc 2 and
yet  remains  a  proton  with  energy  m pc 2.  Also,  conservation  of  momentum
would  cause  a  paired  proton  and  neutron  to  recoil  away  from  each  other  as
the  proton  emitted  a  particle  and  the  neutron  absorbed  it,  instead  of  pro-
ducing motion of the proton toward the neutron as required for an attractive
nuclear force.

The answer to both dilemmas seems to be a trick: The exchanged particle
exists for such a short time and is conﬁned to such a small region of space that
it  is  allowed  to  violate  the  conservation  of  energy  and  momentum.  It  is  a  so-
called virtual particle. A virtual particle cannot be directly detected or mea-
sured  during  the  momentum-  and  energy-violating  processes  taking  place
inside  the  nucleus.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to  understand  this  is  through  the
uncertainty  principles  ⌬E ⌬t ⱖ ប/2  and  ⌬px⌬x ⱖ ប/2.  These  relationships
imply  that  energy  conservation  can  be  violated  by  an  amount  ⌬E for  a  short
time  interval  ⌬t and  that  momentum  conservation  can  be  violated  by  an
amount ⌬px over  a  small  nuclear  region  of  size  ⌬x.  Although  it  may  appear
that a virtual particle can never be detected, if an incident particle strikes the
nucleus in just the right way, it can supply the missing momentum and energy

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

476

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

required to make a virtual particle real, thereby permitting the exchanged par-
ticle to be measured in the laboratory.

A simple application of the energy – time uncertainty principle enables us to
estimate the mass of the exchanged particle that should be responsible for the
nuclear  force.  Since  the  amount  by  which  energy  conservation  is  violated  in
the exchange process is ⌬E ⫽ mc 2, where m is the mass of the exchanged parti-
cle, we have

⌬t ⬵

ប
⌬E

⫽

ប
mc2

(13.5)

Realizing that ⌬t is the time it takes the exchanged particle to travel a distance
d between  nucleons,  and  that  the  maximum  value  of  d is d ⫽ c⌬t for  an
exchanged particle traveling at the speed of light, we ﬁnd that

dmax ⫽ c⌬t ⫽ c 冢 ប

mc2 冣 ⫽

ប

mc

(13.6)

This  expression  shows  that  the  range  of  the  nuclear  force,  dmax,  is  in-
versely proportional to the mass of the exchanged particle, a general fea-
ture of exchange-force models. Finally, because the range of the nuclear force
is approximately 2 fm, we can estimate the rest energy of the exchanged parti-
cle that is responsible for the nuclear force:

mc2 ⬵

បc
dmax

⫽

(1.05 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈s)(3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s)

2.0 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
⫽ 1.6 ⫻ 10⫺11 J ⫽ 100 MeV

Twelve  years  after  the  Japanese  physicist  Hideki-Yukawa  (1907 – 1981)  pro-
posed the exchange theory of the nuclear force just described, a strongly inter-
acting particle with a mass of about 140 MeV/c 2, called the pi meson, was found
in cosmic-ray interactions, closely conﬁrming his predictions. We discuss the pi
meson and other force-carrying exchange particles more fully in Chapter 15.

13.3 NUCLEAR MODELS

Although  the  details  of  nuclear  forces  are  still  not  completely  understood,
several  nuclear  models  with  adjustable  parameters  have  been  proposed,  and
they help us understand various features of nuclear experimental data and the
mechanisms  responsible  for  binding  energy.  The  models  we  shall  discuss  are
(1)  the  liquid-drop  model,  which  accounts  for  the  nuclear  binding  energy;
(2) the  independent-particle  model,  which  accounts  for  more  detailed  fea-
tures of nuclei, including large differences in stability between nuclei with sim-
ilar Z and A values; and (3) the collective model.

Liquid-Drop Model
The liquid-drop model, proposed by C. F. von Weizsächer in 1935, treats the
nucleons  as  though  they  were  molecules  in  a  drop  of  liquid.  The  nucleons
interact strongly with each other and undergo frequent collisions as they jiggle
around within the nucleus. This jiggling motion is analogous to the thermally
agitated motions of molecules in a drop of liquid.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.3

NUCLEAR MODELS

477

Three  major  effects  inﬂuence  the  binding  energy  of  the  nucleus  in  the

liquid-drop model:

• The  volume  effect. Earlier  we  showed  that  the  binding  energy  per
nucleon  is  approximately  constant,  indicating  that  the  nuclear  force
saturates (Fig. 13.10). Therefore, the total binding energy of the nucleus
is  proportional  to  A and  to  the  nuclear  volume.  The  contribution  to
the binding energy of this volume effect is C1A, where C1 is an adjustable
constant.

• The  surface  effect. Because  nucleons  on  the  surface  of  the  drop  have
fewer  neighbors  than  those  in  the  interior,  surface  nucleons  reduce  the
binding energy by an amount proportional to the number of surface nu-
cleons.  Because  the  number  of  surface  nucleons  is  proportional  to  the
surface  area  of  the  nucleus,  4␲r 2,  and  r 2 ⬀ A2/3 (Eq.  13.1),  the  surface
term can be expressed as ⫺C2A2/3, where C2 is a constant.

• The  Coulomb  repulsion  effect. Each  proton  repels  every  other  pro-
ton  in  the  nucleus.  The  corresponding  potential  energy  per  pair  of
interacting  particles  is  ke 2/r,  where  k is  the  Coulomb  constant.  The
total  Coulomb  energy  represents  the  work  required  to  assemble  Z
protons  from  inﬁnity  to  a  sphere  of  volume  V.  This  energy  is  pro-
portional  to  the  number  of  proton  pairs  Z(Z ⫺ 1)/2  and  inversely
proportional  to  the  nuclear  radius.  Consequently,  the  reduction  in
energy  that  results  from  the  Coulomb  effect  is  ⫺C3Z(Z ⫺ 1)/A1/3,
where C 3 is a constant.

Another effect that decreases the binding energy is signiﬁcant for heavy nu-
clei  with  large  excesses  of  neutrons.  Since  it  is  observed  that  for  a  given  A
value, nuclei with Z ⫽ N have the largest binding energy, the binding energy
must  be  corrected  by  a  symmetry  term  that  favors  Z ⫽ N and  decreases  the
binding energy symmetrically for N ⬎ Z or N ⬍ Z. The symmetry term is gen-
erally written as ⫺C4(N ⫺ Z)2/A, where C 4 is an adjustable constant.

Adding these contributions, we get as the total binding energy

Eb ⫽ C1A ⫺ C2A2/3 ⫺ C 3

Z(Z ⫺ 1)

A1/3 ⫺ C4

(N ⫺ Z )2

A

(13.7)

Semiempirical binding
energy formula

This equation is often referred to as the Weizsächer semiempirical binding
energy  formula, because  it  has  some  theoretical  justiﬁcation  but  contains
four constants that are adjusted to ﬁt this expression to experimental data. For
nuclei with A ⱖ 15, the constants have the values

C1 ⫽ 15.7 MeV

C 2 ⫽ 17.8 MeV

C3 ⫽ 0.71 MeV

C 4 ⫽ 23.6 MeV

Equation 13.7, together with these constants, ﬁts the known nuclear bind-
ing energy values very well. However, the liquid-drop model does not account
for  some  ﬁner  details  of  nuclear  structure,  such  as  certain  stability  rules  and
angular momentum. On the other hand, it does provide a qualitative descrip-
tion  of  nuclear  ﬁssion,  shown  schematically  in  Figure  13.12.  If  the  drop  vi-
brates with a large amplitude (which may be initiated by collision with another
particle), it distorts, and under the right conditions, it breaks apart. We shall
discuss the process of ﬁssion further in Chapter 14.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

478

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Figure 13.12 Steps leading to ﬁssion according to the liquid-drop model of the nucleus.

Independent-Particle Model
The independent-particle  model, often  called  the  shell  model, was  devel-
oped 
independently  by  Maria  Goeppert-Mayer  (1906 – 1972,  German-
American  physicist)  and  Hans  Jensen  (1907 – 1973,  German  physicist),  who
shared the Nobel prize in 1963 for this feat. The shell model is based upon
the assumption that each nucleon moves in a well-deﬁned orbital state
within the nucleus in an average ﬁeld produced by the other nucleons.
This model is similar to the shell model of the atom except for the character
of the force term. In the shell model, the nucleons exist in quantized energy
states, and there are few collisions between nucleons. Obviously, the assump-
tions of this model differ greatly from those made in the liquid-drop model.

Each quantized orbital state for a proton or neutron is analogous to one of
the orbital states of an electron in an atomic subshell, with the exception that
the ordering of nuclear states in energy is more closely modeled by a spheri-
cal-well potential than by the Coulomb potential that is appropriate for atomic
electrons. (See Problem 32 in Chapter 8 for a solution of the spherical well.)
The  quantized  states  occupied  by  the  nucleons  can  be  described  by  a  set  of
quantum numbers. Because both the proton and the neutron have spin  , we
can  apply  the  Pauli  exclusion  principle  to  describe  the  allowed  states  (as  we
did for electrons in Chapter 9). That is, each orbital state can contain only two
protons (or two neutrons) having opposite spin (Fig. 13.13). The protons have
a set of allowed states, which differ slightly from those of the neutrons because
they move in different potential wells. The proton levels are higher in energy
than  the  neutron  levels  because  the  protons  experience  a  superposition  of
Coulomb potential and nuclear potential, while the neutrons experience only
a nuclear potential. These two different wells are sketched in Figure 13.13.

1
2

Using  only  the  fact  that  nuclear  energy  levels  exist  and  that  they  ﬁll
according to the Pauli exclusion principle, it is possible to explain the ten-
dency for N to equal Z in stable, light nuclei. To achieve maximum stability
for a given A, all the nucleons must be packed sequentially into the lowest
energy levels, leaving no gaps in ﬁlled levels. Since any energy state is ﬁlled
when  it  contains  two  protons  (or  two  neutrons),  another  proton  (or  neu-
tron) added to the nucleus produces an increase in energy and a decrease
in  stability  of  the  nucleus.  Thus,  comparing  12
6C,  the  seventh  neu-
tron in boron must occupy a higher energy level than the sixth neutron in
carbon  (two  nucleons  per  energy  state),  and  consequently  12
5B  has  higher
energy and is less stable than 12

5B  and  12

6C.

Maria  Goeppert-Mayer  (1906 –
1972) was born and educated in
Germany.  She  is  best  known
for her  development  of  the
shell  model 
(independent-
particle  model)  of  the  nucleus,
published  in  1950.  A  similar
model  was  simultaneously  de-
veloped  by  Hans  Jensen,  an-
other  German  scientist.  Goep-
pert-Mayer  and  Jensen  were
awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  in
Physics  in  1963  for  their  extra-
ordinary work in understanding
the  structure  of  the  nucleus.
(Courtesy  of  Louise  Barker/AIP
Niels Bohr Library)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.4

RADIOACTIVITY

479

Energy

p

n

r

r

Figure 13.13 A square-well po-
tential  containing  12  nucleons.
The  gray  circles  represent  pro-
tons, and the colored circles rep-
resent neutrons. The energy lev-
els  for  the  protons  are  slightly
higher  than  those  for  the  neu-
trons  because  of  the  Coulomb
potential  in  the  case  of  the  pro-
tons. The difference in the levels
increases  as  Z increases.  Note
that  only  two  nucleons  with  op-
posite  spin  can  occupy  a  given
level, as required by the Pauli ex-
clusion principle.

To understand the observed characteristics of nuclear ground states, such as
angular momentum and the high stability of magic-number nuclei, it is neces-
sary to include nuclear  spin-orbit  effects. Unlike the spin-orbit interaction for an
electron in an atom, which is magnetic in origin, the spin-orbit effect for nucle-
ons  in  a  nucleus  is  due  to  the  nuclear  force.  It  is  much  stronger  than  in  the
atomic case and has opposite sign, so that in nuclei, spin-orbit split states with
higher  angular  momentum  lie  lower  in  energy.  When  the  nuclear  spin-orbit
effect is added to a spherical ﬁnite potential, the magic numbers are predicted,
because  the  spin-orbit  potential  produces  especially  large  jumps  between  cer-
tain  energy  levels.  In  effect,  the  spin-orbit  interaction  substantially  raises  the
energy  levels  containing  9,  21,  29,  51,  83,  and  127  nucleons,  thereby  making
the levels that contain 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126 nucleons unusually stable.

Finally, it is possible to understand how individual nucleons can be consid-
ered to be moving in well-deﬁned orbitals within the cramped conﬁnes of the
nucleus, which is literally swarming with other nucleons. Under these circum-
stances,  it  would  seem  that  a  given  nucleon  would  undergo  many  collisions
and  not  move  in  a  well-deﬁned  orbital.  However,  for  the  low-energy  nuclear
ground  state,  the  exclusion  principle  inhibits  energy-changing  collisions  by
preventing  colliding  nucleons  from  occupying  already  ﬁlled  low-lying  energy
states. In effect, the exclusion principle prevents nucleon collisions within the
densely packed nucleus at low energy and justiﬁes the shell-model approach.

Collective Model
A third model of nuclear structure, known as the collective model, combines
some features of the liquid-drop model and the independent-particle model.
The nucleus is considered to have some “extra” nucleons moving in quantized
orbits in addition to the ﬁlled core of nucleons. The extra nucleons are sub-
ject to the ﬁeld produced by the core, as in the independent-particle scheme.
Deformations  can  be  set  up  in  the  core  as  a  result  of  a  strong  interaction
between  the  core  and  the  extra  nucleons,  thereby  initiating  vibrational  and
rotational  motions,  as  in  the  liquid-drop  model.  The  collective  model  has
been very successful in explaining many nuclear phenomena.

13.4 RADIOACTIVITY

In 1896 Henri Becquerel (1852 – 1908, French physicist) accidentally discovered
that  uranyl  potassium  sulfate  crystals  emitted  an  invisible  radiation  that  could
darken a photographic plate when the plate was covered to exclude light. After
a series of experiments, he concluded that the radiation emitted by the crystals
was of a new type, one that required no external stimulation and was so pene-
trating that it could darken protected photographic plates and ionize gases. This
process of spontaneous emission of radiation by uranium was soon to be called
radioactivity. Subsequent  experiments  by  other  scientists  showed  that  other
substances  were  even  more  powerfully  radioactive.  Marie  (1867 – 1934)  and
Pierre Curie (1859 – 1906) conducted the most signiﬁcant investigations of this
type. After several years of careful and laborious chemical separation processes
on tons of pitchblende, a radioactive ore, the Curies reported the discovery of
two  previously  unknown  elements,  both  radioactive,  which  they  named  polo-
nium  and  radium.  Subsequent  experiments,  including  Rutherford’s  famous

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

480

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Marie  Sklodowska  Curie

was born in Poland shortly
after  the  unsuccessful  Pol-
ish revolt against Russia in 1863. Af-
ter  high  school,  she  worked  dili-
gently  to  help  meet  the  educational
expenses  of  her  older  brother  and
sister in Paris. At the same time, she
managed to save enough money for
her  own  move  to  Paris,  where  she
entered  the  Sorbonne  in  1891.  Al-
though she lived very frugally during
this  period  (she  once  fainted  from
hunger  in  the  classroom),  she  grad-
uated at the top of her class.

In  1895  Marie  Sklodowska  mar-
ried  the  French  physicist  Pierre
Curie (1859 – 1906), who was already
known for the discovery of piezoelec-
tricity.  (A  piezoelectric  crystal  ex-
hibits  a  potential  difference  under
pressure.)  Using  piezoelectric  mate-
rials  to  measure  the  activity  of  ra-
dioactive  substances,  Marie  Curie
demonstrated the radioactive nature
of  the  elements  uranium  and  tho-
rium.  In  1898  she  and  her  husband
discovered  a  new  radioactive  ele-

dium  from  pitchblende,  an  ore  rich
in uranium. After four years of puri-
fying  and  repurifying  tons  of  ore,
and using their own life savings to ﬁ-
nance  their  work,  the  Curies  suc-
ceeded  in  preparing  about  0.1  g  of
radium.  In  1903,  along  with  Henri
Becquerel,  they  received  the  Nobel
Prize  in  Physics  for  their  studies  of
radioactive substances.

After  her  husband’s  death  in  an
accident  in  1906,  Marie  Curie  as-
sumed  his  professorship  at  the  Sor-
bonne.  Unfortunately,  she  experi-
enced  prejudice  in  the  scientiﬁc
community  because 
she  was  a
woman.  For  example,  after  being
nominated  to  the  French  Academy
of  Sciences,  she  was  refused  mem-
bership after losing by one vote.

In 1911 Marie Curie was awarded
a  second  Nobel  prize,  this  one  in
chemistry,  for  the  discovery  of  ra-
dium  and  polonium.  She  spent  the
last few decades of her life supervis-
ing the Paris Institute of Radium.

(Courtesy of AIP Niels Bohr Library / W. F. Meggers
Collection)

B I O G R A P H Y

MARIE SKLODOWSKA CURIE

(1867 – 1934)

ment  contained  in  uranium  ore,
which they called polonium after her
native  land.  By  the  end  of  1898,  the
Curies  succeeded  in  isolating  trace
amounts of an even more radioactive
element,  which  they  named  radium.
In  an  effort  to  produce  weighable
quantities  of  radium,  they  took  on
the  painstaking  job  of  isolating  ra-

work  on  alpha-particle  scattering,  suggested  that  radioactivity  was  the  result  of
the decay, or disintegration, of unstable nuclei.

Three types of radiation can be emitted by a radioactive substance: alpha
(␣),  in  which  the  emitted  particles  are  4He  nuclei;  beta  (␤),  in  which  the
emitted  particles  are  either  electrons  or  positrons;  and  gamma  (␥),  in
which  the  emitted  “rays”  are  high-energy  photons.  A positron is  a  particle
like the electron in all respects except that the positron has a charge of ⫹e.
In this book, the symbol e⫺ is used to designate an electron, and e⫹ desig-
nates a positron.

It  is  possible  to  distinguish  these  three  forms  of  radiation  using  the
scheme  shown  in  Figure  13.14.  The  radiation  from  a  radioactive  sample  is
directed  into  a  region  in  which  there  is  a  magnetic  ﬁeld.  The  beam  splits
into  three  components,  two  bending  in  opposite  directions  and  the  third
experiencing no change in direction. From this simple observation, we can
conclude that the radiation of the undeflected beam carries no charge (the
gamma ray), the component deflected upward consists of positively charged
particles  (␣ particles),  and  the  component  deflected  downward  consists  of
negatively charged particles (e⫺). If the beam includes a positron (e⫹), it is
deflected upward.

The three types of radiation have quite different penetrating powers. Alpha
particles barely penetrate a sheet of paper, beta particles can penetrate a few

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.4

RADIOACTIVITY

481

Photographic

 plate

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

Lead

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

Radioactive

ⴛ

ⴛ

 source

ⴛ

e–

ⴛ

α

γ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

ⴛ

B

Figure  13.14 The  radiation  from  a  radioactive  source  can  be  separated  into  three
components through the use of a magnetic ﬁeld to deﬂect the charged particles. The
photographic plate at the right records the events. The gamma ray is not deﬂected by
the magnetic ﬁeld.

millimeters  of  aluminum,  and  gamma  rays  can  penetrate  several  centimeters
of lead.

The rate at which a particular decay process occurs in a radioactive sample
is proportional to the number of radioactive nuclei present (that is, those nu-
clei that have not yet decayed). If N is the number of radioactive nuclei pres-
ent at some instant, the rate of change of N is

dN
dt

⫽ ⫺␭N

(13.8)

where ␭, called the decay constant, is the probability per unit time that a nu-
cleus will decay. The minus sign indicates that dN/dt is negative because ␭ and
N are both positive; that is, N is decreasing in time.

If we write Equation 13.8 in the form

dN
N

⫽ ⫺␭dt

we can integrate the expression to give

N0

dt

0

dN
N

冕N
ln 冢 N

⫽ ⫺␭冕t
N0 冣 ⫽ ⫺␭t

or

N ⫽ N0e⫺␭t

(13.9)

Exponential decay

where  the  constant  N0 represents  the  number  of  radioactive  nuclei  at  t ⫽ 0.
Equation 13.9 shows that the number of radioactive nuclei in a sample de-
creases exponentially with time.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

482

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

The decay rate R, or the number of decays per unit time, can be obtained

by differentiating Equation 13.9 with respect to time:

Decay rate

R ⫽ 兩 dN

dt

兩 ⫽ N0␭e⫺␭t ⫽ R 0e⫺␭t

(13.10)

N =N0e – λt

N(t)

N0

1
2

1
4

N0

N0

T1 2

2T1 2

t

Figure 13.15 A plot of the ex-
ponential decay law for radioac-
tive  nuclei.  The  vertical  axis
represents  the  number  of  ra-
dioactive  nuclei  present  at  any
time t, and the horizontal axis is
time.  The  time  T1/2 is  the  half-
life of the sample.

where R 0 ⫽ N0␭ is  the  decay  rate  at  t ⫽ 0  and  R ⫽ ␭N.  The  decay  rate  of  a
sample is often referred to as its activity. Note that both N and R decrease ex-
ponentially with time. The plot of N versus t shown in Figure 13.15 illustrates
the exponential decay law.

Another parameter that is useful in characterizing the decay of a particular

nucleus is the half-life, T1/2:

The half-life of a radioactive substance is the time it takes half of a given
number of radioactive nuclei to decay.

Setting N ⫽ N0/2 and t ⫽ T1/2 in Equation 13.9 gives

N0
2

⫽ N0e⫺␭T1/2

Writing  this  in  the  form 
sides, we get

e␭T1/2 ⫽ 2

and  taking  the  natural  logarithm  of  both

T1/2 ⫽

ln 2
␭

⫽

0.693

␭

(13.11)

This is a convenient expression for relating half-life to the decay constant. Note
that after an elapsed time of one half-life, N0/2 radioactive nuclei remain (by
deﬁnition); after two half-lives, half of these have decayed and N0/4 radioactive
nuclei remain; after three half-lives, N0/8 remain; and so on. In general, after n
half-lives,  the  number  of  radioactive  nuclei  remaining  is  N0/2n.  Thus  we  see
that nuclear decay is independent of the past history of a sample.
A frequently used unit of activity is the curie (Ci), deﬁned as

The curie

1 Ci ⬅ 3.7 ⫻ 1010 decays/s

This value was originally selected because it is the approximate activity of 1 g
of radium. The SI unit of activity is the becquerel (Bq):

The becquerel

1 Bq ⬅ 1 decay/s

Therefore,  1 Ci ⫽ 3.7 ⫻ 1010 Bq.  The  curie  is  a  rather  large  unit,  and  the
more  frequently  used  activity  units  are  the  millicurie  mCi  (10⫺3 Ci)  and  the
microcurie, ␮Ci (10⫺6 Ci).

EXAMPLE 13.4 How Many Nuclei Are Left?
The  isotope  carbon-14,  14
6C,  is  radioactive  and  has  a
half-life of 5730 years (yr). If you start with a sample of
1000 carbon-14 nuclei, how many will still be around in
22,920 yr?

Solution In 5730 yr half the sample will have decayed,
leaving  500  carbon-14  nuclei.  In  another  5730 yr  (for  a
total  elapsed  time  of  11,460 yr),  the  number  will  be
reduced to 250 nuclei. After another 5730 yr (total time

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

17,190 yr),  125  will  remain.  Finally,  after  four  half-lives
(22,920 yr), only about 62 will remain.

represent 

These  numbers 

ideal  circumstances.
Calculation  of  radioactive  decay  is  an  averaging  process
conducted  with  a  very  large  number  of  atoms,  and  the
actual  outcome  depends  on  statistics.  Our  original  sam-
ple in this example contained only 1000 nuclei, certainly
not a very large number. Thus, if we actually counted the
number remaining from this small sample after one half-
life, it probably would not be 500.

EXAMPLE 13.5 The Activity of Radium
The  half-life  of  the  radioactive  nucleus  226
1.6 ⫻ 103 yr. (a) What is the decay constant of 226

88Ra  is  about

88Ra?

13.4

RADIOACTIVITY

483

EXAMPLE 13.6 The Activity of Carbon
A radioactive sample contains 3.50 ␮g of pure 11
6C, which
has a half-life of 20.4 min. (a) Determine the number of
nuclei in the sample at t ⫽ 0.

Solution The atomic mass of 11
6C is approximately 11.0,
and so 11.0 g contains Avogadro’s number (6.02 ⫻ 1023)
of nuclei. Therefore 3.50 ␮g contains N nuclei, where

N

6.02 ⫻ 1023 nuclei/mol

⫽

3.50 ⫻ 10⫺6 g

11.0 g/mol

N ⫽ 1.92 ⫻ 1017 nuclei

(b)  What  is  the  activity  of  the  sample  initially  and  after
8.00 h?

Solution (a) We can calculate the decay constant ␭ by
using Equation 13.11 and the fact that

Solution Since T1/2 ⫽ 20.4 min ⫽ 1224 s,  the  decay
constant is

T1/2 ⫽ 1.6 ⫻ 103 yr

⫽ (1.6 ⫻ 103 yr)(3.16 ⫻ 107 s/yr)
⫽ 5.0 ⫻ 1010 s

Therefore,

␭ ⫽

0.693
T1/2

⫽

0.693

5.0 ⫻ 1010 s

⫽ 1.4 ⫻ 10⫺11 s⫺1

Note that this result gives the probability that any single
226
88Ra nucleus will decay in 1 s.

(b)  If  a  sample  contains  3.0 ⫻ 1016 such  nuclei  at

t ⫽ 0, determine its activity at this time.

Solution (b) We can calculate the activity of the sample
at t ⫽ 0  using  R 0 ⫽ ␭N0,  where  R 0 is  the  decay  rate  at
t ⫽ 0 and N0 is the number of radioactive nuclei present
at t ⫽ 0. Since N0 ⫽ 3.0 ⫻ 1016, we have

R 0 ⫽ ␭N 0 ⫽ (1.4 ⫻ 10⫺11 s⫺1)(3.0 ⫻ 1016)

⫽ 4.2 ⫻ 105 decays/s

Since  1 Ci ⫽ 3.7 ⫻ 1010 decays/s,  the  activity,  or  decay
rate, at t ⫽ 0 is

R 0 ⫽ 11.1 ␮Ci

(c) What is the decay rate after the sample is 2.0 ⫻ 103 yr
old?

Solution (c)  We  can  use  Equation  13.10  and  the  fact
2.0 ⫻ 103 yr ⫽ (2.0 ⫻ 103 yr)(3.15 ⫻ 107 s/yr) ⫽
that 
6.3 ⫻ 1010 s:

R ⫽ R 0e⫺␭t

⫽ (4.2 ⫻ 105 decays/s)e⫺(1.4⫻10⫺11 s⫺1)(6.3⫻1010 s)
⫽ 1.7 ⫻ 105 decays/s

␭ ⫽

0.693
T1/2

⫽

0.693
1224 s

⫽ 5.66 ⫻ 10⫺4 s⫺1

Therefore, the initial activity or decay rate of the sample is

R 0 ⫽ ␭N 0 ⫽ (5.66 ⫻ 10⫺4 s⫺1)(1.92 ⫻ 1017)

⫽ 1.08 ⫻ 1014 decays/s

We can use Equation 13.10 to ﬁnd the activity at any time
t.  For  t ⫽ 8.00 h ⫽ 2.88 ⫻ 104 s,  we  see  that  ␭t ⫽ 16.3,
and so

R ⫽ R 0e⫺␭t ⫽ (1.09 ⫻ 1014 decays/s)e⫺16.3

⫽ 8.96 ⫻ 106 decays/s

Table 13.3 lists values for activity versus the time in hours
for this situation.

Table 13.3 Activity Versus Time for
the Sample Described in
Example 13.6

t (h)

R (decays/s)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1.08 ⫻ 1014
1.41 ⫻ 1013
1.84 ⫻ 1012
2.39 ⫻ 1011
3.12 ⫻ 1010
4.06 ⫻ 109
5.28 ⫻ 108
6.88 ⫻ 107
8.96 ⫻ 106

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

484

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Exercise  1 Calculate in Example 13.6 the number of radioactive nuclei that remain
after 8.00 h.
Answer 1.58 ⫻ 1010 nuclei

EXAMPLE 13.7 A Radioactive Isotope 

of Iodine

A sample of the isotope 131I, which has a half-life of 8.04
days,  has  an  activity  of  5 mCi  at  the  time  of  shipment.
Upon receipt of the 131I in a medical laboratory, its activ-
ity  is  4.2 mCi.  How  much  time  has  elapsed  between  the
two measurements?

Solution We can make use of Equation 13.10 in the form

R
R 0

⫽ e⫺␭t

Taking the natural logarithm of each side, we get

ln 冢 R

R 0 冣 ⫽ ⫺␭t

(1)    t ⫽ ⫺

1
␭

 ln 冢 R
R 0 冣

To ﬁnd ␭, we use Equation 13.11:

(2)    ␭ ⫽

0.693
T1/2

⫽

0.693

8.04 days

Substituting (2) into (1) gives

t ⫽ ⫺冢 8.04 days

0.693 冣 ln 冢 4.2 mCi

5.0 mCi 冣 ⫽ 2.02 days

13.5 DECAY PROCESSES

As we stated in the preceding section, a radioactive nucleus spontaneously de-
cays  by  means  of  one  of  three  processes:  alpha  decay,  beta  decay,  or  gamma
decay. Let us discuss these processes in more detail.

Alpha Decay
If a nucleus emits an ␣ particle (4
2He), it loses two protons and two neutrons.
Therefore, the atomic number Z decreases by 2, the mass number A decreases
by 4, and the neutron number decreases by 2. The decay can be written as

Alpha decay

ZX9: A⫺4
A

Z⫺2 Y ⫹ 4

2He

(13.12)

where X is called the parent nucleus and Y the daughter nucleus. For exam-
ple, 238U  and  226Ra  are  both  alpha  emitters  and  decay  according  to  the
schemes

92U9: 234
238
88Ra9: 222
226

90Th ⫹ 4
86Rn ⫹ 4

2He

2He

(13.13)

(13.14)

The half-life for the 238U decay is 4.47 ⫻ 109 years, and that for 226Ra decay is
1.60 ⫻ 103 years.  In  both  cases,  note  that  the  mass  number  of  the  daughter
nucleus is 4 less than that of the parent nucleus. Likewise, the atomic number
is  reduced  by  2.  The  differences  are  accounted  for  in  the  emitted ␣ particle
(the 4He nucleus). Observe that alpha decay processes release energy because

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.5

DECAY PROCESSES

485

Disintegration energy Q

226
88

Ra

K Ra = 0
p Ra = 0

Before decay

K Rn

222
Rn86

pRn

After decay

Kα
α

αp

Figure  13.16 Alpha  decay  of
radium.  The  radium  nucleus  is
initially  at  rest.  After  the  decay,
the  radon  nucleus  has  kinetic
energy KRn and  momentum
pRn,  and  the  alpha  particle  has
kinetic  energy  K␣ and  momen-
tum p␣.

the decay products, especially the alpha particle, are more tightly bound than
the parent nucleus (see Fig. 13.10.)

Figure  13.16  depicts  the  spontaneous  decay  of  226Ra.  As  a  general  rule,
(1) the  sum  of  the  mass  numbers  A must  be  the  same  on  both  sides  of
the equation,  and  (2)  the  net  charge  must  be  the  same  on  both  sides  of  the
equation.  In  addition,  the  total  relativistic  energy  and  momentum  must
be conserved.  If  we  call  M X the  atomic  mass  of  the  parent,  M Y the  mass  of
the daughter, and M␣ the mass of the alpha particle, we can deﬁne the disin-
tegration energy Q :

Q ⫽ (M X ⫺ M Y ⫺ M␣)c 2

(13.15)

Note that atomic mass rather than nuclear mass can be used here, because the
electronic masses cancel in an evaluation of the mass differences. Q is in joules
when the masses are in kilograms, and c is the usual 3.00 ⫻ 108 m/s. However,
when masses are expressed in the more convenient unit u, the value of Q can
be calculated in MeV with the expression

Q ⫽ (M X ⫺ M Y ⫺ M␣) ⫻ 931.494 MeV/u

(13.16)

The  disintegration  energy  Q appears  in  the  form  of  kinetic  energy  of
the daughter nucleus and the ␣ particle. The quantity given by Equation 13.16
is sometimes referred to as the Q value of the nuclear reaction. In the case of
the 226Ra decay described in Figure 13.16, if the parent nucleus is at rest when
it decays, the residual kinetic energy of the products is 4.87 MeV. Most of the
kinetic  energy  is  associated  with  the alpha  particle  because  this  particle  is
much less massive than the recoiling daughter nucleus, 222Rn. That is, because
momentum  must  be  conserved,  the  lighter  ␣ particle  recoils  with  a  much
higher  speed  than  the daughter  nucleus.  Generally,  light  particles  carry  off
most of the energy in nuclear decays.

It is fairly easy to calculate the fraction of the disintegration energy carried

off by the ␣ particle by applying conservation of energy and momentum:

Q ⫽ K Y ⫹ K␣

p Y ⫽ p␣

(13.17)

(13.18)

where the subscript Y stands for the daughter nucleus. Since the total kinetic
energy released in alpha decay (several MeV) is small compared to the rest en-
ergies  of  the ␣ particle  (3726 MeV)  and  the  daughter  nucleus  (206.793 BeV
for 222Rn),  we  can  use  the  classical  expressions  for  momentum  and  kinetic
energy in Equations 13.17 and 13.18 to show that

K␣ ⫽

⌴Y

M Y ⫹ M␣

Q

(13.19)

where M Y and M␣ are  the  atomic  masses  of  the  daughter  nucleus  and  the ␣
particle (see Problem 43 at the end of the chapter).

Interestingly, if one assumed that 238U (or other alpha emitters) decayed by
emitting  a  proton  or  neutron,  the  mass  of  the  decay  products  would  exceed
that of the parent nucleus, corresponding to negative Q values. These negative
Q values indicate that such decays do not occur spontaneously.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

486

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

EXAMPLE 13.8 The Energy Liberated 
When Radium Decays

The 226Ra  nucleus  undergoes  alpha  decay  according  to
Equation  13.12.  Calculate  the  Q value  for  this  process.
Take  the  atomic  masses  to  be  226.025 406 u  for  226Ra,
222.017 574 u  for  222Rn,  and  4.002 603 u  for  4
2He,  as
found in Appendix B.

Solution Using Equation 13.16, we see that

Q ⫽ (MX ⫺ MY ⫺ M␣) ⫻ 931.494

MeV

u

⫽ (226.025 406 u ⫺ 222.017 574 u
MeV

⫺ 4.002 603 u) ⫻ 931.494

u

⫽ (0.005 229 u) ⫻ 冢931.494

MeV

u 冣 ⫽ 4.87 MeV

It is left to Problem 43 to show that the kinetic energy of
the ␣ particle  is  about  4.8 MeV,  whereas  the  recoiling
daughter  nucleus  carries  off  only  about  0.1 MeV  of
kinetic energy.

U(r)

≈ 30 MeV

5 MeV

0

A

R

B

R 1

r

≈ⴚ40 MeV

Figure 13.17 Potential energy
versus  separation  for  the  alpha
particle – nucleus  system.  Classi-
cally,  the  energy  of  the  alpha
particle  is  not  great  enough  to
overcome  the  barrier,  and  so
the  particle  should  not  be  able
to escape the nucleus.

We now  turn  to  the  mechanism  of  ␣ decay.  Imagine  that  an  ␣ particle  is
somehow formed within the nucleus. Figure 13.17 is a plot of potential energy
versus distance r from the nucleus for a typical alpha particle – nucleus system,
where R is the range of the nuclear force. The curve represents the combined
effects of (1) the Coulomb repulsive energy, which gives the positive peak for
r ⬎ R, and (2) the nuclear attractive force, which causes the curve to be nega-
tive  for  r ⬍ R.  As  we  saw  in  Example  13.8,  a  typical  disintegration  energy  is
about 5 MeV, which is the approximate kinetic energy of the ␣ particle, repre-
sented by the lower dashed line in Figure 13.17. According to classical physics,
the ␣ particle is trapped in the potential well. How, then, does it ever escape
from the nucleus?

The  answer  to  this  question  was  ﬁrst  provided  by  George  Gamow  in  1928
and, independently, by R. W. Gurney and E. U. Condon in 1929, using quan-
tum mechanics. Brieﬂy, the view of quantum mechanics is that there is always
some probability that the particle can penetrate (tunnel through) the barrier
(Section  7.2).  Recall  that  the  probability  of  locating  the  particle  depends  on
its  wavefunction ␺ and  that  the  probability  of  tunneling  is  measured  by 兩␺兩2.
Figure 13.18 is a sketch of the wavefunction for a particle of energy E meeting
a  square  barrier  of  ﬁnite  height,  a  shape  that  approximates  the  nuclear
barrier. Note that the wavefunction exists both inside and outside the barrier.
Although the amplitude of the wavefunction is greatly reduced on the far side
of the barrier, its ﬁnite value in this region indicates a small but ﬁnite proba-
bility that the particle can penetrate the barrier. As the energy E of the particle

Inside the
 nucleus

U(r)

ψ

Outside

the nucleus

E

0

R

R 1

r

Figure  13.18 The  nuclear  potential  energy  is  modeled  as  a  square  barrier.  The
energy of the alpha particle is E, which is less than the height of the barrier. According
to quantum mechanics, the alpha particle has some chance of tunneling through the
barrier, as indicated by the ﬁnite size of the wavefunction for r ⬎ R1.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

increases, its probability of escaping also increases. Furthermore, the probabil-
ity increases as the width of the barrier decreases.

13.5

DECAY PROCESSES

487

EXAMPLE 13.9 Probability for Alpha Decay

Apply  the  tunneling  methods  of  Chapter  7  to  compute
the  probability  of  escape  from  a 226
88Ra  nucleus  of  an  ␣
particle with disintegration energy 5 MeV.

冕1
0 √ 1

z

T(E ) ⬇ exp⫺(2/ប)√2m 冕√U(r)⫺E dr

T(E ) ⫽ exp {⫺4␲Z √(E0/E ) ⫹ 8 √Z(R/r 0)}

Solution The escape probability is none other than the
transmission  coefﬁcient  T(E)  for  the  Coulomb  barrier
shown in Figure 13.17. Equation 7.10 of Chapter 7 gives
T(E) approximately as

The integral is taken over the classically forbidden region
where E ⬍ U. For alpha decay, this region is bounded be-
low by the nuclear radius R and above by R1 ⫽ 2Zke 2/E
[from E ⫽ U(R1) ⫽ 2Zke 2/R1]  (see  Fig.  13.17).  In  this
expression, Z is  the  atomic  number  of  the  daughter nu-
cleus.

The tunneling integral to be evaluated is

冕 √U(r ) ⫺ E dr ⫽ √E冕R1
⫽ R1 √E冕1

R √ R1
R/R1√ 1

z

r

⫺ 1 dr

where z ⫽ r/R1.  An  exact  value  for  this  integral  can  be
had  with  some  effort,  but  a  useful  approximation
is found  readily  by  noting  that  R/R1 is  a  small  number
(R ⬃ 10 fm; R1 ⬃ 50 fm for E ⬃ 5 MeV). Thus, as a ﬁrst
estimate  we  set  the  lower  limit  to  zero  and  change  vari-
ables with z ⫽ cos2␪, obtaining

冕1
0 √ 1

z

⫺ 1 dz ⫽ 2冕␲/2
⫽冕␲/2

0

0

 sin2␪d␪

 [1 ⫺ cos 2␪]d␪ ⫽

␲
2

To improve upon this, we break the original integral into
two  and  approximate  the  second,  using  1/z ⬎⬎ 1  for  z
small, to get

⫺ 1 dz ⫺冕R/R 1

0 √ 1

z

⫺ 1 dz ⫽

⫺冕R/R 1

0

dz
√z

␲
2

⬇

␲
2

⫺ 2√ R

R1

Combining  this  result  with  R1 ⫽ 2Zke 2/E gives,  for  the
decay probability,

The  parameter  r 0 ⫽ ប2/M␣ke 2 is  a  kind  of  Bohr  radius
for the alpha particle, with the value 7.25 fm, and E0 is an
energy unit analogous to the Rydberg in atomic physics:

E0 ⫽

ke 2
2r 0

⫽

14.40 eV ⭈Å

(2)(7.25 ⫻ 10⫺5 Å)

⫽ 0.0993 MeV

For the alpha decay of radium, the daughter nucleus
is  radon  with  atomic  number  Z ⫽ 86  and  mass  number
A ⫽ 222.  Equation  13.1  predicts  the  radius  R of  the
radon nucleus to be

Then  the  decay  probability  for  alpha  disintegration  at
E ⫽ 5 MeV is
exp {⫺4␲(86) √(0.0993/5) ⫹ 8 √86(7.27/7.25) }

⫽ exp {⫺78.008} ⫽ 1.32 ⫻ 10⫺34

This probability is quite small, but the actual number
of  disintegrations  per  second  is  much  larger  because  of
the many collisions the alpha particle makes with the nu-
clear  barrier.  This  collision  frequency  f is  the  reciprocal
of the transit time for the alpha particle crossing the nu-
cleus; that is, f ⫽ v/2R, where v is the speed of the alpha
particle  inside  the  nucleus.  Here,  as  in  most  cases,  f is
about  1021 collisions  per  second  (see  Problem  16  in
Chapter  7),  leading  to  a  predicted  decay  rate ⬇ 10⫺13
disintegrations per second, in reasonable agreement with
the observed value of ␭ ⫽ 1.4 ⫻ 10⫺11 s⫺1.

⫺ 1 dz

R ⫽ (1.2 ⫻ 10⫺5 fm)(222)1/3 ⫽ 7.27 fm

Beta Decay
When  a  radioactive  nucleus  undergoes  beta  decay,  the  daughter  nucleus  has
the same number of nucleons as the parent nucleus, but the atomic number is
changed by 1:

A
Z X9: A

Z⫹1Y ⫹ e⫺

(13.20)

Beta decay

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

488

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
␤

f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

K max

Kinetic energy

Figure  13.19 A  typical  beta
decay  curve.  The  maximum  ki-
netic  energy  observed  for  the
beta  particles  corresponds  to
the Q value for the reaction.

Properties of the neutrino

A
Z X9: A

Z⫺1Y ⫹ e⫹

(13.21)

Again, note that the nucleon number and total charge are both conserved in
these decays. However, as we shall see later, these processes are not described
completely by such expressions. We shall explain this shortly.

Two typical beta decay processes are

6C9: 14
14
12
7N9: 12

7N ⫹ e⫺
6C ⫹ e⫹

Notice that in beta decay a neutron changes into a proton (or vice versa). It is
also important to point out that the electron or positron in these decays is not
present beforehand in the nucleus but is created at the moment of decay out
of the rest energy of the decaying nucleus.

Now consider the energy of the system before and after the decay. As with
alpha  decay,  we  assume  energy  is  conserved  and  that  the  heavy  recoiling
daughter nucleus carries off negligible kinetic energy. (See Problem 43.) Exper-
imentally, it is found that beta particles from a single type of nucleus are emit-
ted with a continuous range of kinetic energies up to some maximum value,
K max (Fig. 13.19). The kinetic energy of the system after the decay is equal to
the decrease in mass – energy of the system — that is, the Q value. However, be-
cause all parent nuclei of a given type have the same initial mass, the Q value
must be the same for each decay. In view of this and the fact that the daughter nu-
cleus  carries  off  very  little  kinetic  energy,  why  do  the  emitted  beta  particles
have different kinetic energies? The law of conservation of energy seems to be
violated!  Further  analysis  shows  that  the  decay  processes  given  by  Equations
13.20 and 13.21 also violate the principles of conservation of angular momen-
tum (spin) and linear momentum!

After a great deal of experimental and theoretical study, Pauli in 1930 pro-
posed that a third particle must be present to carry away the “missing” energy
and momentum. Fermi later named this particle the neutrino (“little neutral
one”)  because  it  had  to  be  electrically  neutral  and  have  little  rest  mass.  Al-
though it eluded detection for many years, the neutrino (symbolized by ␯) was
ﬁnally detected experimentally in 1956. It has the following properties:

• Zero electric charge.
• A rest  mass  that  is  much  smaller  than  that  of  the  electron.  Recent  experi-

ments show that the mass of the neutrino is not 0 but is less than 2.8 eV/c 2.

• A spin of  , which satisﬁes the law of conservation of angular momentum

1
2

when applied to beta decay.

• Very weak interaction with matter, which makes it very difﬁcult to detect.
For  the  general  form  of  the  beta  decays  considered  earlier,  we  can  now

write

ZX9: A
A
A
ZX9: A

Z⫹1Y ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯
Z⫺1Y ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯

(13.22)

(13.23)

␯

represents  the  antineutrino, the  antiparticle  to  the  neu-
where  the  symbol 
trino. (We discuss antiparticles further in Chapter 15.) As in the case of alpha
decay,  the  decays  just  listed  are  analyzed  through  conservation  of  energy  and
momentum, but we must use relativistic expressions because the kinetic ener-
gies of the electron and neutrino are not small compared to their rest energies.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

an 

Enrico  Fermi,

Italian-
American  physicist,  received
his  doctorate  from  the  Uni-
versity of Pisa in 1922, then did post-
doctoral  work  in  Germany  under
Max  Born.  He  returned  to  Italy  in
1924,  and  in  1926  became  a  profes-
sor  of  physics  at  the  University  of
Rome.  He  received  the  Nobel  Prize
for Physics in 1938 for his work with
the  production  of  transuranic  ra-
dioactive elements (those more mas-
sive than uranium) by neutron bom-
bardment.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Fermi  ﬁrst  became  interested  in
physics  at  the  age  of  14,  after  read-
ing  an  old  physics  book  in  Latin.
(He  was  an  excellent  scholar  and
could  recite  Dante’s  Divine  Comedy
and  much  of  Aristotle’s  writings
from  memory.)  His  great  ability  to
solve problems in theoretical physics
and  his  skill  for  simplifying  very
complex situations made him some-
what  of  an  oracle.  Fermi  was  also  a
gifted  experimentalist  and  teacher.
During one of his early lecture trips
to  the  United  States,  a  car  that  he

had  purchased  became  disabled,
and he pulled into a nearby gas sta-
tion.  After  Fermi  repaired  the  car
with  ease,  the  station  owner  offered
him a job on the spot.

Fermi  and  his  family  emigrated
to the United States, and he became
a  naturalized  citizen  in  1944.  He
taught  ﬁrst  at  Columbia  University,

13.5

DECAY PROCESSES

489

then at the University of Chicago. As
part  of  the  Manhattan  Project  dur-
ing  World  War  II,  Fermi  was  com-
missioned  to  design  and  build  a
structure,  called  an  atomic  pile,  in
which a self-sustained chain reaction
might  occur.  The  structure,  built  in
a  squash  court  under  the  stadium
of the  University  of  Chicago,  con-
tained uranium in combination with
graphite blocks to slow the neutrons
to  thermal  speeds.  Cadmium  rods
inserted  in  the  pile  were  used  to
absorb  neutrons  and  control  the
reaction  rate.  History  was  made  at
3:45 P.M. on  December  2,  1942,  as
the  cadmium  rods  were  slowly  with-
drawn  and  a  self-sustained  chain  re-
action  was  observed.  Fermi’s  earth-
shaking  achievement — the  world’s
ﬁrst  nuclear  reactor — marked  the
beginning of the atomic age.

Fermi  died  of  cancer  in  1954  at
the  age  of  53.  One  year  later,  the
100th  element  was  discovered  and
named fermium in his honor.

(Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory)

A  process  that  competes  with  e⫹ decay  is  called  electron  capture. This
occurs when a parent nucleus captures one of its own orbital atomic electrons
and emits a neutrino. The ﬁnal product after decay is a nucleus whose charge
is Z ⫺ 1:

A
Z X ⫹ e⫺ 9: A

Z⫺1X ⫹ ␯

(13.24)

Electron capture

In  most  cases  it  is  an  inner  K-shell  electron  that  is  captured,  and  this  is
referred  to  as  K  capture.  One  example  of  this  process  is  the  capture  of  an
electron by 7

4Be to become 7
3Li:
7
4Be ⫹ e⫺ 9: 7

3Li ⫹ ␯

Finally, it is instructive to mention the Q values for beta-decay processes. The
Q values for e⫺ decay and electron capture are given by Q ⫽ (M X ⫺ M Y)c 2, while
the Q values for e⫹ decay are given by Q ⫽ (M X ⫺ M Y ⫺ 2me)c 2 where M X and
M Y are the masses of neutral atoms. These relationships are useful for determin-
ing whether or not possible beta-decay processes are energetically allowed.

Carbon Dating
The  beta  decay  of  14C  is  commonly  used  to  date  organic  samples.  Cosmic
rays  in  the  upper  atmosphere  cause  nuclear  reactions  that  create  14C.  In

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

490

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

fact,  the  ratio  of  14C  to  12C  in  the  carbon  dioxide  molecules  of  our  atmos-
phere  has  a  constant  value  of  approximately  1.3 ⫻ 10⫺12.  All  living  organ-
isms have this same ratio of 14C to 12C, because they continuously exchange
carbon dioxide with their surroundings. When an organism dies, however, it
no  longer  absorbs  14C  from  the  atmosphere,  and  so  the  14C/12C  ratio  de-
creases as a result of the beta decay of  14C, which has a half-life of 5730 yr.
It is  therefore  possible  to  measure  the  age  of  a  material  by  measuring  its
activity  per  unit  mass  caused  by  the  decay  of  14C.  Using  this  technique,
scientists  have  been  able  to  identify  samples  of  wood,  charcoal,  bone,  and
shell as having lived from 1000 to 25,000 yr ago. This knowledge has helped
us reconstruct the history of living organisms — including humans — during
that time span.

A  particularly  interesting  example  is  the  dating  of  the  Dead  Sea  Scrolls,
a group  of  manuscripts  discovered  by  a  shepherd  in  1947.  Transla-
tion showed  them  to  be  religious  documents,  including  most  of  the  books
of  the  Old  Testament.  Because  of  their  historical  and  religious  signiﬁ-
cance, scholars  wanted  to  know  their  age.  Carbon  dating  performed  on
the material  in  which  the  scrolls  were  wrapped  established  their  age  at
approximately 1950 yr.

EXAMPLE 13.10 The Age of Ice Man

In 1991 a German tourist discovered the well-preserved
remains  of  a  human,  later  dubbed  “Ice  Man,”  trapped
in  a  glacier  in  the  Italian  Alps.  Radioactive  dating  of
a sample  of  Ice  Man  established  an  age  of  5300 yr.
Why did  scientists  date  the  sample  with  the  isotope
14C rather  than  11C,  a  beta  emitter  with  a  half-life
of 20.4 min?

Reasoning Carbon-14  has  a  long  half-life,  5730 yr,  so
the fraction of 14C nuclei remaining after one half-life is
high  enough  to  enable  accurate  measurements  of
changes  in  the  sample’s  activity.  The  11C  isotope,  which
has a very short half-life, is not useful because its activity
decreases to a vanishingly small value over the age of the
sample, making it impossible to detect.

If  a  sample  to  be  dated  is  not  very  old — say,  about
50 yr — then  the  scientist  should  select  the  isotope  of
some other element whose half-life is comparable to the
age of the sample. For example, if the sample contained
hydrogen, one could measure the activity of 3H (tritium),
a beta emitter with a half-life of 12.3 yr. As a general rule,
the expected age of the sample should be great enough
to  allow  measurement  of  a  change  in  activity  but  not  so
great that the activity is undetectable.

EXAMPLE 13.11 Radioactive Dating

An  archaeologist  ﬁnds  a  25.0-g  piece  of  charcoal  in  the
ruins  of  an  ancient  city.  The  sample  shows  a  14C  activity
of  250 decays/min.  How  long  has  the  tree  from  which
this charcoal came been dead?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Solution First  calculate  the  decay  constant  for  14C,
which has a half-life of 5730 yr.

␭ ⫽

0.693
T1/2

⫽

0.693

(5730 yr)(3.16 ⫻ 107 s/yr)

⫽ 3.83 ⫻ 10⫺12 s⫺1

The number of 14C nuclei can be calculated in two steps.
(1) The number of 12C nuclei in 25.0 g of carbon is

6.02 ⫻ 1023 nuclei/mol

 (25.0 g)

N(12C) ⫽

12.0 g/mol
⫽ 1.26 ⫻ 1024 nuclei

Knowing  that  the  ratio  of  14C  to  12C  in  the  live  sample
was 1.3 ⫻ 10⫺12, we see that the number of 14C nuclei in
25.0 g before decay is

N0(14C) ⫽ (1.3 ⫻ 10⫺12)(1.26 ⫻ 1024)

⫽ 1.6 ⫻ 1012 nuclei

Hence the initial activity of the sample is

R 0 ⫽ N0␭ ⫽ (1.6 ⫻ 1012 nuclei)(3.83 ⫻ 10⫺12 s⫺1)

⫽ 6.13 decays/s ⫽ 370 decays/min

(2) We can now calculate the age of the charcoal, using
Equation 13.10, which relates the activity R at any time t
to the initial activity R 0:

R ⫽ R 0e⫺␭t    or    e⫺␭t ⫽

R
R 0

 

Because it is given that R ⫽ 250 decays/min and because
we  found  that  R 0 ⫽ 370 decays/min,  we  can  calculate  t
by  taking  the  natural  logarithm  of  both  sides  of  the  last
equation:

⫺␭t ⫽ ln 冢 R

R 0 冣 ⫽ ln 冢 250

370 冣 ⫽ ⫺0.39

13.5

DECAY PROCESSES

491

0.39
␭

⫽

0.39

t ⫽

3.84 ⫻ 10⫺12 s⫺1
⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 1011 s ⫽ 3.2 ⫻ 103 yr

Gamma Decay
Very often, a nucleus that undergoes radioactive decay is left in an excited en-
ergy  state.  The  nucleus  can  then  undergo  a  second  decay  to  a  lower  energy
state, perhaps to the ground state, by emitting a high-energy photon:

A
ZX* 9: A

ZX ⫹ ␥

(13.25)

Gamma decay

where  X*  indicates  a  nucleus  in  an  excited  state.  The  typical  half-life  of  an
excited nuclear state is 10⫺10 s. Photons emitted in such a deexcitation process
are  called  gamma  rays.  Such  photons  have  very  high  energy  (in  the  range  of
1 MeV to 1 GeV) relative to the energy of visible light (about 1 eV). Recall that
the energy of photons emitted (or absorbed) by an atom equals the difference in
energy  between  the  two  electronic  states  involved  in  the  transition.  Similarly,  a
gamma-ray  photon  has  an  energy  hf that  equals  the  energy  difference  ⌬E be-
tween two nuclear energy levels. When a nucleus decays by emitting a gamma ray,
the nucleus doesn’t change its atomic mass A or atomic number Z.

A nucleus may reach an excited state as the result of a violent collision with
another particle. It is also very common for a nucleus to be in an excited state
after  undergoing  an  alpha  or  beta  decay.  The  following  sequence  of  events
represents a typical situation in which gamma decay occurs:

5B9: 12
12

6C* ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯

12
6C* 9: 12

6C ⫹ ␥

(13.26)

(13.27)

Figure  13.20  shows  the  decay  scheme  for  12B,  which  undergoes  beta  decay
with a half-life of 20.4 ms to either of two levels of 12C. It can either (1) decay

12
5 B

e –

Y
G
R
E
N
E

e –

13.4 MeV

12
6 C*

␥

4.4 MeV

12
6 C

Figure  13.20 An  energy-level  diagram  showing  the  initial  nuclear  state  of  a  12B
nucleus and two possible lower-energy states of the 12C nucleus. The beta decay of the
12B nucleus can result in either of two situations: The 12C nucleus is in the ground state
or in the excited state, in which case the nucleus is denoted as 12C*. In the latter case,
the  beta  decay  to  12C*  is  followed  by  a  gamma  decay  to  12C  as  the  excited  nucleus
makes a transition to the ground state.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

492

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

Table 13.4 Decay Processes

Alpha decay

Beta decay (eⴚ)

Beta decay (eⴙ)

Electron capture

Gamma decay

2He

Z⫺2X ⫹ 4
Z⫹1X ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯
Z⫺1X ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯
Z⫺1X ⫹ ␯

ZX 9: A⫺4
A
A
ZX 9: A
A
ZX 9: A
A
ZX ⫹ e⫺9: A
A
Z X* 9: A
Z X ⫹ ␥

directly to the ground state of 12C by emitting a 13.4-MeV electron or (2) un-
dergo  e⫺ decay  to  an  excited  state  of  12C*,  followed  by  gamma  decay  to  the
ground state. The latter process results in the emission of a 9.0-MeV electron
and  a  4.4-MeV  photon.  Table  13.4  summarizes  the  pathways  by  which  a
radioactive nucleus can undergo decay.

13.6 NATURAL RADIOACTIVITY

Four Radioactive Series
Radioactive nuclei are generally classiﬁed into two groups: (1) unstable nuclei
found in nature, which give rise to what is called natural  radioactivity, and
(2)  nuclei  produced  in  the  laboratory  through  nuclear  reactions,  which
exhibit artiﬁcial  radioactivity. There are three series of naturally occurring
radioactive  nuclei  (Table  13.5).  Each  series  starts  with  a  speciﬁc  long-lived
radioactive isotope whose half-life exceeds that of any of its descendants. The
three  natural  series  begin  with  the  isotopes  238U (Uranium  Series), 235U
(Actinium  Series), and 232Th (Thorium Series), and  the  corresponding
stable  end  products  are  three  isotopes  of  lead:  206Pb, 207Pb,  and  208Pb.  The
fourth series in Table 13.5 is an artiﬁcial radioactive series called the Neptu-
nium  Series because  Neptunium  is  the  longest-lived  member  of  the  series
other  than  its  stable  end  product,  209Bi.  The  element  237Np  is  a  transuranic
element  (one  having  an  atomic  number  greater  than  that  of  uranium)  not
found in nature. This element has a half-life of “only” 2.14 ⫻ 106 years, much
less than the age of the Earth; consequently, any 237Np present when the Earth
was created would long since have decayed away.

Figure  13.21  shows  the  successive  decays  for  the  232Th  series.  Note  that
232Th ﬁrst undergoes ␣ decay to 228Ra. Next, 228Ra undergoes two successive ␤

Table 13.5 The Four Radioactive Series

Series

Starting Isotope

Half-Life (years)

Stable End Product

Uranium

Actinium

Thorium

Neptunium

238
92U
235
92U
232
90Th
237
93Npa

4.47 ⫻ 109
7.04 ⫻ 108
1.41 ⫻ 1010
2.14 ⫻ 106

206
82Pb
207
82Pb
208
82Pb
209
83Bi

aThis is the longest-lived member of the series. The starting isotope is actually plutonium, 241

94Pu.

N

140

135

130

125

α

232Th

228Ra
e –

e –

224Ra

228Ac

228Th

α

α

220Rn

216Po

α

212Pb
e –

208Tl
e –

α

α

212Bi

212Po

α

208Pb

80

85

90

Z

Figure 13.21 Successive decays
for the 232Th series.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.6

NATURAL RADIOACTIVITY

493

decays  to  228Th.  The  series  continues  and  ﬁnally  branches  when  it  reaches
212Bi.  At  this  point,  there  are  two  decay  possibilities.  The  end  of  the  decay
series  is  the  stable  isotope  208Pb.  Each  step  in  the  decay  sequence  shown  in
Figure 13.21 may be characterized by a decrease of either 4 (for ␣ decays) or 0
(for ␤ or ␥ decays) in the mass number A, together with appropriate changes
in Z.  The  two  uranium  series  are  somewhat  more  complex  than  the  232Th
series. Also, there are several naturally occurring radioactive isotopes, such as
14C and 40K, that are not part of the aforementioned decay series.

Radioactive  series  in  nature  constantly  replenish  our  environment  with
radioactive  elements  that  would  otherwise  have  disappeared  long  ago.  For
example, because the Earth is approximately 5 ⫻ 109 years old, the supply of
226Ra (whose half-life is only 1600 years) would have been depleted by radioac-
tive decay long ago if it were not for the decay series that starts with 238U.

Determining the Age of the Earth
The casual statement that the Earth is about 5 billion years old deserves more
explanation not only because it has been a historically contentious subject but
also because the science is interesting. Various methods, ranging from geologi-
cal estimates based on weathering rates to estimates based on cooling rates of an
initially hot Earth, have been used. However, Rutherford’s method of using the
half-life and measured amounts of decay products in rocks (he had already used
it by 1904!) has proven the most accurate. Let’s follow this interesting story.

The ﬁrst major scientiﬁc theory of the origin of the Solar System was that of
Pierre Simon de Laplace (1749 – 1827, French physicist) and William Herschel
(1738 – 1822, German – British astronomer). They suggested that the solar sys-
tem  was  formed  from  a  hot,  slowly  rotating  spherical  cloud  of  gas,  which
cooled and contracted, ﬂattening into more rapidly rotating rings to conserve
angular momentum, with planets eventually condensing out of the rings. The
Sun was formed from the hot leftover central part of the gas cloud. Hermann
von  Helmholtz  (1821 – 1894,  German  physiologist  and  physicist),  the  great
champion of the law of energy conservation, realized that there was no need
to  start  with  a  rather  artiﬁcial  hot  gas  cloud.  He  modiﬁed  the  Laplace –
Herschel theory by assuming that the primordial gas cloud was cold and that
gravitational contraction produced heating in agreement with energy conser-
vation. An enormous contribution to the quantitative study of the cooling of
the  Earth  was  made  by  Jean  Baptiste  Joseph  Fourier  (1768 – 1830,  French
mathematician) with his solution of the heat conduction equation in terms of
sums of trigonometric functions (Fourier series). Taking into account varying
seasonal inﬂow of solar energy as well as heat ﬂowing out of the Earth’s core,
and using measurements of the temperature at different depths in mines and
the thermal conductivity of rock as input parameters, Fourier concluded that
the  idea  of  a  cooling  Earth  with  an  intially  hot  interior  did  not  contradict
known observations.

Geologists  of  the  period  generally  agreed  with  these  theories  of  an  Earth
solidifying  from  a  molten  state,  the  interior  gradually  cooling  in  an  average
way. Nineteenth-century geological estimates of the Earth’s age based on con-
tinuous weathering processes, such as erosion, predicted ages of hundreds of
millions  of  years.  This  hypothesis  was  readily  adopted  by  Charles  Darwin
(1809 – 1882,  English  naturalist)  who  felt  that  the  natural  selection  processes

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

494

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

of his theory of evolution required long periods on the order of hundreds of
millions of years.

Kelvin Weighs In. Hardly any scientiﬁc story involves more disciplines and
more famous scientiﬁc names than this one. Just sticking to the bare bones of
the  plot  we  have  to  mention  William  Thompson,  Lord  Kelvin  (1824 – 1907,
British physicist), one of the most important physicists of the 19th century. In
the  1860s  Kelvin  reﬁned  Fourier’s  cooling  model  and  estimated  the  Earth’s
age  to  be  about  60  million  years,  starting  from  a  uniform  temperature  of
about 10,000⬚F, the highest melting point of rock. He also estimated that the
Sun  was  about  this  age,  or  somewhat  less,  based  on  a  model  of  solar  energy
production powered by gravitational contraction.

Kelvin’s calculations started a serious disagreement between physicists who
believed in the 60-million-year ﬁgure, and geologists, who felt the Earth was 10
times older. Even antievolutionists sided with physicists, whom they saw as pro-
viding clear scientiﬁc evidence that the Earth had not existed long enough for
natural selection to occur. Neither side foresaw that the discovery of radioac-
tivity would supply both the explanation of the failure of cooling models and
an exquisitely accurate method of dating the Earth itself. 

The  End  of  The  Age-of-the-Earth-Problem. The discovery of radium and
the  measurement  of  its  abundance  and  the  energy  it  gives  off  allowed  the
Curies to explain Kelvin’s erroneous age for the Earth. When the amount of
thermal energy given off in one day by the radium in the Earth’s crust is calcu-
lated, it turns out to be comparable to the energy lost per day by the Earth’s
core by conduction through the crust and eventual radiation into space. This
means  the  Earth  is  warmer  than  it  would  be  if  energy  were  not  added  by  ra-
dioactive decay. This led Kelvin to underestimate the actual cooling time when
he  did  not  incorporate  the  energy  released  by  radioactive  decay  into  the
Earth’s energy budget.

As mentioned previously, shortly after the prodigious discovery of radioactive
series and the transmutation of series members into different chemical elements
by  Rutherford  and  Frederick  Soddy  (1877 – 1956,  English  physical  chemist),
Rutherford  realized  that  radioactive  techniques  could  be  used  to  date  the
Earth’s oldest rocks. The earliest methods involved measuring the amount of he-
lium  (from  alpha  decay)  trapped  in  rocks,  but  these  methods  only  provided
a lower  limit  on  the  Earth’s  age  because  some  helium  had  presumably  leaked
out of the rocks. In the 1940s, partly as a result of war work on the atomic bomb,
very  sensitive  techniques  were  developed  by  Clair  Cameron  Patterson
(1922 – 1995,  American  geochemist)  and  others  of  measuring  tiny  lead
concentrations in samples. Since the three natural radioactive series all produce
stable  isotopes  of  lead,  measurement  of  the  amount  of  lead  in  very  old  rocks
should  indicate  the  age  of  the  Earth.  However,  a  major  difﬁculty  is  that  one
needs to know the amount of primordial lead, that is, lead not produced by ra-
dioactive decay, present at the time of the formation of the Earth and Solar Sys-
tem.  Because  of  their  process  of  formation,  iron  meteorites  containing  almost
no  uranium  are  believed  to  contain  true  primordial  levels  of  lead.  Patterson
used these and the oldest Earth rocks to arrive at the age of the Earth. In 1953
he found the still accepted value of (4.55 ⫾ 0.07) billion years . A modest yet en-
ergetic scientist, Patterson is quoted as saying about his momentous discovery,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

495

True scientiﬁc discovery renders the brain incapable at such moments of shouting
vigorously  to  the  world  “Look  at  what  I’ve  done!  Now  I  will  reap  the  beneﬁts  of
recognition  and  wealth.”  Instead  such  discovery  instinctively  forces  the  brain  to
thunder  “We  did  it”  in  a  voice  no  one  else  can  hear,  within  its  sacred,  but  lonely,
chapel of scientiﬁc thought.
. . . “We” refers to what Patterson calls “the generations-old community of scientiﬁc
minds.”  . . .  To  him  it  must  have  been  an  exercise  in  improving  the  state  of  the
“community  of  scientiﬁc  minds.”  His  attitude  recalls  the  remark  of  Newton:  “If  I
have seen farther than others, it is because I have stood on the shoulders of giants.”
(From Biographical Memoirs by George R. Tilton)

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

SUMMARY
A nuclear species can be represented by A
Z X, where A is the mass number, the
total number of nucleons, and Z is the atomic number, the total number of
protons. The total number of neutrons in a nucleus is the neutron number,
N, where A ⫽ N ⫹ Z. Elements with the same Z but different A and N values
are called isotopes.

Assuming that a nucleus is spherical, its radius is

r ⫽ r 0A1/3

(13.1)

where r 0 ⫽ 1.2 fm (1 fm ⫽ 10⫺15 m).

Nuclei  are  stable  because  of  the  nuclear  force between  nucleons.  This
short-range force dominates the Coulomb repulsive force at distances of less
than about 2 fm and is nearly independent of charge. Light nuclei are most
stable when the number of protons equals the number of neutrons. Heavy nu-
clei are most stable when the number of neutrons exceeds the number of pro-
tons.  In  addition,  the  most  stable  nuclei  have  Z and N values  that  are  both
even. Nuclei with unusually high stability have Z or N values of 2, 8, 20, 28, 50,
82, and 126, called magic numbers.

Nuclei have a total angular momentum of magnitude 

, where I is
called  the  nuclear-spin  quantum  number. The  magnetic  moment  of  a  nu-
cleus is measured in terms of the nuclear magneton ␮n, where

√I(I ⫹ 1) ប

␮n ⬅

e ប
2mp

⫽ 5.05 ⫻ 10⫺27 J/T

(13.3)

When a nuclear moment is placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld, it precesses
about the ﬁeld with a frequency that is proportional to the ﬁeld strength.

The  difference  between  the  combined  mass  of  the  separate  nucleons  and
that of the compound nucleus containing those nucleons, when multiplied by
c 2, gives the binding energy Eb of the nucleus. We can calculate the binding
energy of any nucleus of mass M A with Z protons and N neutrons from

Eb (MeV) ⫽ [ZM(H) ⫹ Nm n ⫺ MA] ⫻ 931.494

MeV

u

(13.4)

where all masses are atomic masses and m n is the mass of the neutron.

The liquid-drop model of nuclear structure treats the nucleons as molecules
in a drop of liquid. The three main contributions inﬂuencing binding energy
are  the  volume  effect,  the  surface  effect,  and  Coulomb  repulsion.  Summing
such contributions results in the semiempirical binding energy formula.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

496

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

The independent-particle  model or shell  model of  nuclear  structure
assumes that each nucleon moves in a well-deﬁned quantized orbit within the
nucleus.  The  stability  of  certain  nuclei — particularly  those  with  magic  num-
bers — can  be  explained  with  this  model.  Nuclei  can  move  in  well-deﬁned
orbits  inside  the  densely  packed  nucleus  because  two  nucleons  will  collide
only  if  the  energy  of  each  state  after  the  collision  corresponds  to  one  of  the
unoccupied nuclear states.

The collective model of the nucleus combines some features of the liquid-
drop model and some features of the independent-particle model. It has been
very successful in describing a variety of nuclear phenomena.

A radioactive substance decays by alpha decay, beta decay, or gamma de-
cay. An  alpha  particle  is  a  4He  nucleus;  a  beta  particle  is  either  an  electron
(e⫺) or a positron (e⫹); a gamma particle is a high-energy photon.

If a radioactive material contains N 0 radioactive nuclei at t ⫽ 0, the number

of nuclei N, remaining after a time t has elapsed is

N ⫽ N0e⫺␭t

(13.9)

where ␭ is  the  decay  constant, the  probability  per  unit  time  that  a  nucleus
will decay. The decay rate, or activity, of a radioactive substance is

R ⫽ 兩 dN

dt

兩 ⫽ R 0e⫺␭t

(13.10)

where R 0 ⫽ N0␭ is the activity, or number of decays per unit time at t ⫽ 0. The
half-life T1/2 is  deﬁned  as  the  time  required  for  half  of  a  given  number  of
radioactive nuclei to decay, where

T1/2 ⫽

0.693

␭

(13.11)

Alpha decay can occur because, according to quantum mechanics, alpha par-
ticles can tunnel through the coulomb barriers of nuclei. A nucleus undergoing
beta decay emits either an electron (e⫺) and an antineutrino ( ) or a positron
(e⫹)  and  a  neutrino  (␯).  In  electron  capture,  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  absorbs
one of its own orbital electrons and emits a neutrino. In gamma decay, a nucleus
in an excited state decays to a lower energy state and emits a gamma ray.

␯

QUESTIONS

1. Why are heavy nuclei unstable?
2. A proton precesses with a frequency ␻p in the presence
of  a  magnetic  ﬁeld.  If  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic
ﬁeld is doubled, what happens to the precessional fre-
quency?

3. Explain why nuclei that are well off the line of stability

in Figure 13.4 tend to be unstable.

4. Consider  two  heavy  nuclei,  X  and  Y,  with  similar  mass
numbers.  If  X  has  the  higher  binding  energy,  which
nucleus tends to be more unstable?

7. In  nuclear  magnetic  resonance,  how  does  increasing
the  dc  magnetic  ﬁeld  change  the  frequency  of  the  ac
ﬁeld that excites a particular transition?

8. Would  the  liquid-drop  model  or  the  independent-
particle model be more appropriate for predicting the
behavior  of  a  nucleus  in  a  ﬁssion  reaction?  Which
would  be  more  successful  at  predicting  the  magnetic
moment  of  a  given  nucleus?  Which  could  better  ex-
plain the gamma-ray spectrum of an excited nucleus?

9. If a nucleus has a half-life of one year, does that mean it

5. Discuss the differences between the liquid-drop model

will be completely decayed after two years? Explain.

and the independent-particle model of the nucleus.

6. How many values of Iz are possible for I ⫽ ? for I ⫽ 3?

5
2

10. What fraction of a radioactive sample has decayed after

two half-lives have elapsed?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

11. Two  samples  of  the  same  radioactive  nuclide  are  pre-
pared,  each  having  the  same  size.  Sample  A  has  twice
the initial activity of sample B. How does the half-life of
A  compare  with  the  half-life  of  B?  After  each  sample
has  passed  through  ﬁve  half-lives,  what  is  the  ratio  of
their activities?

12. Explain  why  the  half-lives  of  radioactive  nuclei  are  es-

sentially independent of temperature.

13. The radioactive nucleus 226

88Ra has a half-life of approxi-
mately  1.6 ⫻ 103 yr.  Given  that  the  Solar  System  is
about  5  billion  years  old,  why  do  we  still  ﬁnd  this  nu-
cleus in nature?

14. A free neutron undergoes beta decay with a half-life of
about  10 min.  Can  a  free  proton  undergo  a  similar
decay?

15. Explain how you can carbon-date the age of a sample.
16. What is the difference between a neutrino and a photon?
17. Use  Equation  13.24  to  explain  why  the  neutrino  must

1
have a spin of  .
2

18. A  nucleus  such  as  226Ra  that  is  initially  at  rest  under-
goes alpha decay. Which has more kinetic energy after
the decay, the alpha particle or the daughter nucleus?

19. Can a nucleus emit alpha particles with different ener-

gies? Explain.

PROBLEMS

Table 13.6 will be useful for many of these problems. A more
complete list of atomic masses appears in Appendix B.

Table 13.6 Some Atomic Masses

Element

4
2He
7
3Li
9
4Be
10
5B
12
6C
13
6C
14
7N
15
7N
15
8O
17
8O
18
8O
18
9F
20
10Ne
23
11Na
23
12Mg

Atomic
Mass (u)

4.002 603

7.016 003

9.012 182

10.012 937

12.000 000

13.003 355

14.003 074

15.000 109

15.003 065

16.999 131

17.999 160

18.000 937

19.992 436

22.989 768

22.994 124

Element

27
13Al
30
15P
40
20Ca
42
20Ca
43
20Ca
56
26Fe
64
30Zn
63
29Cu
93
41Nb
197
79Au
202
80Hg
216
84Po
220
86Rn
234
90Th
238
92U

Atomic
Mass (u)

26.981 539

29.978 310

39.962 591

41.958 63

42.958 766

55.934 939

63.929 145

63.929 599

92.906 377

196.966 543

201.970 617

216.001 888

220.011 368

234.043 593

238.050 785

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

497

20. Explain  why  many  heavy  nuclei  undergo  alpha  decay

but do not spontaneously emit neutrons or protons.

21. If  an  alpha  particle  and  an  electron  have  the  same  ki-
netic energy, which undergoes greater deﬂection when
passed through a magnetic ﬁeld?

22. If  photographic  ﬁlm  is  kept  in  a  wooden  box,  alpha
particles from a radioactive source outside the box can-
not expose the ﬁlm, but beta particles can. Explain.

23. Pick  any  beta-decay  process,  and  show  that  the  neu-

trino must have zero charge.

24. Suppose it could be shown that the intensity of cosmic
rays  at  the  Earth’s  surface  was  much  greater  10,000
years ago. How would this difference affect what we ac-
cept  as  valid  carbon-dated  ages  of  ancient  samples  of
once-living matter?

25. Why  is  carbon  dating  unable  to  provide  accurate  esti-

mates of very old material?

26. Element X has several isotopes. What do these isotopes

have in common? How do they differ?

27. Explain  the  main  differences  among  alpha,  beta,  and

gamma rays.

28. How  many  protons  are  in  the  nucleus  222

88Rn?  How
many  neutrons?  How  many  orbiting  electrons  are  in
the neutral atom?

13.1 Some Properties of Nuclei
1. Find the radii of (a) a nucleus of 4

of 238

92U. (c) What is the ratio of these radii?

2H and (b) a nucleus

2. The compressed core of a star formed in the wake of a
supernova  explosion  consists  of  only  neutrons  and  is
called a  neutron  star. Calculate the mass of 10 cm3 of a
neutron star.

3. Consider  the  hydrogen  atom  to  be  a  sphere  of  radius
equal to the Bohr radius, a 0, given by Equation 3.29 in
Chapter 3, and calculate the approximate value of the
ratio  of  the  nuclear  mass  density  to  the  atomic  mass
density.

4. The Larmor precessional frequency is

f ⫽

⌬E
h

⫽

2␮B

h

Calculate  the  radio-wave  frequency  at  which  reso-
nance  absorption  occurs  for  (a)  free  neutrons  in  a
magnetic ﬁeld of 1 T, (b) free protons in a magn etic
field of 1 T, and (c) free protons in the Earth’s mag-
netic  ﬁeld  at  a  location  where  the  magnetic  ﬁeld
strength is 50 ␮T.

5. (a)  Use  energy  methods  to  calculate  the  distance  of
closest approach for a head-on collision between an al-
pha  particle  with  an  initial  energy  of  0.5 MeV  and  a
gold nucleus (197Au) at rest. (Assume that the gold nu-

498

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

cleus  remains  at  rest  during  the  collision.)  (b)  What
minimum initial speed must the alpha particle have in
order to approach to a distance of 300 fm?

6. A neutron star is a nucleus composed entirely of neu-
trons  and  has  a  radius  of  about  10  km.  Such  a  star
forms  when  a  larger  star  cools  down  and  collapses
under  the  influence  of  its  own  gravitational  ﬁeld.
The compression  continues  until  the  protons  and
electrons merge to form neutrons. (a) Assuming that
Equation  13.1  is  valid,  estimate  the  mass  number
A and mass M of a neutron star of radius R ⫽ 10 km.
(b)  Find  the  acceleration  due  to  gravity  at  the  sur-
face of  such  a  star.  (c)  Find  the  rotational  kinetic
energy  of  the  star 
its  axis
30 times/s.  (Assume  that  the  star  is  a  sphere  of  uni-
form density.)

it  rotates  about 

if 

7. Consider  a  hydrogen  atom  with  the  electron  in  the
2p state. The magnetic ﬁeld at the nucleus produced
by  the  orbiting  electron  has  a  value  of  12.5 T.  The
proton  can  have  its  magnetic  moment  aligned  in  ei-
ther  of  two  directions  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
the electron’s orbit. Because of the interaction of the
proton’s  magnetic  moment  with  the  electron’s  mag-
netic  ﬁeld,  there  will  be  a  difference  in  energy  be-
tween the states with the two different orientations of
the proton’s magnetic moment. Find that energy dif-
ference in electron volts.

8. Using  a  reasonable  scale,  sketch  an  energy-level  dia-
gram for (a) a proton and (b) a deuteron, both in a
magnetic  ﬁeld  B.  (c)  What  are  the  absolute  values
of the  changes  in  energy  that  accompany  the  possi-
ble transitions  between  the  levels  shown  in  your
diagrams?

9. Copper, as it occurs naturally, consists of two stable iso-
topes, 63Cu  and  65Cu.  What  is  the  relative  abundance
of the two forms? In your calculations, take the atomic
weight of copper to be 63.55 and take the masses of the
two isotopes to be 62.95 u and 64.95 u.

10. (a)  Find  the  radius  of  the  12

6C  nucleus.  (b)  Find  the
force  of  repulsion  between  a  proton  at  the  surface
of a  12
6C  nucleus  and  the  remaining  ﬁve  protons.
(c) How much work (in MeV) must be done to over-
come  this  electrostatic  repulsion  and  put  the  last
proton  into  the  nucleus?  (d)  Repeat  (a),  (b),  and
(c) for 238

92U.

13.2 Binding Energy and Nuclear Forces
11. In  Example  13.3,  the  binding  energy  of  the  deuteron
was  calculated  to  be  2.224 MeV.  This  corresponds  to  a
value  of  1.112 MeV/nucleon.  What  is  the  binding  en-
ergy per nucleon for the heaviest isotope of hydrogen,
3H (called tritium)?

12. Using  the  atomic  mass  of  56

26Fe  given  in  Table  13.6,
ﬁnd its  binding  energy.  Then  compute  the  binding

13. The  139

energy  per  nucleon  and  compare  your  result  with
Figure 13.10.

57 La  isotope  of  lanthanum  is  stable.  A  radioac-
tive  isobar  (see  Problem  14)  of  this  lanthanum  iso-
tope, 139
59 Pr, appears below the line of stable nuclei in
Figure  13.4  and  decays  by  e⫹ emission.  Another  ra-
dioactive isobar of 139La, 139
55 Cs, decays by e⫺ emission
and appears above the line of stable nuclei in Figure
13.4. (a) Which of these three isobars has the highest
neutron-to-proton  ratio?  (b)  Which  has  the  greatest
binding  energy  per  nucleon?  (c)  Which  of  the  two
radioactive  nuclei  (139Pr  or  139Cs)  do  you  expect  to
be heavier?

11Na and  23

14. Two  nuclei  with  the  same  mass  number  are  known  as
isobars. If the two nuclei also have interchanged atomic
and neutron numbers, such as  23
12Mg, the nu-
clei  are  called  mirror  isobars. Binding-energy  measure-
ments on these nuclei can be used to obtain evidence of
the  charge  independence  of  nuclear  forces  (that  is,
proton – proton,  proton – neutron, 
and  neutron–-
neutron forces are approximately equal). (a) Calculate
the difference in binding energy for the two mirror nu-
clei 15
7N. (b) Calculate the difference in bind-
ing energy per nucleon for the mirror isobars 23
11Na and
23
12Mg. How do you account for the difference?

8O and  15

15. Calculate the binding energy per nucleon for the nuclei

(a) 20

10Ne, (b) 40

20Ca, (c) 93

41Nb, and (d) 197

79Au.

16. Calculate  the  minimum  energy  required  to  remove  a
20Ca  nucleus.  (Hint : Use  a  formula

neutron  from  the  43
analogous to Eq. 13.4.)

17. Using  the  graph  in  Figure  13.10,  estimate  how  much
energy is released when a nucleus of mass number 200
is split into two nuclei, each of mass number 100.

13.3 Nuclear Models
18. (a) In the liquid-drop model of nuclear structure, why
does  the  surface-effect  term  ⫺C 2A2/3 have  a  minus
sign? (b) The binding energy of the nucleus increases
as  the  volume-to-surface  ratio  increases.  Calculate  this
ratio  for  both  spherical  and  cubical  shapes,  and  ex-
plain which is more plausible for nuclei.

19. Treat  the  nucleus  as  a  sphere  of  uniform  volume
charge density ␳. (a) Derive an expression for the total
energy required to assemble a sphere of charge corre-
sponding to a nucleus of atomic number Z and radius
R.  (b)  Using  the  result  of  (a),  ﬁnd  an  expression  for
the  electrostatic  potential  energy  U in  terms  of  the
mass number A for the case when N ⫽ Z (the nucleus is
on  the  line  of  stability).  (c)  Evaluate  the  result  of
(b) for the nucleus 30

15P.

20. (a)  Use  Equation  13.7  and  the  given  values  for  the
constants C1, C 2, C 3,  and  C 4 to  calculate  the  binding
energy  per  nucleon  for  the  isobars  64
30Zn.
(b) Compare  these  values  to  the  binding  energy  per
nucleon calculated with Equation 13.4.

29Cu  and  64

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

13.4 Radioactivity
21. Measurements  on  a  radioactive  sample  show  that  its
activity decreases by a factor of 5 during a 2-h interval.
(a)  Determine  the  decay  constant  of  the  radioactive
nucleus. (b) Calculate the value of the half-life for this
isotope.

22. The half-life of 131I is 8.04 days. (a) Calculate the decay
constant  for  this  isotope.  (b)  Find  the  number  of  131I
nuclei  necessary  to  produce  a  sample  with  an  activity
of 0.5 ␮Ci.

23. A freshly prepared sample of a certain radioactive isotope
has an activity of 10 mCi. After an elapsed time of 4 h, its
activity is 8 mCi. (a) Find the decay constant and half-life
of the isotope. (b) How many atoms of the isotope were
contained  in  the  freshly  prepared  sample?  (c)  What  is
the sample’s activity 30 h after it is prepared?

24. Tritium  has  a  half-life  of  12.33  yr.  What  percentage  of
the 3H  nuclei  in  a  tritium  sample  will  decay  during  a
period of 5 years?

25. A sample of radioactive material is said to be carrier-free
when no stable isotopes of the radioactive element are
present.  Calculate  the  mass  of  strontium  in  a  carrier-
free 5-mCi sample of 90Sr whose half-life is 28.8 yr.

26. How  many  radioactive  atoms  are  present  in  a  sample
that has an activity of 0.2 ␮Ci and a half-life of 8.1 days?
27. A  laboratory  stock  solution  is  prepared  with  an  initial
activity  due  to  24Na  of  2.5 mCi/mL,  and  10 mL  of  the
stock  solution  is  diluted  (at  t 0 ⫽ 0)  to  a  working  solu-
tion with a total volume of 250 mL. After 48 h, a 5-mL
sample  of  the  working  solution  is  monitored  with  a
counter.  What  is  the  measured  activity?  (Note : 1 mL ⫽
1 milliliter, and the half-life of 24Na is 15.0 h.)

28. Start with Equation 13.10, and ﬁnd the following useful

forms for the decay constant and half-life:

␭ ⫽

 ln 冢 R 0

R 冣    T1/2 ⫽

1
t

(ln 2)t

ln(R 0/R)

29. The radioactive isotope 198Au has a half-life of 64.8 h. A
sample containing this isotope has an initial activity of
40 ␮Ci. Calculate the number of nuclei that will decay
in the time interval from t 1 ⫽ 10 h to t 2 ⫽ 12 h.

30. During the manufacture of a steel engine component,
radioactive iron (59Fe) is included in the total mass of
0.2 kg. The component is placed in a test engine when
the activity due to this isotope is 20 ␮Ci. After a 1000-h
test period, oil is removed from the engine and found
to  contain  enough  59Fe  to  produce  800  disintegra-
tions/min per liter of oil. The total volume of oil in the
engine is 6.5 L. Calculate the total mass worn from the
engine  component  per  hour  of  operation.  (The  half-
life for 59Fe is 45.1 days.)

31. The  activity  of  a  sample  of  radioactive  material  was
measured  over  12  h,  and  the  following  net count  rates
were obtained at the times indicated:

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

499

Time (h)

Counting Rate (counts/min)

1
2
4
6
8
10
12

3100
2450
1480
910
545
330
200

(a) Plot the activity curve on semilog paper. (b) Deter-
mine  the  disintegration  constant  and  the  half-life  of
the radioactive nuclei in the sample. (c) What counting
rate would you expect for the sample at t ⫽ 0? (d) As-
suming the efﬁciency of the counting instrument to be
10%, calculate the number of radioactive atoms in the
sample at t ⫽ 0.

32. A by-product of some ﬁssion reactors is the isotope 239
which is an alpha emitter with a half-life of 24,000 years:

94Pu,

239
94Pu 9: 235

92U ⫹ ␣

Consider  a  sample  of  1 kg  of  pure  239
94Pu  at  t ⫽ 0.
Calculate  (a)  the  number  of  239
94Pu  nuclei  present  at
t ⫽ 0, (b) the initial activity in the sample, and (c) the
time required for the activity to decrease to 1 decay/s.

33. A piece of charcoal has a mass of 25 g and is known to
be  about  25,000  years  old.  (a)  Determine  the  number
of decays per minute expected from this sample. (b) If
the  radioactive  background  in  the  counter  without  a
sample  is  20 counts/min  and  we  assume  100%  efﬁ-
ciency in counting, explain why 25,000 years is close to
the limit of dating with this technique.

34. A  ﬁssion  reactor  accident  evaporates  5 ⫻ 106 Ci  of
90Sr(T1/2 ⫽ 27.7 yr)  into  the  air.  The  90Sr  falls  out
over an area of 104 km2. How long will it take the activ-
ity of the 90Sr to reach the agriculturally “safe” level of
2 ␮Ci/m2?

35. What  speciﬁc  activity  (see  Problem  36),  in  disintegra-
tions/min ⭈ g,  would  be  expected  for  carbon  samples
from  2000-year-old  bones?  (Note  that  the  ratio  of  14C
to 12C  in  living  organisms  is  1.3 ⫻ 10⫺12 and  the  half-
life of 14C is 5730 yr.)

36. In  addition  to  the  radioactive  nuclei  included  in  the
natural  decay  series,  there  are  several  other  radioac-
tive  nuclei  that  occur  naturally.  One  is  147Sm,  which
is  15%  naturally  abundant  and  has  a  half-life  of  ap-
proximately  1.3 ⫻ 1010 years.  Calculate  the  number
of  decays  per  second  per  gram  (due  to  this  isotope)
in  a  sample  of  natural  samarium.  The  atomic  weight
of samarium is 150.4. (Activity per unit mass is called
speciﬁc activity.)

37. A radioactive nucleus with decay constant ␭ decays to a
stable daughter nucleus. (a) Show that the number of

500

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

 

daughter  nuclei,  N 2,  increases  with  time  according  to
the expression

N 2 ⫽ N01(1 ⫺ e⫺␭t)

where N 01 is  the  initial  number  of  parent  nuclei.
(b) Starting with 106 parent nuclei at t ⫽ 0, with a half-
life of 10 h, plot the number of parent nuclei and the
number  of  daughter  nuclei  as  functions  of  time  over
the interval 0 to 30 h.

38. Many  radioisotopes  have  important  industrial,  med-
ical,  and  research  applications.  One  of  these  is  60Co,
which has a half-life of 5.2 yr and decays by the emis-
sion  of  a  beta  particle  (energy  0.31 MeV)  and  two
gamma  photons  (energies  1.17 MeV  and  1.33 MeV).
A scientist wishes to prepare a 60Co sealed source that
will  have  an  activity  of  at  least  10  Ci  after  30  months
of use.  (a)  What  minimum  initial  mass  of  60Co  is  re-
quired?  (b)  At  what  rate  will  the  source  emit  energy
after 30 months?

39. The  concept  of  radioactive  half-life  was  described  in
Section 13.4, and Equation 13.11 gives the relationship
between T1/2 and ␭.  Another  parameter  that  is  often
useful in the description of radioactive processes is the
mean  life, ␶.  Although  the  half-life  of  a  radioactive  iso-
tope  is  accurately  known,  it  is  not  possible  to  predict
the  time  when  any  individual  atom  will  decay.  The
mean  life  is  a  measure  of  the  average  length  of  exis-
tence of all the atoms in a particular sample. Show that
␶ ⫽ 1/␭. (Hint: Remember that ␶ is essentially an aver-
age  value,  and  use  the  fact  that  the  number  of  atoms
that  decay  between  t and t ⫹ dt is  equal  to  dN.  Fur-
thermore,  note  that  these  dN atoms  have  a  ﬁnite  time
of existence, t.)

40. Potassium  as  it  occurs  in  nature  includes  a  radioactive
isotope 40K, which has a half-life of 1.27 ⫻ 109 yr and a
relative abundance of 0.0012%. These nuclei decay by
two different pathways — 89% by e⫺ emission and 11%
by e⫹ emission. Calculate the total activity in Bq associ-
ated with 1 kg of KCl due to e⫺ emission.

13.5 Decay Processes
41. Find the energy released in the alpha decay of 238

92U:

238
92U 9: 234

90 Th ⫹ 4

2He

You will ﬁnd the mass values in Table 13.6 useful.

42. When, after a reaction or disturbance of any kind, a nu-
cleus is left in an excited state, it can return to its nor-
mal (ground) state by emission of a gamma-ray photon
(or  several  photons).  Equation  13.25  describes  this
process.  The  emitting  nucleus  must  recoil  in  order  to
conserve  both  energy  and  momentum.  (a)  Show  that
the recoil energy of the nucleus is

E r ⫽

(⌬E )2
2Mc2

where ⌬E is  the  difference  in  energy  between  the
excited  and  ground  states  of  a  nucleus  of  mass
M. (b) Calculate the recoil energy of the 57Fe nucleus
when it decays by gamma emission from the 14.4-keV
excited  state.  For  this  calculation,  take  the  mass  to
be 57 u.  (Hint: When  writing  the  equation  for  con-
servation  of  energy,  use  (Mv)2/2M for  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  recoiling  nucleus.  Also,  assume  that
hf ⬍⬍ Mc 2.)

43. Equation 13.12 represents the decay of an unstable nu-
cleus  at  rest  by  alpha  emission.  The  disintegration  en-
ergy Q given by Equation 13.15 must be shared by the
alpha  particle  and  the  daughter  nucleus  in  order  to
conserve  both  energy  and  momentum  in  the  decay
process.  (a)  Show  that  for  nonrelativistic  particles,  Q
and K␣, the kinetic energy of the ␣ particle, are related
by the expression

Q ⫽ K␣冢1 ⫹

M␣

M Y 冣

where M Y is the mass of the daughter nucleus. (b) Use
the  result  of  (a)  to  ﬁnd  the  energy  of  the  ␣ particle
emitted in the decay of 226Ra. (c) What is the kinetic en-
ergy  of  the  daughter?  (d)  Apply  the  preceding  expres-
sion  for  Q to  the  beta  decay  210
84Po ⫹ e⫺ to
verify the claim that the daughter nucleus carries off a
negligible amount of kinetic energy in beta decay. Why
is your answer an approximation?

83Bi 9: 210

44. Find  the  kinetic  energy  of  an  alpha  particle  emitted
86Rn.  Assume  that  the

during  the  alpha  decay  of  220
daughter nucleus, 216

84Po, has zero recoil velocity.

45. Determine which of the following suggested decays can

occur spontaneously:
(a) 40
20Ca 9: e⫹ ⫹ 40
(b) 98
44Ru 9: 4
(c) 144
60Nd 9: 4

2He ⫹ 94
2He ⫹ 140

19K ⫹ ␯
42Mo
58Ce

46. (a) Why is the following inverse ␤ decay forbidden for

a free proton?

p 9: n ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯

(b) Why  is  the  same  reaction  possible  if  the  proton  is
bound  in  a  nucleus?  For  example,  the  following  reac-
tion occurs:

13
7N 9: 13

6C ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯

(c) How much energy is released in the reaction given
in  (b)?  [Take  the  masses  to  be  m(e⫹) ⫽ 0.000549 u,
M(13C) ⫽ 13.003355 u,  and  M(13N) ⫽ 13.005739 u,
and see Problem 49.]

47. Use  the  Heisenberg  uncertainty  principle  to  make  a
reasonable  argument  against  the  hypothesis  that  free
electrons  can  be  present  in  a  nucleus.  Use  relativistic
expressions  for  the  momentum  and  energy,  and  in-
clude appropriate assumptions and approximations.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

48. The simplest example of beta decay is the beta decay of
the  free  neutron.  Free  neutrons  have  a  half-life  of
10.2 min and decay according to the reaction

Z X)  and  M(Z ⫾1

where M(A
AY)  are  the  atomic  masses  of
the  parent  and  daughter,  respectively,  and  me is  the
mass of the electron.

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

501

n9: p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯

(a) Find the maximum kinetic energy the electron may
have when a neutron decays at rest. (Hint: In this case,
the  energy  of  the  antineutrino  is  approximately  zero,
the momentum of the proton equals the momentum of
the  electron,  and  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  proton  is
negligible compared to that of the electron.) (b) Find
the  proton’s  kinetic  energy  in  this  case.  (c)  Find  the
maximum kinetic energy and momentum that the anti-
neutrino  may  have  and  the  proton’s  kinetic  energy  in
this  case.  (Hint: Assume  that  the  proton’s  kinetic  en-
ergy is negligible compared to that of the  .)

␯

49. Q values for ␤ decay. One must be careful in calculating
Q values  for  beta  decay.  Atomic  masses  cannot  always
be used without correction, because electron masses do
not always cancel as in alpha decay. Show that the cor-
rect expressions for beta decay are

electron emission  Q ⫽ [M(A
positron emission  Q ⫽ [M(A
electron capture  Q ⫽ [M(A

ZX) ⫺ M( A
ZX) ⫺ M( A
ZX) ⫺ M( A

Z⫹1Y )]c 2
Z⫺1Y) ⫺ 2m e]c 2
Z⫺1Y)]c2

13.6 Natural Radioactivity
50. Starting  with  235

92U,  the  sequence  of  decays  shown  in
Figure  P13.50  is  observed,  ending  with  the  stable  iso-
tope 207
82Pb.  Enter  the  correct  isotope  symbol  in  each
open square.

α

235U92U

e –
α

α

e –

α

α

e –

α

α

e –

α

e –

α

Figure P13.50

e –
α

e –

α

e –

207Pb82Pb

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

51. A 3H nucleus beta-decays into 3He by creating an elec-

tron and an antineutrino according to the reaction

3
1H9: 3

2He ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯

Use Appendix B to determine the total energy released
in this reaction.
52. The  nucleus  15

8O  decays  by  electron  capture.  Write
(a) the  basic  nuclear  process  and  (b)  the  decay
process. (c) Determine the energy of the neutrino. Dis-
regard the daughter’s recoil.

53. In a piece of rock from the Moon, the  87Rb content is
assessed to be 1.82 ⫻ 1010 atoms per gram of material
and  the  87Sr  content  is  found  to  be  1.07 ⫻ 109 atoms
per  gram.  (a)  Determine  the  age  of  the  rock.
(b) Could  the  material  in  the  rock  actually  be  much
older?  What assumption  is  implicit  in  the  use  of
the radioactive dating  method?  (The  relevant  decay
is 87Rb : 87Sr ⫹ e⫺.  The  half-life  of  the  decay  is
4.8 ⫻ 1010 yr.)

54. (a)  Can  57Co  decay  by  e⫹ emission?  Explain.  (b)  Can
14C decay by e⫺ emission? Explain. (c) If either answer
is yes, what is the range of kinetic energies available for
the beta particle?

55. When  a  material  of  interest  is  irradiated  by  neutrons,
radioactive  atoms  are  produced  continually  and  some

decay according to their given half-lives. (a) If radioac-
tive atoms are produced at a constant rate R and their
decay  is  governed  by  the  conventional  radioactive  de-
cay law, show that the number of radioactive atoms ac-
cumulated after an irradiation time t is

N ⫽

R
␭

 (1 ⫺ e⫺␭t)

(b) What is the maximum number of radioactive atoms
that can be produced?
56. The ground state of  92

43Tc (molar mass 92.9102) decays
by electron capture and e⫹ emission to energy levels of
the  daughter  (molar  mass  in  ground  state  is  92.9068)
at  2.44 MeV,  2.03 MeV,  1.48 MeV,  and  1.35 MeV.
(a) For  which  of  these  levels  are  electron  capture  and
e⫹ decay allowed? (b) Identify the daughter and sketch
the decay scheme, assuming that all excited states deex-
cite by direct gamma decay to the ground state.

57. In  an  experiment  on  the  transport  of  nutrients  in  the
root  structure  of  a  plant,  two  radioactive  nuclides  X
and Y are used. Initially, 2.50 times more nuclei of type
X are present than of type Y. Just three days later there
are 4.20 times more nuclei of type X than of type Y. Iso-
tope  Y  has  a  half-life  of  1.60  d.  What  is  the  half-life  of
isotope X? 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

502

CHAPTER 13

NUCLEAR STRUCTURE

58. (a) The daughter nucleus formed in radioactive decay is
often radioactive. Let N10 represent the number of par-
ent nuclei at time t ⫽ 0, N 1(t) the number of parent nu-
clei  at  time  t,  and ␭1 the  decay  constant  of  the  parent.
Suppose the number of daughter nuclei at time t ⫽ 0 is
zero, let N 2(t) be the number of daughter nuclei at time
t, and let ␭2 be the decay constant of the daughter. Show
that N2(t) satisﬁes the differential equation

dN2
dt

⫽ ␭1N1 ⫺ ␭2N2

(b) Verify by substitution that this differential equation
has the solution

N2(t ) ⫽

N10␭1
␭1 ⫺ ␭2

 (e⫺␭2t ⫺ e⫺␭1t)

This  equation  is  the  law  of  successive  radioactive
decays.  (c)  218Po  decays  into  214Pb  with  a  half-life  of
3.10 min, and 214Pb decays into 214Bi with a half-life of
26.8 min.  On  the  same  axes,  plot  graphs  of  N1(t)  for
218Po and N 2(t) for  214Pb. Let N10 ⫽ 1000 nuclei, and
choose values of t from 0 to 36 min in 2-min intervals.
The  curve  for  214Pb  at  ﬁrst  rises  to  a  maximum  and
then starts to decay. At what instant tm is the number of
214Pb  nuclei  a  maximum?  (d)  By  applying  the  condi-

tion  for  a  maximum 

⫽ 0

,  derive  a  symbolic  for-

dN2
dt

mula  for  tm in  terms  of  ␭1 and ␭2 .  Does  the  value
obtained in (c) agree with this formula?

59. A certain African artifact is found to have a carbon-14
activity  of  (0.12 ⫾ 0.01)  Bq  per  gram  of  carbon.
Assume  the  uncertainty  is  negligible  in  the  half-life  of
14C (5730 yr) and in the activity of atmospheric carbon
(0.25  Bq  per  gram).  The  age  of  the  object  lies  within
what range? 

60. As  part  of  his  discovery  of  the  neutron  in  1932,  James
Chadwick determined the mass of the newly identiﬁed
particle by ﬁring a beam of fast neutrons, all having the
same speed, at two different targets and measuring the
maximum recoil speeds of the target nuclei. The maxi-
mum  speeds  arise  when  an  elastic  head-on  collision
occurs  between  a  neutron  and  a  stationary  target
nucleus.  (a)  Represent  the  masses  and  ﬁnal  speeds  of
the two target nuclei as m1, v1, m 2, and v 2 and assume
Newtonian  mechanics  applies.  Show  that  the  neutron
mass can be calculated from the equation

mn ⫽

m1v1 ⫺ m 2v2

v2 ⫺ v1

(b) Chadwick directed a beam of neutrons (produced
from  a  nuclear  reaction)  on  parafﬁn,  which  contains
hydrogen. The maximum speed of the protons ejected
was  found  to  be  3.3 ⫻ 107 m/s.  Since  the  velocity  of
the  neutrons  could  not  be  determined  directly,  a  sec-
ond  experiment  was  performed  using  neutrons  from
the same source and nitrogen nuclei as the target. The
maximum  recoil  speed  of  the  nitrogen  nuclei  was
found to be 4.7 ⫻ 106 m/s. The masses of a proton and
a nitrogen nucleus were taken as 1 u and 14 u, respec-
tively. What was Chadwick’s value for the neutron mass?
61. A  rock  sample  contains  traces  of  238U, 235U, 232Th,
208Pb, 207Pb, and 206Pb. Careful analysis shows that the
ratio  of  the  amount  of  238U  to  206Pb  is  1.164.  (a)  As-
sume  that  the  rock  originally  contained  no  lead  and
determine the age of the rock. (b) What should be the
ratios  of  235U  to  207Pb  and  of  232Th  to  208Pb  so  that
they would yield the same age for the rock? Ignore the
minute amounts of the intermediate decay products in
the decay chains. Note that this form of multiple dating
gives reliable geological dates.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14
Nuclear Physics
Applications

Chapter Outline

14.1 Nuclear Reactions
14.2 Reaction Cross Section
14.3 Interactions Involving Neutrons
14.4 Nuclear Fission
14.5 Nuclear Reactors

Neutron Leakage
Regulating Neutron Energies
Neutron Capture
Control of Power Level
Safety and Waste Disposal

14.6 Nuclear Fusion
Fusion Reactions
Magnetic Field Conﬁnement
Inertial Conﬁnement

Fusion Reactor Design
Advantages and Problems of Fusion

14.7 Interaction of Particles with Matter

Heavy Charged Particles
Electrons
Photons

14.8 Radiation Damage in Matter
14.9 Radiation Detectors
14.10 Uses of Radiation

Tracing
Neutron Activation Analysis
Radiation Therapy
Food Preservation

Summary

This chapter is concerned with nuclear reactions in which particles and nuclei
collide  and  change  into  other  nuclei  and  particles.  We  also  consider  the  two
means by which energy can be derived from nuclear reactions: ﬁssion, in which
a large nucleus splits, or ﬁssions, into two smaller nuclei, and fusion, in which
two small nuclei fuse to form a larger one. In either case, a release of energy
occurs that can then be used either destructively through bombs or construc-
tively through production of electric power. Finally, we examine the interaction
of radiation with matter and several devices for detecting radiation.

14.1 NUCLEAR REACTIONS

It is possible to change the structure of nuclei by bombarding them with ener-
getic particles. Such collisions that change the identities of the target nuclei are
called nuclear  reactions. Rutherford  was  the  ﬁrst  to  observe  them  in  1919,
using naturally occurring radioactive sources for the bombarding particles. Since
then,  thousands  of  nuclear  reactions  have  been  observed,  especially  after  the
development  of  charged-particle  accelerators  in  the  1930s.  With  today’s

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

503

504

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

technology in particle accelerators, it is possible to achieve particle energies of
1000 GeV ⫽ 1 TeV  and  higher.  These  high-energy  particles  are  used  to  create
new particles whose properties are helping to solve the mystery of the nucleus.

Consider a reaction in which a target nucleus X is bombarded by a particle

a, resulting in a nucleus Y and a particle b:

Nuclear reaction

a ⫹ X9: Y ⫹ b

(14.1)

Sometimes this reaction is written in the more compact form

As an example, consider the reaction 7Li(p, ␣)4He, or

X(a, b)Y

1
1H ⫹ 7

3Li 9: 4

2He ⫹ 4

2He

Cockroft and Walton were ﬁrst to observe this reaction in 1932, using protons
accelerated  to  600 keV  in  an  accelerator  they  had  designed  and  built.  A  nu-
clear reaction such as this, and in fact any reaction, can occur only if it satisﬁes
certain conservation laws. The conservation laws for nuclear reactions are

• Conservation of mass number, A. The total number of nucleons must be the
same  after  the  reaction  as  before.  For  the  reaction  under  discussion,
A before ⫽ 1 ⫹ 7 ⫽ A after ⫽ 4 ⫹ 4.

• Conservation  of  charge, q. Here the charged nuclear particles are protons,

and q before ⫽ 1 ⫹ 3 ⫽ q after ⫽ 2 ⫹ 2.

• Conservation  of  energy,

linear  momentum, and  angular  momentum.  These
quantities are conserved because a nuclear reaction involves only internal
forces between a target nucleus and a bombarding nucleus, and there are
no external forces to upset these conservation principles.

Let us apply the conservation of energy to a reaction of the form of Equation
14.1 to compute the total kinetic energy released (or absorbed) in the reaction,
which is called the reaction energy, Q. Assume that the target nucleus X is orig-
inally at rest, the bombarding particle a has kinetic energy Ka, and the reaction
products b and Y have kinetic energies K b and K Y. Conserving energy,

MXc 2 ⫹ Ka ⫹ Mac 2 ⫽ M Yc 2 ⫹ K Y ⫹ M bc 2 ⫹ K b

As the total kinetic energy released in the reaction, Q , is equal to the differ-
ence  between  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  ﬁnal  particles  and  that  of  the  initial
particle, we ﬁnd

Q of a reaction

Q ⫽ (K Y ⫹ K b) ⫺ K a ⫽ (MX ⫹ Ma ⫺ M Y ⫺ M b)c 2

(14.2)

A reaction for which  Q is positive converts nuclear mass to kinetic energy of
the  products  Y  and  b  and  is  called  an  exothermic  reaction. A  reaction  for
which Q is  negative  requires  some  minimum  input  kinetic  energy  from  the
bombarding particle in order to occur. Such a reaction is called endothermic.
For an endothermic reaction to proceed, the incident particle must have a
minimum kinetic energy called the threshold energy, K th. Since K th must not
only supply 兩Q 兩, the excess mass – energy of the products, but also supply some
kinetic energy to the products to conserve momentum, K th is greater than 兩Q 兩.
For  low-energy  reactions,  where  the  kinetic  energies  of  all  the  interacting
particles are small compared to their rest energies, we can apply the nonrela-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Table 14.1 Q Values for Nuclear Reactions

Involving Light Nuclei

14.1

NUCLEAR REACTIONS

505

Reactiona

2H(n, ␥)3H
2H(d, p)3H
6Li(p, ␣)3H
6Li(d, p)7Li
7Li(p, n)7Be
7Li(p, ␣)4He
9Be(n, ␥)10Be
9Be(␥, n)8Be
9Be(d, p)10Be
9Be(p, ␣)6Li
10B(n, ␣)7Li
10B(p, ␣)7Be
12C(n, ␥)13C
13C(p, n)13N
14N(n, p)14C
14N(n, ␥)15N
18O(p, n)18F
19F(p, ␣)16O

Measured Q Value (MeV)

6.257 ⫾ 0.004
4.032 ⫾ 0.004
4.016 ⫾ 0.005
5.020 ⫾ 0.006
⫺1.645 ⫾ 0.001
17.337 ⫾ 0.007
6.810 ⫾ 0.006
⫺1.666 ⫾ 0.002
4.585 ⫾ 0.005
2.132 ⫾ 0.006
2.793 ⫾ 0.003
1.148 ⫾ 0.003
4.948 ⫾ 0.004
⫺3.003 ⫾ 0.002
0.627 ⫾ 0.001
10.833 ⫾ 0.007
⫺2.453 ⫾ 0.002
⫺8.124 ⫾ 0.007

aThe symbols n, p, d, ␣, and ␥denote the neutron, proton,
deuteron,  alpha  particle,  and  photon,  respectively.
From C. W. Li, W. Whaling, W. A. Fowler, and C. C. Laurit-
sen, Phy. Rev., 83:512, 1951.

tivistic expressions K ⫽ mv 2 and p ⫽ mv to ﬁnd the threshold energy. It is left
as a problem (Problem 9) to show that when momentum and energy are con-
served in a low-energy negative Q reaction, the threshold energy is

1
2

Kth ⫽ ⫺Q 冢1 ⫹

Ma

MX 冣

(14.3)

Finally, we have included a selected list of measured Q values for reactions in-
volving light nuclei in Table 14.1.

EXAMPLE 14.1
(a)  Calculate  the  Q value  for  the  reaction  observed  by
Cockcroft and Walton.

Solution (a) The reaction is
3Li 9: 4

1H ⫹ 7
1

2He ⫹ 4

2He

Using Q ⫽ (M Li ⫹ M H ⫺ 2M He)c 2
atomic mass values from Appendix B, we ﬁnd

and 

substituting

Q ⫽ (7.016 003 u ⫹ 1.007 825 u

⫺ 2(4.002 603 u))(931.50 MeV/u) ⫽ 17.3 MeV

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

(b)  Find  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  products  if  600-keV
protons are incident.

Solution (b) Since Q ⫽ K products ⫺ K incident particle,
K products ⫽ Q ⫹ K incident particle ⫽ 17.3 MeV ⫹ 0.6 MeV

⫽ 17.9 MeV

This  means  that  the  two  alpha  particles  share  17.9 MeV
of kinetic energy.

506

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

x

14.2 REACTION CROSS SECTION

Thin foil

target

(a)

Total area
of foil = A Area of target

nucleus = σ

(b)

Figure  14.1 (a)  A  beam  of
particles incident on a thin foil
target  of  thickness  x.  The  view
shown  is  of  an  edge  of  the  tar-
get. (b) A front view of the tar-
get, where the circles represent
the target nuclei.

Reaction rate is proportional
to cross section and target
density

Since we deal in this chapter with the interactions between nuclei and matter,
it is useful to introduce a quantity called the cross section, which is a mea-
sure of the probability that a particular nuclear reaction will occur.

When a beam of particles is incident on a target in the form of a thin foil, not
every particle interacts with a target nucleus. The probability that an interaction
will occur depends on the ratio of the “effective” area of the target nucleus to
the area of the foil. The situation is analogous to throwing darts at a large wall
upon which many inﬂated balloons are hanging. If the darts are thrown at ran-
dom in the direction of the wall and the balloons are spread out so as not to
touch each other, there is some chance that you will hit a balloon on any given
throw. Furthermore, if you throw darts at a rate R 0, the rate R at which balloons
burst will be less than R 0. In fact, the probability of hitting a balloon will equal
R/R 0. The ratio R/R 0 will depend on the number of balloons N on the wall, the
area ␴of each balloon, and the area A of the wall. Since the total cross-sectional
area of the balloons is N␴, the probability R/R 0 equals the ratio N␴/A.

With this analogy, we can now understand the concept of cross section as it
pertains to nuclear events. Suppose a beam of particles is incident upon a thin-
foil target, as in Figure 14.1a. Each target nucleus X has an effective area ␴called
the cross section. You can think of ␴ as an effective area of the nucleus at right
angles to the direction of motion of the bombarding particles, as in Figure 14.1b,
but note that the reaction cross reaction ␴ can be greater than, equal to, or less
than the actual geometrical cross section of the target nucleus. It is assumed that
the reaction X(a, b)Y will occur only if the incident particle strikes the area ␴.
Therefore, the probability that a collision will occur is proportional to ␴. That is,
the probability increases as ␴ increases. In the general case, the size of ␴ for a
speciﬁc reaction may also depend on the energy of the incident particle.

Let us consider the concept of cross section in more detail. In what follows,
we take the foil thickness to be x and its area to be A. Furthermore, we use the
following notation.

R 0 ⫽ Rate at which incident particles strike the foil (particles/s)
R ⫽ Rate at which reaction events occur (reactions/s)
n ⫽ Number of target nuclei per unit volume (particles/m3)

Since  the  total  number  of  target  nuclei  in  the  foil  is  nAx,  the  total  area  ex-
posed to the incident beam must be ␴nAx. It is assumed that the foil is sufﬁ-
ciently thin that nuclei are not “hidden” behind others. The ratio of the rate
of interactions to the rate of incident particles, R/R 0, must equal the ratio of
the area ␴nAx to the total area A of the foil, in analogy with the dart – balloon
collision events. That is,

R
R 0

⫽

␴nAx

A

⫽ ␴nx

(14.4)

This result shows that the probability that a nuclear reaction will occur is pro-
portional to the cross section ␴, the density of target nuclei n, and the thick-
ness of the target, x. A value for ␴ for a speciﬁc reaction can therefore be ob-
tained by measuring R, R 0, n, and x and using Equation 14.4.

We can use the same reasoning to arrive at an expression for the number of
particles  that  penetrate  a  foil  without  undergoing  reaction.  Suppose  that  N0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

particles are incident on a foil of thickness dx and dN is the number of parti-
cles that interact with the target nuclei (Fig. 14.2). The ratio of the number of
interacting  particles  to  the  number  of  incident  particles,  dN/N,  equals  the
ratio of the total target cross section, nA␴ dx, to the total foil area A. That is,

N0

dx

N0 – dN

14.2

REACTION CROSS SECTION

507

⫺

dN
N

⫽

nA␴ dx

A

⫽ n␴ dx

Figure  14.2 If N 0 is  the  num-
ber of particles incident on a tar-
get of thickness dx in some time
interval,  the  number  emerging
from the target is N 0 ⫺ dN.

Number of particles
transmitted through a
target of thickness x

where  the  minus  sign  indicates  that  particles  are  being  removed  from  the
beam. Integrating this expression and taking N ⫽ N0 at x ⫽ 0,

N0

dx

0

dN
N

冕N
ln冢 N

⫽ ⫺n␴冕x
N0 冣 ⫽ ⫺n␴x

N ⫽ N0e⫺n␴x

(14.5)

That  is,  if  N 0 is  the  number  of  incident  particles,  the  number  that  emerge
from the slab, N, decreases exponentially with target thickness.

Nuclear cross sections, which have dimensions of area, are typically of the or-
der of the square of the nuclear radius, which is about 10⫺28 m2. For this reason,
it is common to use the unit of 10⫺28 m2 for measuring nuclear cross sections.
This small unit is known, strangely enough, as the barn (b)1 and is deﬁned as

1 barn ⫽ 10⫺28 m2

(14.6)

The barn

In reality, the concept of cross section in nuclear and atomic physics has little
to do with the actual geometric area of target nuclei. The model we have used
is simply a convenient one for describing the probability of occurrence of any
nuclear  reaction.  In  fact,  cross  sections  vary  with  both  the  speciﬁc  reaction
considered  and  with  the  incident  particle’s  kinetic  energy  over  much  more
than  several  times  the  target  nucleus’s  geometrical  area.  For  example,  the
cross section for an antineutrino to interact with a proton via the nuclear weak
interaction is only about 10⫺19 b in the reaction

␯ ⫹ p 9: e⫹ ⫹ n    (␴ ⫽ 10⫺19 b)

The cross sections for inelastic scattering of neutrons from iodine and xenon
via the nuclear strong interaction, however, are about 4 barns in the following
reactions:

n ⫹ 127I 9: 127I* ⫹ n

n ⫹ 129Xe 9: 129Xe* ⫹ n

(␴ ⫽ 4 b)

(␴ ⫽ 4 b)

(An inelastic scattering reaction is one in which the incident particle loses en-
ergy to the target nucleus, emerging from the reaction with less kinetic energy
but leaving the target in an excited state, here denoted by the asterisk.)

1“Barn” was introduced by the American physicists M. G. Holloway and C. P. Baker in 1942 in a hu-
morous twist. It served the purpose of a code word in concealing war work on reaction probabili-
ties and was appropriate because a cross section of 10⫺28 m2 really is “as big as the broad side of a
barn” for nuclear processes.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

508

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Finally, an example of a nuclear reaction with a large scattering cross sec-
tion (104 b), and with a strongly energy-dependent cross section as well, is the
neutron capture reaction

n ⫹ 113Cd 9: 114Cd ⫹ ␥

(␴ ⫽ 104 b)

In this reaction, which has a high probability only for low-energy neutrons, the
cadmium target incorporates an extra neutron into its nucleus, is raised to an
excited state, and emits its excess energy by gamma decay. Figure 14.3 shows the
strong dependence of cross section on incident neutron energy in this case.

14.3 INTERACTIONS INVOLVING NEUTRONS

In  order  to  understand  the  process  of  nuclear  ﬁssion  and  the  physics  of  the
nuclear reactor, we must ﬁrst understand the manner in which neutrons inter-
act with nuclei. As mentioned earlier, because of their charge neutrality, neu-
trons are not subject to Coulomb forces. Since neutrons interact very weakly
with electrons, matter appears fairly transparent to neutrons. In general, one
ﬁnds that typical cross sections for neutron-induced reactions increase as the
neutron energy decreases. Free neutrons undergo beta decay with a mean life-
time of about 10 min. On the other hand, neutrons in matter are usually ab-
sorbed by nuclei before they decay.

When a fast neutron (one with an energy greater than about 1 MeV) moves
through matter, it undergoes scattering events with nuclei. In each such event,
the neutron gives up some of its kinetic energy to a nucleus. The neutron con-
tinues to undergo collisions until its energy is of the order of the thermal en-
ergy k BT, where k B is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature.
A  neutron  with  this  energy  is  called  a  thermal  neutron. At  this  low  energy,
there is a high probability that the neutron will be captured by a nucleus, as
can be seen for the case of Cd, shown in Figure 14.3. This neutron-capture

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

process can be written

14.3

INTERACTIONS INVOLVING NEUTRONS

509

(14.7)

Neutron-capture process

1
0n ⫹ A

ZX 9: A⫹1

Z X ⫹ ␥

Although we do not indicate it here, the nucleus X is in an excited state X* for
a very short time before it undergoes gamma decay. Also, the product nucleus
A
ZX is usually radioactive and may decay by ␣or ␤emission.

The  neutron-capture  cross  section  associated  with  the  preceding  process
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  target  nucleus  and  the  energy  of  the  incident
neutron. For some materials and for fast neutrons, the cross section is so small
that  elastic  collisions  dominate.  Materials  for  which  this  occurs  are  called
moderators, since they slow down (or moderate) the originally energetic neu-
trons very effectively. Boron, graphite, and water are a few examples of moder-
ator materials.

During an elastic collision between two particles, the maximum kinetic en-
ergy  is  transferred  from  one  particle  to  the  other  when  they  have  the  same
mass.  Consequently,  a  neutron  loses  all  of  its  kinetic  energy  when  it  collides
head-on with a proton, in analogy with the collision between a moving billiard
ball and a stationary one. If the collision is oblique, the neutron loses only part
of its kinetic energy. For this reason, materials which are abundant in hydro-
gen, such as parafﬁn and water, are good moderators for neutrons.

At  some  point,  many  of  the  neutrons  in  the  moderator  become  thermal
neutrons, which are neutrons in thermal equilibrium with the moderator ma-
terial. Their average kinetic energy at room temperature is

K av ⫽

3
2

k BT ⬇ 0.04 eV

which corresponds to a neutron root-mean-square speed of about 2800 m/s.
Thermal  neutrons  have  a  distribution  of  velocities  just  as  the  molecules  in  a
container of gas do. A high-energy neutron, whose energy is several MeV, will
thermalize (that is, reach K av) in less than 1 ms when incident on a moderator
such as graphite (carbon) or water.

EXAMPLE 14.2 Neutron Capture by Aluminum
An  aluminum  foil  of  thickness  0.30  mm  is  bombarded
by  energetic  neutrons.  The  aluminum  nuclei  undergo
neutron  capture  according  to  the  process  27Al(n, ␥)
28Al,  with  a  measured  capture  cross  section  of
2.0 ⫻ 10⫺3 b ⫽ 2.0 ⫻ 10⫺31 m2.  Assuming  the  flux  of
incident  neutrons  to  be  5.0 ⫻ 1012 neutrons/cm2 ⭈ s,
calculate the number of neutrons captured per second
by 1.0 cm2 of the foil.

Solution To  solve  this  problem,  we  must  ﬁrst  evaluate
the  density  of  nuclei  n (which  equals  the  density  of
atoms). Since the density of aluminum is 2.7 g/cm3 and
A ⫽ 27 for aluminum, we have
6.02 ⫻ 1023 nuclei/mol

⫻ 2.7

g
cm3

n ⫽

27 g/mol

⫽ 6.02 ⫻ 1022 nuclei/cm3 ⫽ 6.02 ⫻ 1028 nuclei/m3

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Substituting this value into Equation 14.4, together with
the given data for x and ␴, gives

R
R0

⫽ ␴nx

⫽ (2.0 ⫻ 10⫺31 m2)(6.02 ⫻ 1028 nuclei/m3)

(0.30 ⫻ 10⫺3 m) ⫽ 3.6 ⫻ 10⫺6
Since  the  rate  of  incident  particles  per  unit  area  is 
R 0 ⫽ 5.0 ⫻ 1012 neutrons/cm2 ⭈ s,

R ⫽ (5.0 ⫻ 1012 neutrons/cm2 ⭈s)(3.6 ⫻ 10⫺6)

⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 107 neutrons/cm2 ⭈s

Therefore, 
the  number  of  neutrons  captured  by
1.0 cm2/s  is  only  1.8 ⫻ 107 neutrons,  whereas  the  inci-
dent number is 5.0 ⫻ 1012 neutrons. That is, only about
4 neutrons out of 1 million are captured!

510

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

14.4 NUCLEAR FISSION
Nuclear  ﬁssion occurs when a very heavy nucleus such as  235U splits, or ﬁs-
sions,  into  two  particles  of  comparable  mass.  In  such  a  reaction,  the  total
mass of the product particles is less than the original mass. Fission is ini-
tiated by the capture of a thermal neutron by a heavy nucleus and involves the
release of about 200 MeV per ﬁssion. This energy release occurs because the
smaller ﬁssion-product nuclei are more tightly bound by about 1 MeV per nu-
cleon than the original heavy nucleus.

The  process  of  nuclear  ﬁssion  was  ﬁrst  observed  in  1938  by  Otto  Hahn
(1879–1968, German chemist), Lise Meitner (1878–1968, Austrian physicist),
and  Fritz  Strassmann  (1902–1980,  German  chemist),  following  some  basic
studies by Fermi concerning the interaction of thermal neutrons with uranium.
After bombarding uranium (Z ⫽ 92) with neutrons, Hahn and Strassmann per-
formed a chemical analysis and discovered among the products two medium-
mass  elements,  barium  and  lanthanum.  Shortly  thereafter,  Lise  Meitner  and
her nephew Otto Frisch (1904–1979, German-British physicist) explained what
had  happened  and  coined  the  term  ﬁssion.  The  uranium  nucleus  could  split
into nearly equal fragments after absorbing a neutron. Measurements showed
that about 200 MeV of energy was released in each ﬁssion event.

The ﬁssion of 235U by thermal neutrons can be represented by

Fission of 235U

1
0n ⫹ 235

92U 9: 236

92U* 9: X ⫹ Y ⫹ neutrons

(14.8)
where 236U* is an intermediate excited state that lasts for only about 10⫺12 s
before splitting into X and Y. The resulting nuclei X and Y are called ﬁssion
fragments. There are many combinations of X and Y that satisfy the require-
ments of conservation of mass – energy, charge, and nucleon number. Figure
14.4 shows the actual mass distribution of fragments in the ﬁssion of 235U. The

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.4

NUCLEAR FISSION

511

10

1

)

%

(
 
d
l
e
i
y
 
n
o
i
s
s
i
F

10–1

10–2

10–3

70

90

110
130
Mass number A

150

170

Figure  14.4 The distribution of ﬁssion products versus mass number for the ﬁssion
of 235U bombarded with slow neutrons. Note that the ordinate has a logarithmic scale.

process  results  in  the  production  of  several  neutrons,  typically  two  or  three.
On the average, about 2.5 neutrons are released per event. A typical reaction
of this type is

0n ⫹ 235
1

92U 9: 141

56Ba ⫹ 92

36Kr ⫹ 31
0n

(14.9)

Of  the  200 MeV  or  so  released  in  this  reaction,  most  goes  into  the  kinetic
energy of the heavy fragments barium and krypton.

The breakup of the uranium nucleus can be compared to what happens to
a drop of water when excess energy is added to it. All the atoms in the drop
have energy, but not enough to break up the drop. However, if enough energy
is added to set the drop into vibration, it undergoes elongation and compres-
sion until the amplitude of vibration becomes large enough to cause the drop
to break. In the uranium nucleus, a similar process occurs. Figure 14.5 shows
various stages of the nucleus as the result of neutron capture. The sequence of
events for 235U can be described as follows:

1. The 235U nucleus captures a thermal (slow-moving) neutron.
2. This capture results in the formation of 236U*, and the excess energy of

this nucleus causes it to undergo violent oscillations.

3. The 236U* nucleus becomes highly distorted, and the force of repulsion
between  protons  in  the  two  halves  of  the  dumbbell  shape  tends  to  in-
crease the distortion.

4. The nucleus splits into two fragments, emitting several neutrons in the

process.

As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  14.4,  the  most  probable  ﬁssion  events  corres-
pond to  ﬁssion  fragments  with  mass  numbers  A ⬇ 140  and  A ⬇ 95.  These

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

512

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

235U

236U*

X

Y

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Figure  14.5 The  stages  in  a  nuclear  ﬁssion  event  as  described  by  the  liquid-drop
model of the nucleus.

fragments, which share the protons and neutrons of the mother nucleus, both
fall on the neutron-rich side of the stability line in Figure 13.4 (Chapter 13).
Since  fragments  that  have  a  large  excess  of  neutrons  are  unstable,  the 
neutron-rich fragments almost instantaneously release two or three neutrons.
The  remaining  fragments  are  still  rich  in  neutrons  and  proceed  to  decay  to
more stable nuclei through a succession of beta decays. In the process of such
decays, gamma rays are also emitted by nuclei in excited states.

Let  us  estimate  the  disintegration  energy  Q released  in  a  typical  ﬁssion
process.  From  Figure  13.10  we  see  that  the  binding  energy  per  nucleon  for
heavy  nuclei  (A ⬇ 240)  is  about  7.6 MeV,  whereas  in  the  intermediate  mass
range,  the  binding  energy  per  nucleon  is  about  8.5 MeV.  Taking  the  mass
number of the mother nucleus to be A ⫽ 240, we see that the energy released
per nucleon is estimated to be

Q ⫽ (240 nucleons)冢8.5

MeV

nucleon

⫺ 7.6

MeV

nucleon 冣 ⫽ 200 MeV

About 85% of this energy appears in the form of kinetic energy in the heavy
fragments. This energy is very large compared to the energy released in chem-
ical  processes.  For  example,  the  energy  released  in  the  combustion  of  one
molecule of octane used in gasoline engines is about one-millionth the energy
released in a single uranium ﬁssion event!

EXAMPLE 14.3 The Fission of Uranium
In addition to the barium – lanthanum reaction observed
by Meitner and Frisch and the barium– krypton reaction
of  Equation  14.9,  two  other  ways  in  which  235U  can  ﬁs-
sion when bombarded with a neutron are (1) by forming
140Xe  and  94Sr  and  (2)  by  forming  132Sn  and  101Mo.  In
each  case,  neutrons  are  also  released.  Find  the  number
of neutrons released in each event.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Solution By balancing mass numbers and atomic num-
bers, we ﬁnd that these reactions can be written
38Sr ⫹ 2(1
0n)
42Mo ⫹ 3(1
0n)

92U 9: 140
92U 9: 132

0n ⫹ 235
1
0n ⫹ 235
1

54Xe ⫹ 94
50Sn ⫹ 101

Thus two neutrons are released in the ﬁrst reaction and
three in the second.

 

EXAMPLE 14.4 The Energy Released 
in the Fission of 235U

Calculate the total energy released if 1.00 kg of 235U un-
dergoes ﬁssion,  taking  the  disintegration  energy  per
event  to  be  Q ⫽ 208 MeV  (a  more  accurate  value  than
the estimate given before).

Solution We  need  to  know  the  number  of  nuclei  in
1 kg of uranium. Since A ⫽ 235, the number of nuclei is

6.02 ⫻ 1023 nuclei/mol

N ⫽

235 g/mol
⫽ 2.56 ⫻ 1024 nuclei

 (1.00 ⫻ 103 g)

Hence the disintegration energy is

E ⫽ NQ ⫽ (2.56 ⫻ 1024 nuclei) 冢208
⫽ 5.32 ⫻ 1026 MeV

MeV

nucleus 冣

14.5

NUCLEAR REACTORS

513

that  the  incident  neutron  provides  a  few  MeV  of  excita-
tion  energy  to  separate  the  Ba  and  Kr  nuclei  within  the
uranium  nucleus  so  that  the  two  fragments  141
56Ba  and
92
36Kr are driven apart by Coulomb repulsion. We also ne-
glect  the  small  amount  of  kinetic  energy  (several  MeV)
carried off by the neutrons produced in the reaction.

Solution First we calculate the separation, r, of the Ba
and Kr nuclei at which the nuclear force between them
falls to zero. This is r ⬵ r Ba ⫹ r Kr, where r Ba and r Kr are
the  nuclear  radii  of  Ba  and  Kr  given  by  Equation  13.1.
Thus

r Ba ⫽ (1.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m)(141)1/3 ⫽ 6.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
r Kr ⫽ (1.2 ⫻ 10⫺15 m)(92)1/3 ⫽ 5.4 ⫻ 10⫺15 m

r ⬵ 12 ⫻ 10⫺15 m

Since 1 MeV is equivalent to 4.14 ⫻ 10⫺20 kWh, we ﬁnd
that E ⫽ 2.37 ⫻ 107 kWh. If this amount of energy were
released  suddenly,  it  would  be  equivalent  to  detonating
20,000 tons of TNT!

Next  calculate  the  Coulomb  potential  energy  for  two
charges of  Z 1 ⫽ 56 and  Z 2 ⫽ 36 separated by a distance
of 12 fm. The potential energy of the two nuclei on the
brink of separation is

EXAMPLE 14.5 A Rough Mechanism 

for the Fission Process
92U ⫹ n : 141

Consider the ﬁssion reaction 235
36Kr ⫹
21
0n.  Show  that  the  model  of  the  ﬁssion  process  in
which an excited 235
92U nucleus elongates enough to over-
come  attractive  nuclear  forces  and  separates  into  two
charged  fragments  can  be  used  to  estimate  the  energy
released in this ﬁssion process. In this model, we assume

56Ba ⫹ 92

U ⫽

k(Z1e)(Z2e)

r

⫽

(1.440 eV ⭈nm)(56)(36)

12 ⫻ 10⫺15 m

⫽ 240 MeV

As  the  two  fragments  separate,  this  potential  energy  is
converted to an amount of kinetic energy consistent with
the total measured energy release of about 200 MeV. This
shows that the simple ﬁssion mechanism suggested here
is plausible.

14.5 NUCLEAR REACTORS
In the last section we saw that when 235U ﬁssions, an average of 2.5 neutrons
are emitted per event. These neutrons can in turn trigger other nuclei to ﬁs-
sion, with the possibility of a chain reaction (Fig. 14.6). Calculations show that
if the chain reaction is not controlled (that is, if it does not proceed slowly), it
can result in a violent explosion, with the release of an enormous amount of
energy. For example, if the energy in 1 kg of 235U were released, it would be
equivalent  to  detonating  about  20,000  tons  of  TNT!  This,  of  course,  is  the
principle behind the ﬁrst nuclear bomb, an uncontrolled ﬁssion reaction.

A  nuclear  reactor  is  a  system  designed  to  maintain  what  is  called  a  self-
sustained chain reaction. This important process was ﬁrst achieved in 1942
by Fermi at the University of Chicago, with natural uranium as the fuel (Fig.
14.7).  Most  reactors  in  operation  today  also  use  uranium  as  fuel.  Natural
uranium  contains  only  about  0.7%  of  the  235U  isotope,  with  the  remaining
99.3%  being  238U.  This  fact  is  important  for  the  operation  of  a  reactor,
because 238U  almost  never  ﬁssions.  Instead,  it  tends  to  absorb  neutrons,

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

514

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

235U

Fragments

Neutron

Figure  14.6 A  nuclear  chain  reaction  initiated  by  the  capture  of  a  neutron.  (Many
pairs of different isotopes are produced.)

Chain reaction

producing neptunium and plutonium. For this reason, reactor fuels must be
artiﬁcially enriched to contain at least a few percent 235U.

To achieve a self-sustained chain reaction, on average one of the neutrons
emitted in  235U ﬁssion must be captured by another  235U nucleus and cause
it to  undergo  ﬁssion.  A  useful  parameter  for  describing  the  level  of  reactor

Figure  14.7 A  sketch  of  the  world’s ﬁrst  reactor,  which  was  composed  of  layers  of
graphite  interspersed  with  uranium.  (Because  of  wartime  secrecy,  there  are  no  pho-
tographs of the completed reactor.) The ﬁrst self-sustained chain reaction was achieved
on December 2, 1942. Word of the success was telephoned immediately to Washington,
D.C., in the form of this coded message: “The Italian navigator has landed in the New
World and found the natives very friendly.” The historic event took place in an impro-
vised  laboratory  in  the  racquet  court  under  the  west  stands  of  the  University  of
Chicago’s Stagg Field, and the Italian navigator guiding the work was Fermi.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.5

NUCLEAR REACTORS

515

operation is the reproduction constant K, deﬁned as the average number of
neutrons from each ﬁssion event that actually cause another ﬁssion event. As
we have seen, K can have a maximum value of 2.5 in the ﬁssion of uranium. In
practice, however, K is less than this because of several factors, to be discussed.
A  self-sustained  chain  reaction  is  achieved  when  K ⫽ 1.  Under  this  condi-
tion  the  reactor  is  said  to  be  critical. When K ⬍ 1,  the  reactor  is  subcritical
and the reaction dies out. When K is substantially greater than unity, the reac-
tor is said to be supercritical and a runaway reaction occurs. In a nuclear reac-
tor  run  by  a  utility  company  to  furnish  power,  it  is  necessary  to  maintain  a
value of K slightly greater than unity.

Figure 14.8 shows the basic ingredients of a nuclear reactor core. The fuel
elements consist of enriched uranium. The function of the remaining parts of
the reactor and some aspects of its design will now be described.

Neutron Leakage
In any reactor, a fraction of the neutrons produced in ﬁssion leak out of the
core  before  inducing  other  ﬁssion  events.  If  the  fraction  leaking  out  is  too
great, the reactor will not operate. The percentage lost is large if the reactor is
very small because leakage is a function of the ratio of surface area to volume.
Therefore, a critical feature of the design of a reactor is to choose the correct
surface-area-to-volume ratio so that a sustained reaction can be achieved.

Regulating Neutron Energies
Recall that the neutrons released in ﬁssion events are very energetic, having ki-
netic energies of about 2 MeV. It is necessary to slow these neutrons to ther-
mal energies to allow them to be captured and produce ﬁssion of other 235U
nuclei,  because  the  probability  of  neutron-induced  ﬁssion  increases  with  de-
creasing energy, as shown in Figure 14.9. The energetic neutrons are slowed
down by a moderator substance surrounding the fuel, as shown in Figure 14.8.

Reproduction constant

Control

rods

Radiation

shield

Fuel elements

Moderator
material

Figure  14.8 A  cross  section  of
a  reactor  core  showing  the  con-
trol  rods,  fuel  elements,  and
moderating material surrounded
by a radiation shield.

Neutron Capture
In the process of being slowed down, neutrons may be captured by nuclei that
do  not  ﬁssion.  The  most  common  event  of  this  type  is  neutron  capture  by
238U,  which  constitutes  over  90%  of  the  uranium  in  the  fuel  elements.  The
probability  of  neutron  capture  by  238U  is  very  high  when  the  neutrons  have
high kinetic energies and very low when they have low kinetic energies. Thus
the slowing down of the neutrons by the moderator serves the secondary pur-
pose  of  making  them  available  for  reaction  with  235U  and  decreasing  their
chances of being captured by 238U.

1000

100

10

1

0.1

)
b
(
 
n
o

i
t
c
e
s
 
s
s
o
r
c
 
n
o
i
s
s
i
F
U
5
3
2

 

235U

Control of Power Level
It is possible for a reactor to reach the critical stage (K ⫽ 1) after all the neu-
tron losses just described are minimized. However, some method of control is
needed to maintain a K value near unity. If K were to rise above this value, the
heat produced in the runaway reaction would melt the reactor. To control the
power  level,  control  rods  are  inserted  into  the  reactor  core  (see  Fig.  14.8).
These rods are made of materials such as cadmium that absorb neutrons very

0.01

10–2

1

102

104 106

Neutron energy (eV)

Figure 14.9 The cross section
for  neutron-induced  ﬁssion  of
235U.  The  average  cross  section
for room-temperature neutrons
is about 500 b.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

516

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Control rod

Uranium
fuel rod

Nuclear
reactor

Liquid water
under high
pressure
(carries
heat to steam
generator)

Steam turbine
(generates electricity)

+
–

Steam
Stea

Condenser (steam from turbine
Condenser (steam from 
turbine
is condensed by cold water)

Heat
Heat
exchanger
exchange

Pump

Containment
vessel

Cold water

Warm water

Figure 14.10 Main components of a pressurized-water reactor.

efﬁciently (see Fig. 14.3). By adjusting the number and position of these con-
trol  rods  in  the  reactor  core,  the  K value  can  be  varied  and  any  power  level
within the design range of the reactor can be achieved.

Although there are several types of reactor that convert the kinetic energy
of ﬁssion fragments to electrical energy, the most common type in use in the
United States is the pressurized-water reactor (Fig. 14.10). Its main parts are
common to all reactor designs. Fission events in the reactor core supply heat
to  the  water  contained  in  the  primary  (closed)  loop,  which  is  maintained  at
high pressure to keep it from boiling. This water also serves as the moderator.
The  hot  water  is  pumped  through  a  heat  exchanger,  and  the  heat  is  trans-
ferred to the water contained in the secondary loop. The hot water in the sec-
ondary loop is converted to steam, which drives a turbine-generator system to
create  electric  power.  Note  that  the  water  in  the  secondary  loop  is  isolated
from the water in the primary loop to prevent contamination of the secondary
water and steam by radioactive nuclei from the reactor core.

Safety and Waste Disposal
The 1979 near-disaster at a nuclear power plant on Three Mile Island in Pennsyl-
vania and the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl reactor in the Ukraine rightfully
focused attention on reactor safety. The Three Mile Island accident was the result
of  inadequate  control-room  instrumentation  and  poor  emergency-response
training.  There  were  no  injuries  or  detectable  health  impacts  from  the  event,
even though more than one-third of the fuel melted. This unfortunately was not
the case at Chernobyl, where the activity of the materials released immediately
after the accident totaled approximately 1.2 ⫻ 1019 Bq and resulted in the evacu-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.6

NUCLEAR FUSION

517

ation  of  135,000  people.  Thirty  individuals  died  during  the  accident  or  shortly
thereafter  and  data  from  the  Ukraine  Radiological  Institute  suggest  that  more
than 2,500 deaths could be attributed to the Chernobyl accident. In the period
1986–1997 there was a tenfold increase in the number of children contracting
thyroid cancer from the ingestion of radioactive iodine in milk from cows that
ate contaminated grass. One conclusion of an international conference studying
the Ukraine accident was that the main causes of the Chernobyl accident were
the  coincidence  of  severe  deﬁciencies  in  the  reactor  design  and  a  violation  of
safety  procedures.  Most  of  these  deﬁciencies  have  been  addressed  at  plants  of
similar design in Russia and neighboring countries of the former Soviet Union.

Commercial reactors achieve safety through careful design, rigid operating
protocol,  and  thorough  emergency-response  training  of  operators.  It  is  only
when these variables are compromised that reactors pose a danger. Radiation
exposure and the potential health risks associated with such exposure are con-
trolled by three layers of containment. The fuel and radioactive ﬁssion prod-
ucts are contained inside the reactor vessel. Should this vessel rupture, the re-
actor  building  acts  as  a  second  containment  structure  to  prevent  radioactive
material  from  contaminating  the  environment.  Finally,  the  reactor  facilities
must  be  in  a  remote  location  to  protect  the  general  public  from  exposure
should radiation escape the reactor building.

A continuing concern about nuclear ﬁssion reactors is the safe disposal of
radioactive  material  when  the  reactor  core  is  replaced.  Even  when  the  ura-
nium and plutonium are separated out and recycled, the remaining waste ma-
terial contains long-lived, highly radioactive isotopes that must be stored over
long time intervals in such a way that there is no chance of environmental con-
tamination. At present, sealing radioactive wastes in waterproof containers and
burying them in deep salt mines seems to be the most promising solution.

Transport  of  reactor  fuel  and  reactor  wastes  poses  additional  safety  risks.
Accidents during transport of nuclear fuel could expose the public to harmful
levels  of  radiation.  To  minimize  these  dangers,  the  Department  of  Energy
requires stringent crash tests of all containers used to transport nuclear mate-
rials. Container manufacturers must demonstrate that their containers will not
rupture even in high-speed collisions.

Despite these risks, there are advantages to the use of nuclear power to be
weighed against the risks. For example, nuclear power plants do not produce
air pollution and greenhouse gases as do fossil fuel plants, and the supply of
uranium on the Earth is predicted to last longer than the supply of fossil fuels.
For each source of energy, whether nuclear, hydroelectric, fossil fuel, wind, or
solar, the risks must be weighed against the beneﬁts and the regional availabil-
ity  of  the  energy  source.  Thus,  thoughtful  use  of  a  variety  of  energy  sources
and increased emphasis on energy conservation methods appear to be logical
components of a sensible energy policy.

14.6 NUCLEAR FUSION

In Chapter 13 we found that the binding energy for light nuclei (those having
mass numbers less than 20) is much smaller than the binding energy for heav-
ier nuclei. This suggests a process that is the reverse of ﬁssion, called nuclear
fusion. Fusion  occurs when  two  light  nuclei  combine  to  form  a  heavier
nucleus. Because the mass of the ﬁnal nucleus is less than the combined rest

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

518

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

masses of the original nuclei, a loss of mass occurs, accompanied by a release
of  energy.  The  following  are  examples  of  such  energy-liberating  fusion  reac-
tions occuring in the Sun:
1H ⫹ 1
1
1
1H ⫹ 2

1H 9: 2
1H 9: 3

1H ⫹ 0
2He ⫹ ␥

1e⫹ ⫹ ␯

(14.10)

This second reaction is followed by one of the following reactions:

1
1H ⫹ 3
3
2He ⫹ 3

2H 9: 4
2He 9: 4

2He ⫹ 0
2He ⫹ 1

1e⫹ ⫹ ␯
1H ⫹ 1
1H

These are the basic reactions in what is called the  proton – proton  cycle, be-
lieved to be one of the basic cycles by which energy is generated in the Sun and
other stars that have an abundance of hydrogen. Most of the energy produc-
tion takes place in the Sun’s interior, where the temperature is approximately
1.5 ⫻ 107 K. As we will see later, such high temperatures are required to drive
these  reactions  that  they  are  called  thermonuclear  fusion  reactions. The
hydrogen (fusion) bomb, which was ﬁrst exploded in 1952, is an example of an
uncontrolled  thermonuclear  fusion  reaction.  All  of  the  reactions  in  the 
proton–proton cycle are exothermic—that is, they involve a release of energy.
An  overall  view  of  the  proton–proton  cycle  is  that  four  protons  combine  to
form an alpha particle and two positrons, with the release of 25 MeV of energy.

Fusion Reactions
The enormous amount of energy released in fusion reactions suggests the pos-
sibility  of  harnessing  this  energy  for  useful  purposes  here  on  Earth.  A  great
deal of effort is currently directed toward developing a sustained and control-
lable thermonuclear reactor — a fusion power reactor. Controlled fusion is of-
ten  called  the  ultimate  energy  source  because  of  the  availability  of  its  fuel
source:  water.  For  example,  if  deuterium  were  used  as  the  fuel,  0.12 g  of  it
could be extracted from 1 gal of water at a cost of about 4 cents. Such rates
would make the fuel costs of even an inefﬁcient reactor almost insigniﬁcant.
An additional advantage of fusion reactors is that comparatively few radioac-
tive by-products are formed. For the proton – proton cycle described earlier in
this section, the end product of the fusion of hydrogen nuclei is safe, nonra-
dioactive  helium.  Unfortunately,  a  thermonuclear  reactor  that  can  deliver  a
net power output spread out over a reasonable time interval is not yet a reality,
even though research has been in progress since the 1950s. Many difﬁculties
must be resolved before a successful device is constructed.

We have seen that the Sun’s energy is based, in part, upon a set of reactions
in which hydrogen is converted to helium. Unfortunately, the proton – proton
interaction is not suitable for use in a fusion reactor, because this reaction re-
quires very high pressures and densities. The process works in the Sun only be-
cause of the extremely high density of protons in the Sun’s interior.

The  fusion  reactions  that  appear  most  promising  for  a  terrestrial  fusion

power reactor involve deuterium (2

1H) and tritium (3

1H):

1H ⫹ 2
2
2
1H ⫹ 2
2
1H ⫹ 3

1H 9: 3
1H 9: 3
1H 9: 4

2He ⫹ 1
0n
1H ⫹ 1
1H
2He ⫹ 1
0n

Q ⫽ 3.27 MeV

Q ⫽ 4.03 MeV

Q ⫽ 17.59 MeV

(14.11)

Thermonuclear reactions

U(r )

Coulomb
repulsion

R

r

Nuclear
attraction

Figure 14.11 Potential energy
as  a 
function  of  separation
between  two  deuterons.  The
Coulomb repulsive force is dom-
inant at long range, whereas the
nuclear attractive force is domi-
nant  at  short  range,  where  R is
of the order of several fermi.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.6

NUCLEAR FUSION

519

As noted earlier, deuterium is available in almost unlimited quantities from our
lakes  and  oceans  and  is  very  inexpensive  to  extract.  Tritium,  however,  is
radioactive (T1/2 ⫽ 12.3 yr) and undergoes beta decay to 3He. As a result, tritium
does not occur naturally to any great extent and must be artiﬁcially produced.

One of the major problems in obtaining energy from any fusion reaction is
the fact that the Coulomb repulsion force between two charged nuclei must
be overcome before they can fuse. The potential energy as a function of parti-
cle  separation  for  two  deuterons  (each  with  charge ⫹e)  is  shown  in  Figure
14.11.  The  potential  energy  is  positive  in  the  region  r ⬎ R,  where  the
Coulomb repulsive force dominates, and negative in the region r ⬍ R, where
the  strong  nuclear  force  dominates.  The  fundamental  problem,  then,  is  to
give the two nuclei enough kinetic energy to overcome this repulsive potential
barrier. This can be accomplished by heating the fuel to extremely high tem-
peratures (about 108 K, far greater than the interior temperature of the Sun).
At these high temperatures, the atoms are ionized and the system consists of a
collection of electrons and nuclei, commonly referred to as a plasma.

High temperatures are
required to overcome the
large Coulomb barrier

EXAMPLE 14.6 The Fusion of Two Deuterons
The  separation  between  two  deuterons  must  be  about
1.0 ⫻ 10⫺14 m  for  the  attractive  nuclear  force  to  over-
come  the  repulsive  Coulomb  force.  (a)  Calculate  the
height of the potential barrier due to the repulsive force.

Solution The  potential  energy  associated  with  two
charges separated by a distance r is

U ⫽ k

q1q 2

r

where k is  the  Coulomb  constant.  For  the  case  of  two
deuterons, q1 ⫽ q 2 ⫽ ⫹e, so

U ⫽ k

C2 冣 (1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C)2

1.0 ⫻ 10⫺14 m

e 2
r

⫽ 冢8.99 ⫻ 109 N ⭈m2
⫽ 2.3 ⫻ 10⫺14 J ⫽ 0.14 MeV

(b)  Estimate  the  effective  temperature  required  for  a
deuteron to overcome the potential barrier, assuming an
energy  of  k BT per  deuteron  (where  k B is  Boltzmann’s
constant).

3
2

Solution Since  the  total  Coulomb  energy  of  the  pair
of deuterons  is  0.14 MeV,  the  Coulomb  energy  per
deuteron is 0.07 MeV ⫽ 1.1 ⫻ 10⫺14 J. Setting this equal
to the average thermal energy per deuteron gives

3
2 k BT ⫽ 1.1 ⫻ 10⫺14 J

where k B is equal to 1.38 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K. Solving for T gives

T ⫽

2 ⫻ (1.1 ⫻ 10⫺14 J)

3 ⫻ (1.38 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K)

⫽ 5.3 ⫻ 108 K

Example 14.6 suggests that deuterons must be heated to about 5 ⫻ 108 K to
achieve  fusion.  This  estimate  of  the  required  temperature  is  too  high,  how-
ever, because the particles in the plasma have a Maxwellian speed distribution,
and therefore some fusion reactions are caused by particles in the high-energy
“tail”  of  this  distribution.  Furthermore,  even  the  particles  without  enough
energy  to  overcome  the  barrier  have  some  probability  of  tunneling  through
the barrier. When these effects are taken into account, a temperature of “only”
4 ⫻ 108 K appears adequate to fuse two deuterons.

The temperature at which the power generation rate exceeds the loss rate
(due  to  mechanisms  such  as  radiation  losses)  is  called  the  critical  ignition
temperature. This  temperature  for  the  deuterium – deuterium  (D – D)  reac-
tion  is  4 ⫻ 108 K.  According  to  E ⬵ k BT,  this  temperature  is  equivalent  to
approximately  35 keV.  It  turns  out  that  the  critical  ignition  temperature  for
the  deuterium – tritium  (D – T)  reaction  is  about  4.5 ⫻ 107 K,  or  only  4 keV.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Critical ignition temperature

520

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

108

107

106

105

)
3
m
/
W

(
 
r
e
w
o
P

104

10
0.9

Pgen(D–T)

Pgen(D–D)

Plost

45
3.9

100
8.5

400
35

1000
86

T (× 106 K)
k BT (keV)

Figure  14.12 Power  generated  (or  lost)  versus  temperature  for  the  deuterium –
deuterium  and  deuterium – tritium  fusion  reactions.  When  the  generation  rate  Pgen
exceeds the loss rate P lost, ignition takes place.

Figure  14.12  is  a  plot  of  the  power  generated  by  fusion,  Pgen,  versus  tem-
perature  for  the  two  reactions.  The  straight  line  represents  the  power  lost,
via the  radiation  mechanism  known  as  bremsstrahlung, versus  tempera-
ture. This  is  the  principal  mechanism  of  energy  loss,  in  which  radiation
(primarily x-ray) is emitted as the result of electron– ion collisions within the
plasma.2 The intersections of the Plost line with the Pgen curves give the critical
ignition temperatures.

In  addition  to  the  high  temperature  requirements,  there  are  two  other
critical parameters that determine whether or not a thermonuclear reactor
will  be  successful:  the  ion  density, n,  and  conﬁnement  time, ␶. The
conﬁnement  time  is  the  period  for  which  the  interacting  ions  are
maintained  at  a  temperature  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  ignition
temperature. The  British  physicist  J.  D.  Lawson  has  shown  that  the  ion
density  and  conﬁnement  time  must  both  be  large  enough  to  ensure  that
more  fusion  energy  is  released  than  is  required  to  heat  the  plasma.  In
particular,  Lawson’s  criterion  states  that  a  net  energy  output  is  possible
under the following conditions:

n␶ ⱖ 1014 s/cm3
n␶ ⱖ 1016 s/cm3

(D – T)

(D – D)

(14.12)

Figure 14.13 is a graph of n␶ versus the so-called kinetic temperature k BT for
the D – T and D – D reactions.

Lawson  arrived  at  his  criterion  by  comparing  the  energy  required  to
heat the plasma with the energy generated by the fusion process. The energy
Eh required  to  heat  the  plasma  is  proportional  to  the  ion  density  n;  that  is,
Eh ⫽ D1n. The energy generated by the fusion process, E gen, is proportional to
n2␶,  or  Egen ⫽ D2n2␶.  This  can  be  understood  by  realizing  that  the  fusion
energy released is proportional to both the rate at which interacting ions col-
lide, n2, and the conﬁnement time, ␶. Net energy is produced when the energy
generated  by  fusion,  Egen,  exceeds  Eh.  When  the  constants  D1 and D 2 are

2Cyclotron radiation is another loss mechanism; it is especially important in the case of the D– D
reaction.

Conﬁnement time

Lawson’s criterion

D–D

D–T

1

10

100 1000

)
3
m
c
/
s
(

τ
n

1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013

0.1

Kinetic temperature (keV)

Figure  14.13 The  Lawson
number n␶ at which net energy
output  is  possible  versus  tem-
perature for the D – T and D – D
fusion  reactions.  The  regions
above  the  curves  represent  fa-
vorable conditions for fusion.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.6

NUCLEAR FUSION

521

Requirements for a fusion
power reactor

calculated  for  different  reactions,  the  condition  that  Egen ⱖ Eh leads  to  Law-
son’s criterion.3

In  summary,  the  three  basic  requirements  of  a  successful  thermonuclear

power reactor are

• The  plasma  temperature  must  be  very  high — about  4.5 ⫻ 107 K  for  the

D – T reaction and about 4 ⫻ 108 K for the D – D reaction.

• The ion density must be high. A high density of interacting nuclei is nec-

essary to increase the collision rate between particles.

• The conﬁnement time of the plasma must be long. To meet Lawson’s cri-
terion, the product n␶ must be large. For a given value of n, the probabil-
ity of fusion between two particles increases as ␶increases.

Current  efforts  are  aimed  at  meeting  Lawson’s  criterion  at  temperatures
exceeding  the  critical  ignition  temperature.  Although  the  minimum  plasma
densities have been achieved, the problem of conﬁnement time is more difﬁ-
cult. How can a plasma be conﬁned at 108 K for 1 s? Two basic techniques for
conﬁning  plasmas  are  under  investigation:  magnetic  ﬁeld  conﬁnement  and
inertial conﬁnement.

Magnetic Field Conﬁnement
Many fusion-related plasma experiments use magnetic ﬁeld conﬁnement to
contain the charged plasma. Figure 14.14a shows a device called a tokamak,
ﬁrst developed in Russia. A combination of two magnetic ﬁelds is used to con-
ﬁne and stabilize the plasma: (1) a strong toroidal ﬁeld, produced by the cur-
rent  in  the  windings,  and  (2)  a  weaker  “poloidal” ﬁeld,  produced  by  the
toroidal current. The toroidal current heats the plasma in addition to conﬁn-
ing  it.  The  resultant  helical  ﬁeld  lines  spiral  around  the  plasma  and  keep  it
from touching the walls of the vacuum chamber. If the plasma comes into con-
tact with the walls, its temperature is reduced and heavy impurities sputtered
from  the  walls  “poison”  it  and  lead  to  large  power  losses.  One  of  the  major
breakthroughs in the 1980s was in the area of auxiliary heating to reach igni-
tion temperatures. Experiments have shown that injecting a beam of energetic
neutral  particles  into  the  plasma  is  a  very  efﬁcient  method  of  heating  the
plasma  to  ignition  temperatures  (5  to  10 keV).  Radio-frequency  heating  will
probably  be  needed  for  reactor-size  plasmas.  Figure  14.14b  shows  a  cutaway
view of the Princeton Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor. When it was in operation,
the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR) reported central ion temperatures
of  510  million  degrees  Celsius,  more  than  30  times  hotter  than  the  center
of the Sun. The n␶ values in the TFTR for the D – T reaction were well above
1013 s/cm3 and  close  to  the  value  required  by  Lawson’s  criterion.  By  the
late 1990s,  tokamaks  in  England  and  Japan  were  reporting  reaction  rates  of
1018 D – T fusions per second and n␶ values of 5 ⫻ 1013 s/cm3 at temperatures
of  30 keV.  Direct  measurements  showed  that  the  output  energy  slightly
exceeded the input energy to the plasma for brief periods.

3Note that Lawson’s criterion neglects the energy needed to set up the strong magnetic ﬁeld that
is used to conﬁne the hot plasma. This energy is expected to be about 20 times greater than the
energy required to heat the plasma. Consequently, it is necessary to have a magnetic energy re-
covery system or to make use of superconducting magnets.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

522

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Primary
windings
for ohmic
heating

Poloidal
field, Bp

Vacuum vessel

Shaping field

windings

Ports for

neutral injection

Toroidal
field coils

(a)

Plasma

Axial
current

Toroidal field, Bt

Current

for

toroidal

field
Resulting

helical field, B

(b)

Figure 14.14 (a) A schematic diagram of a tokamak used in magnetic conﬁnement.
The total magnetic ﬁeld B is the superposition of the toroidal ﬁeld Bt and the poloidal
ﬁeld Bp. The plasma is trapped within the spiraling ﬁeld lines as shown. (Adapted from
McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
1987.) (b) A cutaway view of the TFTR. (Courtesy of Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory)

One of the new generation of fusion experiments is the National Spherical
Torus  Experiment  (NSTX),  shown  in  Figure  14.15.  Rather  than  the  donut-
shaped plasma of a tokamak, the NSTX produces a spherical plasma that has a
hole through its center. The major advantage of the spherical conﬁguration is
its ability to conﬁne the plasma at a higher pressure in a given magnetic ﬁeld.
This approach could lead to development of smaller, more economical fusion
reactors.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.6

NUCLEAR FUSION

523

Figure  14.15 The  National  Spherical  Torus  Experiment  (NSTX)  that  began  opera-
tion in March 1999. (Courtesy of Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, Princeton University)

An international collaborative effort involving Canada, Europe, Japan, and
Russia is currently under way to build a fusion reactor called ITER (Interna-
tional  Thermonuclear  Experimental  Reactor).  China  and  the  United  States
began  to  participate  in  program  activities  in  early  2003.  This  facility  will  ad-
dress the remaining technological and scientiﬁc issues concerning the feasibil-
ity of fusion power. The design is completed, and site and construction negoti-
ations  are  under  way.  If  the  planned  device  works  as  expected,  the  Lawson
number  for  ITER  will  be  about  six  times  greater  than  the  current  record
holder, the JT-60U tokamak in Japan. ITER will produce 1.5 GW of power, and
the energy content of the alpha particles inside the reactor will be so intense
that they will sustain the fusion reaction, allowing the auxiliary energy sources
to be turned off once the reaction is initiated.

Inertial Conﬁnement
The  second  technique  for  conﬁning  a  plasma,  called  inertial  conﬁnement,
makes  use  of  a  D – T  target  that  has  a  very  high  particle  density  of  5 ⫻ 1025
particles/cm3, or a mass density of about 200 g/cm3. In this scheme, the con-
ﬁnement time is very short (typically 10⫺11 to 10⫺9 s), and so, because of their
own inertia, the particles do not have a chance to move appreciably from their
initial positions. Thus Lawson’s criterion can be satisﬁed by combining a high
particle density with a short conﬁnement time.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

524

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Expanding

plasma

Imploding
fuel pellet

Laser

radiation

Figure  14.16 In  the  inertial  conﬁnement  scheme,  a  D – T  fuel  pellet  fuses  when
struck by several high-intensity laser beams simultaneously and symmetrically.

Laser fusion is the most common form of inertial conﬁnement. A small
D – T  pellet  about  1  mm  in  diameter  is  struck  simultaneously  by  several
focused,  symmetrically  incident,  high-intensity  laser  beams,  resulting  in
a large  pulse  of  input  energy  that  causes  the  surface  of  the  fuel  pellet  to
evaporate  (Fig.  14.16).  The  escaping  particles  produce  a  reaction  force
on the  core  of  the  pellet,  resulting  in  a  strong,  inwardly  moving,  com-
pressive shock wave. This shock wave increases the pressure and density of
the core and produces a corresponding increase in temperature. When the
temperature  of  the  core  reaches  ignition  temperature,  fusion  reactions
cause  the  pellet  to  explode.  The  process  can  be  viewed  as  a  miniature  hy-
drogen bomb explosion.

Two  of  the  leading  laser  fusion  laboratories  in  the  United  States  are  the
Omega facility at the University of Rochester and the Nova facility at Lawrence
Livermore  National  Laboratory  in  California.  Both  facilities  use  neodymium
glass  lasers.  The  Omega  facility  focuses  60  laser  beams  on  a  target  chamber
about 3 m in diameter. Figure 14.17a shows the target at Omega, and Figure
14.17b shows the tiny, spherical D – T pellets used. Nova, operating at higher
input power levels than Omega, is capable of injecting a power of 200 kJ into a
0.5-mm D – T pellet in 1 ns. With these high input powers, Nova has achieved
n␶ ⬇ 5 ⫻ 1014 s/cm3 and  ion  temperatures  of  5.0 keV,  values  close  to  those
required for D – T ignition.

Fusion Reactor Design
In the D – T fusion reaction

1H ⫹ 3
2

1H 9: 4

2He ⫹ 1
0n

Q ⫽ 17.6 MeV

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.6

NUCLEAR FUSION

525

Images not available due to copyright restrictions

the alpha particle carries 20% of the energy and the neutron carries 80%,
or  about  14 MeV.  While  the  charged  alphas  are  primarily  absorbed  in
the plasma  and  produce  desired  additional  plasma  heating,  the  14-MeV
neutrons pass through the plasma and must be absorbed in a surrounding
blanket material to extract their large kinetic energy and generate electric
power.  A  frequently  proposed  scheme  is  to  use  molten  lithium  metal  as
the neutron-absorbing  material  and  to  circulate  the  lithium  in  a  closed
heat-exchanging loop to produce steam and drive turbines, as in a conven-
tional  power  plant.  Figure  14.18  is  a  diagram  of  such  a  fusion  reactor
system.  It  is  estimated  that  a  blanket  of  lithium  about  1  m  thick  would
capture nearly 100% of the neutrons from the fusion of a small D – T pellet,
not  only  absorbing  the  neutron  kinetic  energy  but  limiting  the  dangerous
neutron flux to nearby workers.

The capture of neutrons by lithium is described by the reaction

1
0n ⫹

6
3Li 9: 3

1H ⫹

4
2He

where the kinetic energies of the charged tritium and alpha particle products
are converted to heat in the lithium. An extra advantage of using lithium as
the  energy  transfer  medium  is  the  production  of  tritium,  3
1H,  which  may  be
separated from the lithium and returned as fuel to the reactor. The process is
indicated in the generic fusion reactor shown in Figure 14.18.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

526

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Deuterium

DT fuel 
injector

Purified tritium

Distilling unit

Shield

n

n

n

n

Neutrons

Input power
(laser, induced
currents, neutral
beam injection)

Li + T

Pure Li

Steam to 
turbine

1-m-thick
Li absorber

Hot Li + T

Cold
water

Figure 14.18 A generic fusion reactor.

Advantages and Problems of Fusion
If  fusion  power  can  be  harnessed,  it  will  offer  several  advantages  over  ﬁssion-
generated  power:  (1)  the  low  cost  and  abundance  of  the  fuel  (deuterium),
(2) the impossibility of runaway accidents, and (3) a lesser radiation hazard than
with ﬁssion.  Some  of  the  anticipated  problem  areas  include  (1)  the  as-yet-
unestablished  feasibility  of  fusion  reactors,  (2)  the  very  high  proposed  plant
costs, (3) the scarcity of lithium, (4) the limited supply of helium needed to cool
the superconducting magnets used to produce strong conﬁning ﬁelds (this prob-
lem may be signiﬁcantly reduced by the development of high-temperature super-
conductors), (5) structural damage and induced radioactivity caused by neutron
bombardment, and (6) the anticipated high degree of thermal pollution. If these
basic  problems  and  the  engineering  design  factors  can  be  resolved,  nuclear
fusion may become a feasible source of energy by the middle of the 21st century.

14.7 INTERACTION OF PARTICLES WITH MATTER

In this section we consider processes involving the interaction between ener-
getic particles and matter. We shall deal mainly with the interaction of charged
particles  and  photons  with  matter,  since  these  are  of  primary  importance  in
such factors as shielding characteristics, the design of particle detectors, and
biological effects.

Heavy Charged Particles
A heavy charged particle, such as an alpha particle or a proton, moving through
a solid, liquid, or gas travels a well-deﬁned distance before coming to rest. This
distance is called the range of the particle. As the particle passes through the

Range of a particle

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.7

INTERACTION OF PARTICLES WITH MATTER

527

)
m
(
 
e
g
n
a
r
 
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p
α

 

0.2

0.1

 particles

α

4

3

2

1

Protons

0

0

5

10

15
Energy in MeV

0
20

)
m
(
 
e
g
n
a
r
 
n
o
t
o
r
P

Figure 14.19 The range of al-
pha particles and protons in air
under 
conditions.
(From E. Segre, ed., Experimental
Nuclear  Physics,  Vol.  1, New
York, Wiley, 1953)

standard 

medium,  it  loses  energy,  primarily  through  the  excitation  and  ionization  of
atoms  in  the  medium.  Some  energy  is  also  lost  through  elastic  collisions  with
nuclei. The highly energetic particle loses its energy in many small increments,
and to a good approximation one can treat the problem as a continuous loss of
energy. At the end of its range, the particle is left with just the average thermal
energy of its surroundings. The range depends on the charge, mass, and energy
of the particle, the density of the medium through which it travels, and the ion-
ization potential and atomic number of the atoms in the medium.

The ranges of ␣ particles and protons in air as a function of their energy
are  plotted  in  Figure  14.19.  Note  that  for  a  given  energy,  the  proton  has
a range  about  10  times  that  of  the  ␣ particle.  This  is  because  the  proton
has less  charge  and  so  does  not  interact  with  the  medium  as  strongly  as  the
alpha particle. Furthermore, since the ␣ particle is more massive, it travels at
a lower  average  speed  for  a  given  energy.  As  a  result,  the  slower-moving  ␣
particle  loses  its  energy  more  readily,  since  it  has  more  time  to  interact  with
atoms in the medium.

Figure 14.20 shows the rate of energy loss per unit length (energy loss rate),
⫺dE/dx,  versus  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  charged  particle.  This  energy  loss
rate (also  called  the  stopping  power)  is  approximately  proportional  to  the
kinetic  energy  at  low  energies  (v ⬍⬍ c)  and  reaches  a  maximum  at  some
point.  At  very  high  energies  (as  v : c),  the  energy  loss  per  unit  length  is
approximately  energy  independent.  At  very  low  energies,  the  decrease  in
energy loss is a result of the fact that the particle is moving too slowly to pro-
duce ionization and loses its energy mainly by elastic collisions.

The  energy  loss  rate  is  approximately  proportional  to  the  density  of  the
medium through which the charged particles travel. This is explained by recog-
nizing that the primary energy loss mechanism (ionization) involves the excita-
tion  of  electrons  in  the  medium,  and  the  density  of  electrons  increases  with
increasing density of the medium. For example, the range in aluminum of pro-
tons having an energy of 1 to 10 MeV is about 1/1600 of their range in air.

Fission fragments with energies of about 80 MeV have a range of only about
0.02 m in air, which is about 1000 times smaller than the range of protons with
the  same  energy.  This  difference  is  due  to  the  greater  charge  of  the  ﬁssion
fragments  and  to  the  fact  that  the  energy  loss  rate  is  proportional  to  the
square of the charge.

–dE/dx

mc 2
Energy

10mc 2

Figure 14.20 The energy loss ⫺dE/dx versus the energy of a charged particle of mass
m moving through a medium.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

528

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Electrons
When an electron of energy less than about 1 MeV passes through matter, it
loses its energy by the same processes that occur for heavy charged particles.
However, the range of the electron is not as well deﬁned. Since an electron is
much smaller than a proton, there are large statistical variations in the elec-
tron’s path length as a result of a phenomenon called straggling. It takes only
a  few  large-deﬂection  collisions  to  stop  an  electron  in  matter.  Furthermore,
electrons  scatter  much  more  readily  than  heavy  charged  particles  with  the
same  energy.  As  we  mentioned  earlier,  a  decelerated  charged  particle  emits
electromagnetic  radiation  called  bremsstrahlung.  This  energy  loss  process  is
more important for electrons than for heavy charged particles, since low-mass
electrons  undergo  greater  accelerations  when  passing  through  matter.  For
example,  the  energy  loss  rate  due  to  bremsstrahlung  for  10-MeV  electrons
passing through lead is about equal to the loss rate due to ionization.

Photons
Since photons are uncharged, they are not as effective as charged particles in
producing  ionization  or  excitation  in  matter.  Nevertheless,  photons  can  be
removed from a beam by either scattering or absorption in the medium. Fig-
ure 14.21 illustrates the three important processes that contribute to the total
absorption of gamma rays in lead:

2.0

1.0

)
1
–

m
c
(
 
t
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
e
o
c
 
n
o
i
t
p
r
o
s
b
A

Total

Pair

production

Compton

effect

Photoelectric

effect

0
0.1

0.2

0.5

γ

1

2
-ray energy (MeV)

5

10

Figure  14.21 The  absorption  of  gamma  rays  in  lead.  Shown  are  the  three  important
absorption processes, which add up to the total absorption constant ␮, measured in cm⫺1.
(From W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation, 3rd ed., Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1954)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.7

INTERACTION OF PARTICLES WITH MATTER

529

Gamma-ray absorption

• At  low  photon  energies  (less  than  about  0.5 MeV),  the  predomi-
nant process  that  removes  photons  from  a  beam  is  the  photoelectric
effect,  in  which  a  photon  is  absorbed  and  transfers  all  of  its  energy
to an electron.

• At  intermediate  photon  energies,  the  predominant  process  is  Compton
scattering,  in  which  the  photon  transfers  some  of  its  energy  to  an  elec-
tron.  Both  the  photoelectric  effect  and  Compton  scattering  were  dis-
cussed in Chapter 3.

• At high energies, the predominant process is pair production, in which
an  electron – positron  pair  is  created  as  a  photon  passes  near  a  nucleus
in the  medium.  Since  the  rest  energy  of  an  electron – positron  pair  is
2mec 2 ⫽ 1.02  MeV (twice the rest energy of an electron), the gamma-ray
photon must have at least this much energy to produce a pair. Pair pro-
duction will be discussed further in Chapter 15.

If a beam of photons is incident on a medium, its intensity decreases expo-
nentially  with  increasing  depth  of  penetration  into  the  medium.  This  reduc-
tion in intensity is referred to as attenuation of the beam. As in the case of
neutrons (Eq. 14.5), the intensity in a medium varies according to the relation

I(x) ⫽ I 0e⫺␮x

(14.13)

Absorption of photons in a
medium

where I 0 is  the  incident  photon  intensity  (measured  in  photons/m2 ⭈ s), x is
the distance the beam travels in the medium, I(x) is the intensity of the beam
after it travels a distance x, and ␮ is a parameter called the linear absorption
coefﬁcient of  the  medium.  This  coefﬁcient  depends  on  the  energy  of  the
photon  as  well  as  on  the  properties  of  the  medium.  The  variation  of ␮ with
energy is shown in Figure 14.21 for gamma rays in lead and in Tables 14.2 and
14.3 for x-rays and gamma rays in various media.

Linear absorption coefﬁcient

Table 14.2 Linear Absorption Coefﬁcients for X-Rays 

in Various Media

Linear Absorption Coefﬁcient (cm⫺1)

␭ (pm)

Air

Water

Aluminum

Copper

Lead

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
150
200
250

0.16
0.18
0.29
0.44
0.66
1.0
1.5
2.1
2.8
3.8
12
28
51

0.43
0.76
1.3
3.0
5.4
9.2
14
20
30
41
124
275
524

8.6 ⫻ 10⫺4
1.3 ⫻ 10⫺3
1.95 ⫻ 10⫺3
2.73 ⫻ 10⫺3
3.64 ⫻ 10⫺3
4.94 ⫻ 10⫺3
1.56 ⫻ 10⫺2
3.64 ⫻ 10⫺2
6.63 ⫻ 10⫺2

43
55
158
350
610
1000
1600

3.2
13
38
87
170
286
430
625
875
1200

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

530

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Table 14.3 Linear Absorption Coefﬁcients for Gamma

Rays in Various Media

Linear Absorption Coefﬁcient (cm⫺1)a

Photon Energy (MeV)

Water

Aluminum

Iron

Lead

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.5
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
8.0
10.0

0.167
0.149
0.139
0.118
0.106
0.0967
0.0894
0.0786
0.0706
0.0576
0.0493
0.0396
0.0339
0.0302
0.0277
0.0242
0.0221

0.432
0.359
0.324
0.278
0.249
0.227
0.210
0.184
0.166
0.135
0.166
0.0953
0.0837
0.0767
0.0718
0.0656
0.0626

2.69
1.43
1.08
0.833
0.722
0.651
0.598
0.525
0.468
0.380
0.332
0.282
0.259
0.247
0.240
0.234
0.236

59.8
20.8
10.1
3.79
2.35
1.64
1.29
0.946
0.772
0.581
0.510
0.463
0.470
0.486
0.514
0.532
0.568

aCalculated  using  data  in  I.  Kaplan,  Nuclear  Physics, Reading,  MA.,  Addison-
Wesley, 1962, Table 15.6.

EXAMPLE 14.7 Half-Value Thickness
The  half-value  thickness  of  an  absorber  is  deﬁned  as
the thickness  that  will  reduce  the  intensity  of  a  beam
of particles  by  a  factor  of  2.  Calculate  the  half-value
thickness for lead, assuming an x-ray beam of wavelength
20 pm (1 pm ⫽ 10⫺12 m ⫽ 10⫺3 nm).

Solution The  intensity  varies  with  distance  traveled  in
the medium according to Equation 14.13:

I(x) ⫽ I 0e⫺␮x

In  this  case,  we  are  looking  for  a  value  of  x such  that
I(x) ⫽ I 0/2. That is, we require that

or

I 0
2

⫽ I 0e⫺␮x

e⫺␮x ⫽ 1
2

Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of this equa-
tion gives

or

␮x ⫽ ln 2

x ⫽

ln 2
␮

Since ␮ ⫽ 55 cm⫺1 for x rays in lead at a wavelength of
20 pm (Table 14.2),

x ⫽

ln 2

55 cm⫺1 ⫽

0.693

55 cm⫺1

⫽ 1.26 ⫻ 10⫺2 cm ⫽ 0.126 mm

Hence we conclude that lead is a very good absorber for
x-rays.

14.8 RADIATION DAMAGE IN MATTER

Radiation passing through matter can cause severe damage. The degree and
type of damage depend upon several factors, including the type and energy of
the radiation and the properties of the matter. For example, the metals used

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.8

RADIATION DAMAGE IN MATTER

531

in nuclear reactor structures can be severely weakened by high ﬂuxes of ener-
getic  neutrons,  because  these  high  ﬂuxes  often  lead  to  metal  fatigue.  The
damage in such situations is in the form of atomic displacements, which often
result  in  major  alterations  in  the  material  properties.  Materials  can  also  be
damaged by ionizing radiations, such as gamma rays and x-rays. For example,
defects called color centers can be produced in alkali halide crystals by irradi-
ating  the  crystals  with  x-rays.  One  extensively  studied  color  center  has  been
identiﬁed as an electron trapped in a Cl⫺ ion vacancy.

Radiation damage in biological organisms is due primarily to ionization ef-
fects in cells. The normal operation of a cell may be disrupted when highly re-
active ions or radicals form as the result of ionizing radiation. For example, hy-
drogen  and  hydroxyl  radicals  produced  from  water  molecules  can  induce
chemical  reactions  that  may  break  bonds  in  proteins  and  other  vital  mole-
cules. Furthermore, the ionizing radiation may directly affect vital molecules
by removing electrons from their structures. Large doses of radiation are espe-
cially  dangerous,  because  damage  to  a  great  number  of  molecules  in  a  cell
may kill the cell. Although the death of a single cell is usually not a problem,
the  death  of  many  cells  may  irreversibly  damage  the  organism.  Cells  that  di-
vide rapidly, such as those of the digestive tract, reproductive organs, and hair
follicles, are especially susceptible. Also, cells that do survive the radiation may
become defective. These defective cells can produce more defective cells when
they divide, leading to cancer.

In biological systems, it is common to separate radiation damage into two
categories:  somatic  and  genetic.  Somatic  damage is  the  damage  associated
with any body cell except the reproductive cells. At high dose rates, such dam-
age can lead to cancer or seriously alter the characteristics of speciﬁc organ-
isms. Genetic damage affects only reproductive cells. Damage to the genes in
reproductive  cells  can  lead  to  defective  offspring.  Clearly,  we  must  be  con-
cerned  about  the  effects  of  diagnostic  treatments  such  as  x  rays  and  other
forms of radiation exposure.

Several units are used to quantify the amount, or dose, of any radiation that

interacts with a substance.

The roentgen (R) is that amount of ionizing radiation that produces an
electric  charge  of  3.33 ⫻ 10⫺10 C  in  1  cm3 of  air  under  standard
conditions.

The roentgen

Equivalently, the roentgen is that amount of radiation that deposits an energy
of 8.76 ⫻ 10⫺3 J into 1 kg of air. For most applications, the roentgen has been
replaced by the rad (which is an acronym for radiation absorbed dose):

One rad is that amount of radiation that increases the energy of 1 kg of
absorbing material by 1 ⫻ 10⫺2 J.

The rad

Although the rad is a perfectly good physical unit, it is not the best unit for
measuring  the  degree  of  biological  damage  produced  by  radiation,  because
damage depends not only on the dose but on the type of the radiation. For
example, a given dose of alpha particles causes about 10 times more biologi-
cal damage  than  an  equal  dose  of  x  rays.  The  RBE (relative  biological

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

532

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Table 14.4 RBEa for
Several Types of Radiation

Radiation

RBE Factor

X-rays and
gamma rays
Beta particles
Alpha particles
Slow neutrons
Fast neutrons
and protons
Heavy ions

1.0
1.0 – 1.7
10 – 20
4 – 5

10
20

aRBE ⫽ relative  biological  effective-
ness.

Table 14.5 Units for Radiation Dosage

Quantity

SI Unit

Older
Symbol Other SI Units Unit

Relation to 

Conversion

Absorbed dose
Dose equivalent

gray
sievert

Gy
Sv

⫽ 1 J/kg
⫽ 1 J/kg

rad
1 Gy ⫽ 100 rad
rem 1 Sv ⫽ 100 rem

effectiveness)  factor  for  a  given  type  of  radiation  is  the  number  of  rads  of
x radiation  or  gamma  radiation  that  produces  the  same  biological
damage  as  1  rad  of  the  radiation  being  used. Table  14.4  gives  the  RBE
factors for several types of radiation. The values are only approximate, because
they  vary  with  particle  energy  and  with  the  form  of  the  damage.  The  RBE
factor  should  be  considered  only  a  ﬁrst-approximation  guide  to  the  actual
effects of radiation.

Finally, the rem (radiation equivalent in man) is the product of the dose in

rad and the RBE factor:

Dose in rem ⬅ dose in rad ⫻ RBE

(14.14)

According to this deﬁnition, 1 rem of any type of radiation produces the same
amount of biological damage as 1 rem of any other type. From Table 14.4 we
see that a dose of 1 rad of fast neutrons represents an effective dose of 10 rem.
On the other hand, 1 rad of gamma radiation is equivalent to a dose of 1 rem.
Low-level radiation from a natural source, such as cosmic rays or radioactive
rocks and soil, delivers to each of us a dose of about 0.13 rem/yr and is called
background radiation. It is important to note that background radiation varies
with geography. The upper limit of radiation dose (apart from background radia-
tion)  recommended  by  the  U.S.  government  is  about  0.5  rem/yr.  Many  occu-
pations  involve  much  higher  radiation  exposures,  and  so  an  upper  limit  of
5 rem/yr has been set for combined whole-body exposure. Higher upper limits
are permissible for certain parts of the body, such as the hands and forearms. A
dose  of  400  to  500 rem  results  in  a  mortality  rate  of  about  50%  (which  means
that  half  the  people  exposed  to  this  radiation  level  die).  The  most  dangerous
forms of exposure are ingestion and inhalation of radioactive isotopes, especially
those elements the body retains and concentrates, such as 90Sr. In some cases, a
dose of 1000 rem can result from ingesting only 1 mCi of radioactive material.

This discussion has focused on measurements of radiation dosage in units
such  as  rads  and  rems  because  these  units  are  still  widely  used.  These  units,
however,  have  been  formally  replaced  with  new  SI  units.  The  rad  has  been
replaced  with  the  gray (Gy),  equal  to  100 rad.  The  rem  has  been  replaced
with the sievert (Sv), equal to 100 rem. Table 14.5 summarizes the older and
the current SI units of radiation dosage.

14.9 RADIATION DETECTORS

Various devices have been developed for detecting radiation. They are used for
a variety of purposes, including medical diagnoses, radioactive dating measure-
ments, measurement of background radiation, and measurement of the mass,
energy, and momentum of particles created in high-energy nuclear reactions.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Chamber wall

14.9

RADIATION DETECTORS

533

+

+

– –

–

+

Radioactive
source

Gas

i

Ionized track
of radiation

+

To
amplifier
and detector

Figure  14.22 A  schematic  of  an  ion  chamber.  A  charged  particle  stopping  in  the
chamber creates electron – ion pairs, which are collected by the plates. This sets up a
current i in the external circuit that is proportional to the particle’s kinetic energy.

An ion  chamber  is  a  general  class  of  detector  that  makes  use  of  the
electron – ion pairs generated by the passage of radiation through a gas to pro-
duce an electrical signal. It consists basically of two charged plates maintained
at different potentials by a voltage supply (Fig. 14.22). The plates attract elec-
trons or ions, depending on plate polarity, and cause a current pulse i that is
proportional to the number of electron– ion pairs produced and to the parti-
cle energy if the particle comes to rest in the chamber. When an ion chamber
is used in this way, both to detect the presence of an energetic charged parti-
cle and to measure its energy, it is called a proportional counter.

The Geiger counter (Fig. 14.23) is perhaps the most common form of ion
chamber  used  to  detect  radiation.  It  can  be  considered  the  prototype  of  all
counters that use the ionization of a medium as the basic detection process. It
consists of a cylindrical metal tube ﬁlled with gas at low pressure and a long
wire  along  the  axis  of  the  tube.  The  wire  is  maintained  at  a  high  positive
potential (about 103 V) with respect to the tube. When a high-energy particle
or  photon  enters  the  tube  through  a  thin  window  at  one  end,  some  of  the
atoms  of  the  gas  are  ionized.  The  electrons  removed  from  these  atoms  are
attracted toward the positive wire, and in the process they ionize other atoms
in their path. This results in an avalanche of electrons that produces a current
pulse at the output of the tube. After the pulse is ampliﬁed, it can either be
used  to  trigger  an  electronic  counter  or  be  delivered  to  a  loudspeaker  that
clicks  each  time  a  particle  is  detected.  While  a  Geiger  counter  easily  detects
the presence of an energetic charged particle, the energy lost by the particle
in  the  counter  is  not proportional  to  the  current  pulse  produced  in  the
avalanche process. Thus, although it is rugged, simple, and portable, a Geiger
counter cannot be used to measure the energy of a particle.

A semiconductor diode detector is essentially a reverse-bias p -n junction.
Recall from Chapter 12 that a p -n junction diode passes current readily when
forward-biased  and  prohibits  a  current  under  reverse-bias  conditions.  As  an

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Ion chamber

Geiger counter

Semiconductor diode
detector

534

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Thin
window

Wire electrode

Gas

+

–

Metal
tube

To amplifier

and

counter

(a)

(b)

Figure  14.23 (a)  A  diagram  of  a  Geiger  counter.  The  voltage  between  the  central
wire  and  the  metal  tube  is  usually  about  1000  V.  (b)  The  use  of  a  Geiger  counter  to
measure the activity in a radioactive mineral. (Henry Leap and Jim Lehman)

energetic particle passes through the junction, electrons are excited into the
conduction  band  and  holes  form  in  the  valence  band.  The  internal  electric
ﬁeld sweeps the electrons toward the positive (p) side of the junction and the
holes toward the negative (n) side. This movement of electrons and holes cre-
ates a pulse of current that is measured with an electronic counter. In a typical
device, the duration of the pulse is about 10⫺8 s.

A scintillation counter (Fig. 14.24) usually uses a solid or liquid material
whose atoms are easily excited by radiation. These excited atoms emit visible
light when they return to their ground state. Common materials used as scin-
tillators are transparent crystals of sodium iodide and certain plastics. If such a
material  is  attached  to  one  end  of  a  device  called  a  photomultiplier (PM)
tube, the photons emitted by the scintillator can be converted to an electric
signal.  The  PM  tube  consists  of  numerous  electrodes,  called  dynodes,  whose
potentials increase in succession along the length of the tube, as shown in Fig-
ure 14.24. The top of the tube contains a photocathode, which emits electrons
by the photoelectric effect. As one of these emitted electrons strikes the ﬁrst
dynode, the electron has sufﬁcient kinetic energy to eject several other elec-
trons. When these electrons are accelerated to the second dynode, many more
electrons are ejected and a multiplication process occurs. The end result is 1
million or more electrons striking the last dynode. Hence one particle striking
the scintillator produces a sizable electric pulse at the output of the PM tube,
and in turn this pulse is sent to an electronic counter. Both the scintillator and
diode detector are much more sensitive than a Geiger counter, mainly because
of the higher density of the detecting medium. Both can also be used to mea-
sure particle energy if the particle stops in the detector.

Track detectors are devices that can be used to view the tracks of charged
particles directly. High-energy particles produced in particle accelerators may
have  energies  ranging  from  109 to  1012 eV.  Thus  they  cannot  be  stopped

Scintillation counter

Track detectors

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.9

RADIATION DETECTORS

535

Scintillation

crystal

Photocathode
0 V

+400 V

+800 V

+1200 V

+1600 V

Output

to counter

Incoming
particle

+200 V

+600 V

+1000 V

+1400 V

Vacuum

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Figure 14.24 A diagram of a scintillation counter connected to a photomultiplier tube.

entirely, and their energy cannot be measured in the small detectors already
mentioned.  Instead,  the  energy  and  momentum  of  these  energetic  particles
are found from the curvature of the path of the particle in a known magnetic
ﬁeld, hence the necessity of track detectors.

A photographic emulsion is the simplest track detector. A charged particle
ionizes the atoms in an emulsion layer. The path of the particle corresponds to
a family of points at which chemical changes have occurred in the emulsion.
When the emulsion is developed, the particle’s track becomes visible.

A cloud chamber contains a vapor that has been supercooled to just below
its usual condensation point. An energetic particle passing through the cham-
ber ionizes the vapor along its path. These ions serve as centers for condensa-
tion of the supercooled vapor. The track can be seen with the naked eye and
can  be  photographed.  A  magnetic  ﬁeld  can  be  applied  to  determine  the
charges of the particles as well as their momentum and energy.

A device called a bubble  chamber, invented in 1952 by Donald A. Glaser,
makes  use  of  a  liquid  (usually  liquid  hydrogen)  maintained  near  its  boiling
point.  Ions  produced  by  incoming  charged  particles  leave  bubble  tracks,
which can be photographed (Fig. 14.25). Because the density of the detecting
medium of a bubble chamber is much higher than the density of the gas in a
cloud chamber, the bubble chamber has a much higher sensitivity.

A spark chamber is a counting device that consists of an array of conducting
parallel  plates  and  is  capable  of  recording  a  three-dimensional  track  record.
Even-numbered plates are grounded, and odd-numbered plates are maintained
at  a  high  potential  (about  10 kV).  The  spaces  between  the  plates  contain  a
noble gas at atmospheric pressure. When a charged particle passes through the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Photographic emulsion

Cloud chamber

Bubble chamber

Spark chamber

536

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

Wire chamber

Neutron detectors

chamber, ionization occurs in the gas, resulting in a large surge of current and a
visible  series  of  sparks  along  the  particle  path.  These  paths  may  be  pho-
tographed  or  electronically  detected  and  sent  to  a  computer  for  path  recon-
struction and the determination of particle mass, momentum, and energy.

Wire chambers or drift chambers are similar to spark chambers in their
ability to record 3-D tracks and provide fast electronic readout to a computer
for track reconstruction and display. A wire chamber consists of closely spaced
parallel wires that collect the electrons created by a passing ionizing particle. A
second grid, with its wires perpendicular to the ﬁrst, allows the xy position of
the particle in the plane of the two sets of wires to be determined. Finally, sev-
eral such xy locating grids arranged parallel to each other along the z-axis can
be used to determine the particle’s trajectory in three dimensions.

Neutron  detectors  are  a  bit  more  difﬁcult  to  construct  than  charged-
particle detectors, because neutrons do not interact electrically with atoms in
their  passage  through  matter.  Fast  neutrons,  however,  can  be  detected  by
ﬁlling  an  ion  chamber  with  hydrogen  gas  and  detecting  the  ionization
produced by high-speed recoiling protons produced in neutron– proton colli-
sions. Slow neutrons with energies less than 1 MeV do not transfer sufﬁcient
energy to protons to be detected in this way but can be detected with an ion
chamber ﬁlled  with  BF3 gas.  In  this  case,  the  boron  nuclei  disintegrate  in  a
slow  neutron-capture  process,  emitting  highly  ionizing  alphas  that  are  easily
detected in the ion chamber.

14.10 USES OF RADIATION

Nuclear  physics  applications  are  extremely  widespread  in  manufacturing,
medicine, and biology. Even a brief discussion of all the possibilities would ﬁll
an entire book, and to keep such a book up-to-date would require frequent re-
visions. In this section we present a few of these applications and the underly-
ing theories supporting them.

Tracing
Radioactive  tracers  are  used  to  track  chemicals  participating  in  various  reac-
tions. One of the most valuable uses of radioactive tracers is in medicine. For
example,  iodine,  a  nutrient  needed  by  the  human  body,  is  obtained  largely
through the intake of iodized salt and seafood. To evaluate the performance
of the thyroid, the patient drinks a very small amount of radioactive sodium
iodide containing 131I, an artiﬁcially produced isotope of iodine (the natural,
nonradioactive isotope is  127I). The amount of iodine in the thyroid gland is
determined as a function of time by measuring the radiation intensity at the
neck area. How much or how little 131I that is still in the thyroid is a measure
of how well that gland is functioning.

A second medical application is indicated in Figure 14.26. A solution con-
taining radioactive sodium is injected into a vein in the leg, and the time at
which the radioisotope arrives at another part of the body is detected with a
radiation  counter.  The  elapsed  time  is  a  good  indication  of  the  presence  or
absence of constrictions in the circulatory system.

Tracers are also useful in agricultural research. Suppose the best method of
fertilizing a plant is to be determined. A certain element in a fertilizer, such as

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14.10

USES OF RADIATION

537

쩹

Blood carries
24NaCl to both legs

Site of
constriction

쩸

24NaCl solution
injected

쩺

High reading—
good circulation

쩻

Low reading—
poor circulation

Figure 14.26 A tracer technique for determining the condition of the human circu-
latory system.

nitrogen,  can  be  tagged (identiﬁed)  with  one  of  its  radioactive  isotopes.  The
fertilizer is then sprayed on one group of plants, sprinkled on the ground for
a second group, and raked into the soil for a third. A Geiger counter is then
used to track the nitrogen through the three groups.

Tracing techniques are as wide ranging as human ingenuity can devise. Pre-
sent applications range from checking how teeth absorb ﬂuoride to monitor-
ing how cleansers contaminate food-processing equipment to studying deteri-
oration inside an automobile engine. In the latter case, a radioactive material
is used in the manufacture of the piston rings, and the oil is checked for ra-
dioactivity to determine the amount of wear on the rings.

Neutron Activation Analysis
For  centuries,  a  standard  method  of  identifying  the  elements  in  a  sample
of material  has  been  chemical  analysis,  which  involves  determining  how
the material  reacts  with  various  chemicals.  A  second  method  is  spectral
analysis,  which  uses  the  fact  that,  when  excited,  each  element  emits  its
own characteristic  set  of  electromagnetic  wavelengths.  These  methods  are
now  supplemented  by  a  third  technique,  neutron  activation  analy-
sis. Both chemical and spectral methods have the disadvantage that a fairly
large sample of the material must be destroyed for the analysis. In addition,
extremely  small  quantities  of  an  element  may  go  undetected  by  either
method.  Neutron  activation  analysis  has  an  advantage  over  the  other  two
methods in both respects.

When a material is irradiated with neutrons, nuclei in the material absorb
the neutrons and are changed to different isotopes, most of which are radioac-
tive. For example, 65Cu absorbs a neutron to become 66Cu, which undergoes
beta decay:

0n ⫹ 65
1

29Cu 9: 66

29Cu 9: 66

30Zn ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

538

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

The presence of the copper can be deduced because it is known that 66Cu has
a  half-life  of  5.1 min  and  decays  with  the  emission  of  beta  particles  having
maximum energies of 2.63 and 1.59 MeV. Also emitted in the decay of 66Cu is
a 1.04-MeV gamma ray. By examining the radiation emitted by a substance af-
ter it has been exposed to neutron irradiation, one can detect extremely small
amounts of an element in that substance.

Neutron activation analysis is used routinely in a number of industries, for
example, in commercial aviation for the checking of airline luggage for hid-
den explosives. The following nonroutine use is of interest. Napoleon died on
the island of St. Helena in 1821, supposedly of natural causes. Over the years,
suspicion has existed that his death was not all that natural. After his death, his
head  was  shaved  and  locks  of  his  hair  were  sold  as  souvenirs.  In  1961,  the
amount of arsenic in a sample of this hair was measured by neutron activation
analysis,  and  an  unusually  large  quantity  of  arsenic  was  found.  (Activation
analysis is so sensitive that very small pieces of a single hair could be analyzed.)
Results showed that the arsenic was fed to him irregularly. In fact, the arsenic
concentration  patterns  in  the  hair  corresponded  to  the  ﬂuctuations  in  the
severity of Napoleon’s illness as determined from historical records.

Art  historians  use  neutron  activation  analysis  to  detect  forgeries.  The  pig-
ments used in paints have changed throughout history, and old and new pig-
ments react differently to neutron activation. The method can even reveal hid-
den works of art behind existing paintings because an older, hidden layer of
paint reacts differently than the surface layer to neutron activation.

Radiation Therapy
Radiation  causes  the  most  damage  to  rapidly  dividing  cells.  Therefore,  it  is
useful  in  cancer  treatment  because  tumor  cells  divide  extremely  rapidly.

Figure 14.27 This large machine is being set to deliver a dose of radiation from 60Co
in an effort to destroy a cancerous tumor. Cancer cells are especially susceptible to this
type  of  therapy  because  they  tend  to  divide  more  often  than  cells  of  healthy  tissue
nearby. (Martin Dohrn/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

539

Several mechanisms can be used to deliver radiation to a tumor. In some cases,
a  narrow  beam  of  x-rays  or  radiation  from  a  source  such  as  60Co  is  used,  as
shown in Figure 14.27. In other situations, thin radioactive needles called seeds
are implanted in the cancerous tissue.

Food Preservation
Radiation is ﬁnding increasing use as a means of preserving food because ex-
posure  to  high  levels  of  radiation  can  destroy  or  incapacitate  bacteria  and
mold spores. Techniques include exposing foods to gamma rays, high-energy
electron beams, or x-rays. Food preserved this way can be placed in a sealed
container  (to  keep  out  new  spoiling  agents)  and  stored  for  long  periods  of
time. There is no evidence of adverse effect on the taste or nutritional value of
food from irradiation. The safety of irradiated foods has been endorsed by the
World Health Organization (WHO), the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention  (CDC),  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA),  and  the  Food
and Drug Administration (FDA).

SUMMARY

A nuclear reaction can occur when a target nucleus X at rest is bombarded
by a particle a, resulting in a nucleus Y and a particle b:

a ⫹ X 9: Y ⫹ b

or

X(a, b)Y

(14.1)

The energy released in such a reaction, called the reaction energy, Q , is

Q ⫽ (M X ⫹ Ma ⫺ M Y ⫺ Mb)c 2

(14.2)
If N 0 beam particles are incident on a target of thickness x, the number N of
beam particles that emerge from the target is
N ⫽ N 0e⫺n␴x

(14.5)

where n is  the  density  of  nuclei  in  the  target  and  ␴ is  the  cross  section.
Nuclear  cross  sections  have  dimensions  of  area  and  are  usually  measured  in
barns (b), where 1 b ⫽ 10⫺28 m2.

The probability that neutrons will be captured as they move through matter
generally  increases  with  decreasing  neutron  energy.  A  thermal  neutron is  a
slow-moving  neutron  that  has  a  high  probability  of  being  captured  by  a
nucleus according to the following neutron-capture process:

1
0n ⫹ A

ZX 9: A⫹1

ZX ⫹ ␥

(14.7)

Energetic  neutrons  are  slowed  down  readily  in  materials  called  modera-
tors. These  materials  have  small  cross  sections  for  neutron  capture,  and  so
neutrons lose their energy mainly through elastic collisions.

Nuclear ﬁssion occurs when a very heavy nucleus, such as 235U, splits into

two main fragments. Thermal neutrons can create ﬁssion in 235U:

0n ⫹ 235
1

92U 9: 236

(14.8)
where X and Y are the ﬁssion fragments and 236U* is a nucleus in an excited
state.  On  the  average,  2.5  neutrons  are  released  per  ﬁssion  event.  The  frag-
ments and neutrons have a great deal of kinetic energy after the ﬁssion event.

92U* 9: X ⫹ Y ⫹ neutrons

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

540

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

The fragments then undergo a series of beta and gamma decays to various sta-
ble isotopes. The energy released per ﬁssion event is about 200 MeV.

The reproduction constant K is the average number of neutrons released
from each ﬁssion event that cause another event. In a power reactor, it is nec-
essary to maintain K slightly greater than 1. The value of K is affected by such
factors as reactor geometry, the mean neutron energy, and the probability of
neutron capture. Proper design of the reactor geometry is necessary to mini-
mize neutron leakage from the reactor core. Neutron energies are regulated
with  a  moderator  material  to  slow  down  energetic  neutrons  and  therefore
increase the probability of neutron capture by other  235U nuclei. The power
level  of  the  reactor  is  adjusted  with  control  rods  made  of  a  material  that
absorbs neutrons very efﬁciently. The value of K can be adjusted by inserting
the rods into the reactor core at varied depths.

Nuclear fusion is a process in which two light nuclei fuse to form a heavier
nucleus. A great deal of energy is released in such a process. The major obsta-
cle  to  obtaining  useful  energy  from  fusion  is  the  large  Coulomb  repulsive
force between the charged nuclei at close separations. Sufﬁcient energy must
be supplied to the particles to overcome this Coulomb barrier. The tempera-
ture required to produce fusion is of the order of 108 K, and at this tempera-
ture all matter occurs as plasma.

In a fusion reactor, the plasma temperature must reach at least the critical
ignition temperature, the temperature at which the power generated by the
fusion reactions exceeds the power lost in the system. The most promising fu-
sion reaction is the D – T reaction, which has a critical ignition temperature of
approximately 4.5 ⫻ 107 K. Two important parameters involved in fusion reac-
tor design are ion density n and conﬁnement time ␶. The conﬁnement time
is the time period for which the interacting particles must be maintained at a
temperature equal to or greater than the critical ignition temperature. Law-
son’s criterion states that for the D – T reaction, n␶ ⱖ 1014 s/cm3.

When energetic particles interact with a medium, they lose their energy by
several  processes.  Heavy  particles,  such  as  alpha  particles,  lose  most  of  their
energy  by  excitation  and  ionization  of  atoms  in  the  medium.  The  particles
have a ﬁnite range in the medium, which depends on the energy, mass, and
charge of the particle as well as the properties of the medium. Energetic elec-
trons moving through a medium also lose their energy by excitation and ion-
ization. However, they scatter more readily than heavy particles and therefore
undergo fewer collisions before coming to rest.

Photons, or gamma rays, which have no charge, are not as effective as charged
particles in producing ionization or excitation. However, they can be absorbed in
a medium by several processes: (1) the photoelectric effect, predominant at low
photon energies; (2) Compton scattering, predominant at intermediate photon
energies; and (3) pair production, predominant at high photon energies.

If a beam of photons with intensity I 0 is incident on a medium, the intensity
of the beam decreases exponentially with increasing depth of penetration into
the medium, according to the relation

I(x) ⫽ I 0e⫺␮x

(14.13)

where x is the distance traveled into the medium,  I(x) is the intensity of the
beam after it travels a distance x in the medium, and ␮ is the linear absorp-
tion coefﬁcient of the medium.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Devices used to detect radiation are the Geiger counter, the semiconductor
diode detector, the scintillation counter, the photographic emulsion, the bub-
ble  chamber,  the  spark  chamber,  and  the  wire  or  drift  chamber.  Both  the
spark chamber and the wire chamber can easily make three-dimensional track
measurements of charged particles, and both are interfaced to computers for
rapid data collection and trajectory reconstruction.

PROBLEMS

541

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. A  popular  history  and  overview  of  fusion  are  given  in
R. Herman,  Fusion:  The  Search 
for  Endless  Energy,
Cambridge, England, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
2. The  history  of  the  German  and  U.S.  A-bomb  projects
(including  several  interesting  photographs)  is  given
in several  articles  in  Physics  Today, 48:8,  August  1995,
Part 1.

3. The ITER is discussed in R. W. Conn, et al., “The Inter-
national  Thermonuclear  Experimental  Reactor,” Sci.
Amer., 226:103, April 1992.

4. For  an  extensive  bibliography  and  selected  reprints  on
medical  applications  of  nuclear  physics,  see  Medical
Physics,  edited  by  Russel  K.  Hobbie,  College  Park,  Md.,
American Association of Physics Teachers, 1986.

QUESTIONS

1. Explain the functions of a moderator and a control rod

in a ﬁssion reactor.

2. Why is water a better shield against neutrons than lead

or steel?

3. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of ﬁssion re-
actors from the standpoints of safety, pollution, and re-
sources.  Make  a  comparison  with  power  generated  by
the burning of fossil fuels.

4. Why  would  a  fusion  reactor  produce  less  radioactive

waste than a ﬁssion reactor?

5. Lawson’s criterion states that the product of ion density
and  conﬁnement  time  must  exceed  a  certain  number
before  a  break-even  fusion  reaction  can  occur.  Why
should these two parameters determine the outcome?

6. Why  is  the  temperature  required  for  the  D – T  fusion
less than that for the D – D fusion? Estimate the relative
importance  of  Coulomb  repulsion  and  nuclear  attrac-
tion in each case.

7. What  factors  make  a  fusion  reaction  difﬁcult  to

achieve?

8. Discuss the similarities and differences between fusion

and ﬁssion.

PROBLEMS

9. Discuss  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  fusion
power from the standpoints of safety, pollution, and re-
sources.

10. Discuss three major problems associated with the devel-

opment of a controlled-fusion reactor.

11. Describe two techniques that are being pursued in an

effort to obtain power from nuclear fusion.

12. If  two  radioactive  samples  have  the  same  activity  mea-
sured  in  curies,  will  they  necessarily  create  the  same
damage to a medium? Explain.

13. One method of treating cancer of the thyroid is to in-
sert a small radioactive source directly into the tumor.
The  radiation  emitted  by  the  source  can  destroy  can-
cerous  cells.  Very  often,  the  radioactive  isotope  131
53I  is
injected  into  the  bloodstream  in  this  treatment.  Why
do you suppose iodine is used?

14. Why  should  a  radiologist  be  extremely  cautious  about

x-ray doses when treating pregnant women?

15. The design of a PM tube might suggest that any num-
ber  of  dynodes  may  be  used  to  amplify  a  weak  signal.
What factors do you suppose would limit the ampliﬁca-
tion in this device?

14.1 Nuclear Reactions
1. (a)  Calculate  the  Q value  corresponding  to  the  reac-
tion 18O(p,  n)18F,  and  compare  your  result  with  the
measured value in Table 14.1. (b) Calculate the thresh-
old energy of the incident proton.

2. Supernova  explosions  are  incredibly  powerful  nuclear
reactions that tear apart the cores of relatively massive

stars  (greater  than  four  times  the  Sun’s  mass).  These
blasts are produced by carbon fusion, which requires a
temperature  of  about  6 ⫻ 108 K  to  overcome  the
strong  Coulomb  repulsion  between  carbon  nuclei.
(a) Estimate  the  repulsive  energy  barrier  to  fusion,
using  the  required  ignition  temperature  for  carbon
fusion. (In other words, what is the kinetic energy for a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

542

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

carbon nucleus at 6 ⫻ 108 K?) (b) Calculate the energy
(in MeV)  released  in  each  of  these  “carbon-burning”
reactions:

one design, deuterons (2H) that have been accelerated
in  a  Van  de  Graaff  generator  are  used  to  bombard
other deuterium nuclei, resulting in the reaction

12C ⫹ 12C 9: 20Ne ⫹ 4He
12C ⫹ 12C 9: 24Mg ⫹ ␥

(c) Calculate the energy (in kWh) given off when 2 kg of
carbon completely fuses according to the ﬁrst reaction.

3. The  following  reaction,  ﬁrst  observed  in  1930,  led  to

the discovery of the neutron by Chadwick:

4Be(␣, n)12
9

6C

Calculate the Q value of this reaction.

4. The following is the ﬁrst known reaction (achieved in

1934) in which the product nucleus is radioactive:

13 Al(␣, n)30
27
15P

Calculate the Q value of this reaction.

5. There are a few nuclear reactions in which the emerg-
ing particle and the product nucleus are identical. One
example of this is the reaction
7
3Li(p, ␣)4

2 He

Calculate the Q value of this reaction.

6. Show  that  the  following  inverse  reactions  have  the

same absolute value of Q:

10
5 B(␣, p)13

6 C    and    13

6 C(p, ␣)10
5B

7. (a)  The  ﬁrst  nuclear  transmutation  was  achieved  in
1919  by  Rutherford,  who  bombarded  nitrogen  atoms
with  alpha  particles  emitted  by  the  isotope  214Bi.  The
reaction is

4
2He ⫹ 14

7N 9: 17

8 O ⫹ 1

1H

What is the Q value of the reaction? What is the thresh-
old  energy?  (b)  Cockroft  and  Walton  performed  the
ﬁrst  nuclear  reaction  utilizing  particle  accelerators.  In
that  case,  accelerated  protons  were  used  to  bombard
lithium nuclei, producing the reaction

1H ⫹ 7
1

3Li 9: 4

2 He ⫹ 4

2He

Since  the  masses  of  the  particles  involved  in  the  reac-
tion were well known, these results were used to obtain
an  early  proof  of  the  Einstein  mass – energy  relation.
Calculate the Q value of the reaction.

8. (a) One method of producing neutrons for experimen-
tal use is based on the bombardment of light nuclei by
alpha  particles.  In  one  arrangement,  alpha  particles
emitted by plutonium are incident on beryllium nuclei,
and this results in the production of neutrons:

4
2He ⫹ 9

4Be 9: 12

6 C ⫹ 1
0n

What is the Q value for this reaction? (b) Neutrons are
also  often  produced  by  small-particle  accelerators.  In

2
1H ⫹ 2

1H 9: 3

2 He ⫹ 1
0n

Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic? Calculate
its Q value.

9. When  the  nuclear  reaction  represented  by  Equation
14.2 is endothermic, the disintegration energy Q is neg-
ative. In order for the reaction to proceed, the incom-
ing  particle  must  have  a  minimum  kinetic  energy,
called the threshold energy, Kth. (a) Show that for nonrel-
ativistic particles

K th ⫽ ⫺ Q 冢1 ⫹

冣

Ma
MX

by using the fact that  K th ⫽⫺ Q in the CM frame and
by  transforming  this  result  for  the  CM  frame  back  to
the laboratory frame. Note that in the CM frame, a and
X have equal and opposite momenta, p ⫽ Mav ⫽ MXV.
In  the  lab  frame,  a  has  momentum  p lab ⫽ Ma(v ⫹ V )
and X is at rest. (b) Calculate the threshold energy of
the incident alpha particle in the reaction

4
2He ⫹ 14

7N 9: 17

8O ⫹ 1

1H

14.2 Reaction Cross Section
10. Consider a slab consisting of two layers of material with
thicknesses x 1 and x 2 and target densities n1 and n2. If
N 0 is the number of particles incident on the ﬁrst layer
of the slab in some time interval, determine the num-
ber N that emerge from the second layer in that inter-
val. Assume that the cross section ␴is the same for each
material. What would you guess is the relationship for
three or more layers?

11. The density of the liquid hydrogen target in a bubble
chamber  is  70 kg/m3.  If  20%  of  a  beam  of  slow  neu-
trons incident on the bubble chamber has reacted with
the  hydrogen  by  the  time  the  beam  has  traveled  2  m
through  the  hydrogen,  what  is  the  cross  section,  in
barns, for the reaction of these slow neutrons with hy-
drogen atoms?

12. The  density  of  lead  is  11.35 g/cm3,  and  its  atomic
weight is 207.2. Assume that 1.000 cm of lead reduces a
beam  of  1-MeV  gamma  rays  to  28.65%  of  its  initial  in-
tensity.  (a)  How  much  lead  is  required  to  reduce  the
beam to 10⫺4 of its initial intensity? (b) What is the ef-
fective cross section of a lead atom for a 1-MeV photon?
13. Neutrons  are  captured  by  a  cadmium  foil.  Using  the
data in Figure 14.3, ﬁnd (a) the ratio of 10-eV neutrons
captured  to  1-eV  neutrons  captured,  (b)  the  ratio  of 
1-eV  neutrons  captured  to  0.1-eV  neutrons  captured,
and  (c)  the  ratio  of  0.1-eV  neutrons  captured  to 
0.01-eV neutrons captured. (d) In what range of ener-
gies can cadmium be used as an energy selector?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14. The atomic weight of cadmium is 112.41, and its den-
sity  is  8.65 g/cm3.  Using  Figure  14.3,  estimate  the  at-
tenuation distance of a thermal neutron beam in cad-
mium.  (The  attenuation  distance  is  the  distance
traveled  after  which  the  intensity  of  the  beam  is  re-
duced to 1/e of its initial value, where  e is the base of
the natural logarithms.)

15. A beam of 100-MeV protons from a Van de Graaff gen-
erator  is  incident  on  a  gold  foil  5.1 ⫻ 10⫺5 m  thick.
The beam current is 0.1 ␮A, and the beam has a cross-
sectional  area  of  1 cm2.  If  the  scattering  cross  section
is 500 b, calculate (a) the ratio N/N 0, (b) the number
per second that pass through the foil, and (c) the num-
ber  lost  from  the  beam  each  second  by  scatter-
ing. (Gold has an atomic weight of 197 and a density of
19.3 g/cm3.)

16. A tiny sphere is made of a material that absorbs all the
photons  incident  on  it.  Many  such  spheres  are  embed-
ded randomly in a transparent medium. (a) If the radius
of one of these spheres is b, what is its cross section ␴ in
terms of  b for the absorption of photons? (b) If the ra-
dius of each sphere is b ⫽ 2 ⫻ 10⫺3 m, what is the cross
section?  (c)  If  3 ⫻ 104 of  these  spheres  are  uniformly
embedded  in  a  cylinder  of  a  transparent  medium  of
height 2 m and cross-sectional area 0.5 m2, and a light of
beam  intensity  0.75 W/m2 is  incident  normally  on  one
end of the cylinder, what is the intensity of the beam of
light that emerges from the other end?

14.3 Interactions Involving Neutrons
17. The density of cadmium is 8.65 g/cm3, and its cross sec-
tion for thermal neutron absorption is 2450 b. Find the
ratio  of  neutron  absorption  to  neutron  decay  in  cad-
mium  for  thermal  neutrons  at  a  temperature  of  27°C.
(Hint: The number of neutrons absorbed per second is

dN
dt

⫽

dN
dx

dx
dt

⫽

dN
dx

v

where v is the neutron speed and dN/dx is the number
of neutrons lost per meter of travel. The half-life of the
neutron is 636 s.)

18. In natural silver, the abundance of 107Ag is 51.35%, and
that  of  109Ag  is  48.65%.  The  neutron-absorption  cross
section of  107Ag is 31 b, and that of  109Ag is 87 b. The
activation products 108Ag and 110Ag formed by neutron
absorption  decay  by  beta  emission  with  half-lives  of
144 s and 24.5 s, respectively. A silver sample is removed
from a ﬁssion reactor, and after some delay it is found
that the ratio of 108Ag to 110Ag is 20:1. How long was the
delay? (Hint: Assume that the sample has been in the re-
actor  for  a  time  sufﬁciently  long  that  the  decay  rate
equals the production rate for both 108Ag and 110Ag.)

19. A  1-MeV  neutron  is  emitted  in  a  ﬁssion  reactor.  If  it
loses  half  of  its  kinetic  energy  in  each  collision  with  a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

543

moderator atom, how many collisions must it undergo
in order to achieve thermal energy (0.039 eV)?

20. A  particle  cannot  generally  be  localized  to  distances
much  smaller  than  its  de  Broglie  wavelength.  This
means  that  a  slow  neutron  appears  to  be  larger  to  a
target particle than does a fast neutron, in the sense
that  the  slow  neutron  will  probably  be  found  over  a
large volume of space. For a thermal neutron at room
temperature (300 K), ﬁnd (a) the linear momentum
and  (b)  the  de  Broglie  wavelength.  Compare  this
effective  neutron  size  with  both  nuclear  and  atomic
dimensions.

14.4 Nuclear Fission
21. Find the energy released in the ﬁssion reaction

1
0n ⫹ 235

92U 9: 141

0n)

56Ba ⫹ 92

36 Kr ⫹ 3(1

The required masses are
M(1
M(235
M(141
M(92

0n) ⫽ 1.008665 u
92U) ⫽ 235.043915 u
56Ba) ⫽ 140.9139 u
36Kr) ⫽ 91.8973 u

14.5 Nuclear Reactors
22. (a)  How  many  grams  of  235U  must  undergo  ﬁssion  to
operate a 1000-MW power plant for one day? (b) If the
density  of  235U  is  18.7 g/cm3,  how  large  a  sphere  of
235U could you make from this much uranium?

23. In  order  to  minimize  neutron  leakage  from  a  reactor,
the surface-area-to-volume ratio should be a minimum
for a given shape. For a given volume V, calculate this
ratio for (a) a sphere, (b) a cube, and (c) a rectangular
parallelepiped of dimensions a ⫻ a ⫻ 2a. (d) Which of
these  shapes  would  have  the  minimum 
leakage?
(e) Which would have the maximum leakage?

24. It has been estimated that there are 109 tons of natural
uranium (mainly 238U) at concentrations exceeding 100
parts per million, of which 0.7% is 235U. If all the world’s
power needs (7 ⫻ 1012 J/s) were to be supplied by 235U
ﬁssion,  how  long  would  this  supply  last?  (This  estimate
of  uranium  supply  was  taken  from  K.  S.  Deffeyes  and 
I. D. MacGregor, Sci. Amer., January 1980, p. 66.)

25. An electrical power plant operates on the basis of ther-
mal  energy  generated  in  a  pressurized-water  reactor.
The electrical power output of the plant is 1 GW, and
its efﬁciency is 30%. (a) Find the total power generated
by  the  reactor.  (b)  How  much  power  is  discharged  to
the  environment  as  waste  heat?  (c)  Calculate  the  rate
of ﬁssion events in the reactor core. (d) Calculate the
mass of 235U used up in one year. (e) Using the results
from (a), determine the rate at which fuel is converted
to  energy  (in  kg/s)  in  the  reactor  core,  and  compare
your answer with the result from (d).

544

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

 

26. (a)  Estimate  the  volume  of  space  required  to  store  the
radioactive wastes that would be produced in one year if
all the annual U.S. electricity production (which is about
2.2 ⫻ 1012 kWh/yr)  came  from  uranium  enriched  to
3% 235U. (Assume that the conversion efﬁciency is 30%
and that the waste is in the form of a liquid with a den-
sity of 1 g/cm3.) (b) If the waste could be formed into a
cube, what would be the length of the cube’s sides?

14.6 Nuclear Fusion
27. Consider  the  deuterium– tritium  fusion  reaction  with

the tritium nucleus at rest:

2
1H ⫹ 3

1H 9: 4

2 He ⫹ 1
0 n

(a) From Equation 13.1, estimate the required distance
of closest approach. (b) What is the Coulomb potential
energy  (in  electron  volts)  at  this  distance?  (c)  If  the
deuteron has just enough energy to reach the distance
of  closest  approach,  what  is  the  ﬁnal  velocity  of  the
combined deuterium and tritium nuclei in terms of the
initial deuteron velocity, v 0? (d) Use energy methods to
estimate  the  minimum  initial  deuteron  energy  re-
quired to achieve fusion. (e) Why does the fusion reac-
tion occur at much lower deuteron energies than that
calculated in (d)?

28. The  half-life  of  tritium  is  12 yr.  If  the  TFTR  fusion
reactor contains 50 m3 of tritium at a density equal to
1.5 ⫻ 1014 particles/cm3,  how  many  curies  of  tritium
are in the plasma? Compare this with a ﬁssion reactor
supply of 4 ⫻ 1010 Ci.

29. (a) Calculate the amounts of energy carried off by the
4
2He nucleus and the neutron in the D – T fusion reac-
tion.  (Assume  that  the  momentum  is  initially  zero.)
(b) Does this explain why only 20% of the energy pro-
duced can be used for critical ignition?

30. The  Sun  radiates  energy  at  the  rate  of  4 ⫻ 1023 kW.

Assuming that the reaction

4(1

1H) 9: 4

2He ⫹ 2e ⫹ ⫹ 2␯ ⫹ ␥

accounts  for  all  the  energy  released,  calculate  (a)  the
number of protons fused per second and (b) the mass
transformed into energy per second.

31. Suppose the target in a laser fusion reactor is a sphere
of solid hydrogen with a diameter of 10⫺4 m and a den-
sity  of  0.2 g/cm3.  Also  assume  that  half  of  the  nuclei
are 2H and half are 3H. (a) If 1% of a 200-kJ laser pulse
goes  into  heating  this  sphere,  what  temperature  will
the  sphere  reach?  (b)  If  all  of  the  hydrogen  “burns”
according  to  the  D – T  reaction,  how  many  joules  of
energy will be released?

32. In  a  tokamak  fusion  reactor,  suppose  a  500-eV
deuteron moves at an angle of 30° to the toroidal mag-
netic ﬁeld. Assume that B t ⫽ 1 T and B p ⫽ 0 (see Fig.
14.14). (a) Calculate the components of velocity paral-
lel and perpendicular to  Bt. (b) What is the radius of
the  spiral  motion  for  the  deuteron?  (c)  How  far  does

the  deuteron  travel  along the  magnetic  ﬁeld  before  it
completes one revolution around the magnetic ﬁeld?

33. The  carbon  cycle,  ﬁrst  proposed  by  Bethe  in  1939,  is
another  cycle  by  which  energy  is  released  in  stars  and
hydrogen is converted to helium. The carbon cycle re-
quires  higher  temperatures  than  the  proton – proton
cycle. The series of reactions is

12C ⫹ 1H 9: 13N ⫹ ␥

13N 9: 13C ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯

13C ⫹ 1H 9: 14N ⫹ ␥
14N ⫹ 1H 9: 15O ⫹ ␥

15O 9: 15N ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯

15N ⫹ 1H 9: 12C ⫹ 4He

(a) If the proton – proton cycle requires a temperature
of  1.5 ⫻ 107 K,  estimate  the  temperature  required  for
the ﬁrst  step  in  the  carbon  cycle.  (b)  Calculate  the  Q
value for each step in the carbon cycle and the overall
energy  released.  (c)  Do  you  think  the  energy  carried
off by the neutrinos is deposited in the star? Explain.

34. (a)  Calculate  the  energy  (in  kWh)  released  if  1 kg  of
239Pu  undergoes  complete  ﬁssion  and  the  energy  re-
leased  per  ﬁssion  event  is  200 MeV.  (b)  Calculate  the
energy (in MeV) released in the D– T fusion:

2
1H ⫹ 3

1H 9: 4

2He ⫹ 1
0 n

(c)  Calculate  the  energy  (in  kWh)  released  if  1 kg  of
deuterium undergoes fusion. (d) Calculate the energy
(in kWh) released by the combustion of 1 kg of coal if
each C ⫹ O2 : CO2 reaction yields 4.2 eV. (e) List the
advantages and disadvantages of each of these methods
of energy generation.

35. The 6Li isotope is only about 7.5% naturally abundant.
The remaining 92.5% of lithium is  7Li. It is estimated
that  about  2 ⫻ 1013 g  of  lithium  is  available.  If  6Li  is
used  as  a  tritium  source  in  fusion  reactors,  with  an
energy release of 22 MeV per 6Li nucleus, estimate the
total  energy  available  in  D – T  fusion.  How  does  this
number  compare  with  the  world’s  fossil  fuel  supply,
which is estimated to be about 2.5 ⫻ 1023 J?

36. Find  the  Q value  for  each  of  the  reactions  in  the
proton – proton  cycle  (Eq.  14.10),  and  show  that  the
overall Q value for the cycle is 25.7 MeV.

37. (a)  Estimate  the  net  power  output  of  a  fusion  reac-
tor that  burns  ten  50:50  3-mg  D– T  pellets  every
second. Assume that 30% of the fuel ignites and that a
5 ⫻ 1014 W laser pulse lasting 10 ns is needed to initi-
ate burning. (b) What is the equivalent in liters of oil
for a day’s operation, if 2 L of oil gives off 100 MJ when
burned?

38. In  a  laser  fusion  reaction,  a  pellet  containing  a  50:50
mixture  of  D  and  T  experiences  a  density  increase  of
1000  times  when  struck  by  a  laser  pulse.  (a)  Find  the
particle  density  in  the  compressed  state  if  the  normal

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

density is 0.20 g/cm3. (b) How long must the D and T
nuclei  be  conﬁned  at  this  density  if  the  reaction  is  to
achieve a break-even condition?

39. Two  nuclei  with  atomic  numbers  Z 1 and Z 2 approach
each  other  with  a  total  energy  E.  (a)  If  the  mini-
mum distance  of  approach  for  fusion  to  occur  is
r ⫽ 10⫺14 m, ﬁnd E in terms of Z1 and Z 2. (b) Calculate
the minimum energy for fusion for the D–D and D–T
reactions (the ﬁrst and third reactions in Eq. 14.11).

40. To  understand  why  containment  of  a  plasma  is  neces-
sary, consider the rate at which a plasma would be lost
if it were not contained. (a) Estimate the rms speed of
deuterons in a plasma at 108 K. (b) Estimate the time
interval  for  which  such  a  plasma  would  remain  in  a 
10-cm cube if no steps were taken to contain it.

4
2 He

41. Of  all  the  hydrogen  nuclei  in  the  ocean,  0.0156%  are
deuterium.  The  oceans  have  a  volume  of  317  million
cubic miles. (a) If all the deuterium in the oceans were
fused to 
, how many joules of energy would be re-
leased? (b) Current world energy consumption is about
7 ⫻ 1012 W.  If  consumption  were  100  times  greater,
how many years would the energy calculated in (a) last?
42. It  has  been  pointed  out  that  fusion  reactors  are  safe
from  explosion  because  there  is  never  enough  energy
in  the  plasma  to  do  much  damage.  (a)  Using  a  parti-
cle density  of  1015 cm⫺3 and  a  kinetic  temperature  of
10 keV,  calculate  the  amount  of  energy  stored  in  the
plasma of the TFTR reactor. (b) How many kilograms
of  water  could  be  boiled  by  this  much  energy?  (The
plasma volume of the TFTR reactor is about 50 m3.)

43. In  order  to  conﬁne  a  stable  plasma,  the  magnetic  en-
ergy  density  in  the  magnetic  ﬁeld  must  exceed  the
pressure 2nkT of the plasma by a factor of at least 10.
In  the  following,  assume  a  conﬁnement  time  ␶ ⫽ 1 s.
(a)  Using  Lawson’s  criterion,  determine  the  required
ion  density.  (b)  From  the  ignition  temperature  crite-
rion  for  the  D – T  reaction,  determine  the  required
plasma  pressure.  (c)  Determine  the  magnitude  of  the
magnetic ﬁeld that is required to contain the plasma.

14.7 Interaction of Particles with Matter
44. The  densities  and  atomic  weights  of  the  materials  in

Table 14.3 are as follows:

Substance

Density (g/cm3)

Atomic Weight

H2O
Al
Fe
Pb

1
2.7
7.8
11.35

18
27
55.8
207.2

Compute the number of electrons per cubic centimeter
for  each  material,  and  plot  the  gamma-ray  linear  ab-
sorption coefﬁcient versus electron density. Draw three
graphs corresponding to gamma-ray energies of 0.1, 1.0,
and 10 MeV. What do you conclude from your graphs?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

545

45. Three  equally  thick  layers  of  aluminum,  copper,  and
lead are used to reduce the intensity of an x-ray beam
to one-third of its original intensity. The wavelength of
the beam is 50 pm. (a) Find the thickness of a layer of
material.  (b)  By  what  fraction  would  the  initial  beam
intensity be reduced by the lead alone?

46. X-rays of wavelength 25 pm and gamma rays of energy
0.1 MeV have approximately the same absorption coef-
ﬁcient in lead. How do their energies compare?

47. What is the half-value thickness (Example 14.7) of water
to x-rays of wavelength 20 pm? Since the human body is
more  than  90%  water,  what  does  your  answer  indicate
about the use of x-rays as a diagnostic technique?

48. In  a  large-scale  nuclear  attack,  typical  radiation  inten-
sity from radioactive fallout might be 2000 rad in most
places.  In  the  following  calculations,  assume  that  one-
third of the radiation is 10-MeV gamma radiation and
that  the  linear  absorption  coefﬁcient  is  the  same  for
aluminum  and  concrete.  (a)  What  thickness  (in  me-
ters) of concrete would be needed to reduce the radia-
tion intensity to 1 rad? (b) If a particular shelter were
located  at  a  “hot  spot”  receiving  100,000 rad,  what
thickness  of  concrete  would  be  needed  to  reduce  the
radiation intensity to 1 rad?

14.8 Radiation Damage in Matter
49. Assume  that  an  x-ray  technician  takes  an  average  of
eight x-rays per day and receives a dose of 5 rem/year
as  a  result.  (a)  Estimate  the  dose  in  rem  per  x-ray
taken. (b) How does this result compare with low-level
background radiation?

50. In terms of biological damage, how many rad of heavy

ions are equivalent to 100 rad of x-rays?

51. Two workers using an industrial x-ray machine acciden-
tally insert their hands in the x-ray beam for the same
length of time. The ﬁrst worker inserts one hand in the
beam,  and  the  second  worker  inserts  both  hands.
Which worker receives the larger dose in rad?

52. Calculate the radiation dose, in rad, supplied to 1 kg of
water such that the energy deposited equals (a) the rest
energy  of  the  water  and  (b)  its  thermal  energy.  (As-
sume that each molecule has a thermal energy of k BT.)
53. A  person  whose  mass  is  75 kg  is  exposed  to  a  dose  of
25 rad. How many joules of energy are deposited in the
person’s body?

14.9 Radiation Detectors
54. In a Geiger tube, the voltage between the electrodes is
typically  1 kV  and  the  current  pulse  generated  by  the
detection of a ␤ particle fully charges a 5-pF capacitor.
(a) What is the energy ampliﬁcation of this device for
a 0.5-MeV  beta  ray?  (b)  How  many  electrons  are
avalanched by the initial electron?

55. In a PM tube, assume that there are seven dynodes with
potentials  of  100  V,  200  V,  300  V, . . . ,  700  V.  The
average  energy  required  to  free  an  electron  from  the

546

CHAPTER 14

NUCLEAR PHYSICS APPLICATIONS

dynode  surface  is  10 eV.  For  each  incident  electron,
how  many  electrons  are  freed  (a)  at  the  ﬁrst  dynode
and (b) at the last dynode?

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

56. A ﬁssion reaction that has been considered as a source
of  energy  is  the  absorption  of  a  proton  by  a  boron-11
nucleus to produce three alpha particles,

1
1 H ⫹ 11

5 B : 3 4

2 He

This is an attractive possibility because large amounts of
boron are present in the Earth’s crust. A disadvantage is
that  the  protons  and  boron  nuclei  must  have  large  ki-
netic  energies  in  order  for  the  reaction  to  take  place.
This is in contrast to the initiation of uranium ﬁssion by
slow  neutrons.  Chemical  explosives  might  provide  the
high  kinetic  energies  required.  (a)  What  energy  is  re-
leased in each ﬁssion event here? (b) What is the reason
the reactant particles must have high kinetic energies?

57. Consider  a  nucleus  at  rest,  which  then  spontaneously
splits  into  two  fragments,  of  masses  m 1 and m 2.  Show
that the fraction of the total kinetic energy that is car-
ried by fragment m 1 is

K1
K tot

⫽

m 2

m1 ⫹ m 2

and the fraction carried by m 2 is

K2
K tot

⫽

m1

m1 ⫹ m 2

58. A  stationary  236

assuming relativistic corrections can be ignored. (Note:
If  the  parent  nucleus  was  moving  before  the  decay,
then the ﬁssion products still divide the kinetic energy
as shown, if all velocities are measured in the center-of-
mass frame of reference, in which the total momentum
of the system is zero.)

35Br  and  149

92 U  nucleus  ﬁssions  spontaneously  into
two  primary  fragments,  87
57La.  (a)  Calculate
the disintegration energy. The required atomic masses
35Br, 148.934 370 u for 149
are 86.920 710 u for 87
57La, and
236.045 562 u for  236
92 U. (b) How is the disintegration
energy  split  between  the  two  primary  fragments?  You
may use the result of Problem 57. (c) Calculate the ini-
tial speed of each fragment.

59. The  ﬁrst  nuclear  bomb  was  a  ﬁssioning  mass  of  pluto-
nium-239,  exploded  before  dawn  on  July  16,  1945,  at
Alamogordo,  New  Mexico.  Enrico  Fermi  was  14 km
away,  lying  on  the  ground  facing  away  from  the  bomb.
After the whole sky had ﬂashed with unbelievable bright-
ness, Fermi stood up and began dropping bits of paper
to the ground. They ﬁrst fell at his feet in the calm and
silent air. As the shock wave passed, about 40 s after the
explosion, the paper then in ﬂight jumped about 5 cm
away from ground zero. (a) Assume that the shock wave

in  air  propagated  equally  in  all  directions  without  ab-
sorption. Find the change in volume of a hemisphere of
radius 14 km as it expands by 5 cm. (b) Find the work
P⌬V done by the air in this sphere on the next layer of
air farther from the center. (c) Assume the shock wave
carried  on  the  order  of  one-tenth  of  the  energy  of  the
explosion.  Make  an  order-of-magnitude  estimate  of  the
bomb  yield.  (d)  One  ton  of  exploding  trinitrotoluene
(TNT) releases an energy of 4.2 GJ. What was the order
of magnitude of the energy of the ﬁrst nuclear bomb in
equivalent  tons  of  TNT?  Fermi’s  immediate  knowledge
of the bomb yield agreed with that determined days later
by analysis of elaborate measurements.

60. At time t ⫽ 0 a sample of uranium is exposed to a neu-
tron source that causes N0 nuclei to undergo ﬁssion. The
sample is in a supercritical state, with a reproduction con-
stant K ⬎ 1. A chain reaction occurs that produces ﬁssion
throughout the mass of uranium. The chain reaction can
be  thought  of  as  a  succession  of  generations.  The  N 0 ﬁs-
sions produced initially are the zeroth generation of ﬁs-
sions. From this generation, N0K neutrons go off to pro-
duce ﬁssion  of  new  uranium  nuclei.  The  N0K ﬁssions
that  occur  subsequently  are  the  ﬁrst  generation  of  ﬁs-
sions,  and  from  this  generation,  N0K 2 neutrons  go  in
search of uranium nuclei in which to cause ﬁssion. The
subsequent N0K 2 ﬁssions  are  the  second  generation  of
ﬁssions. This process can continue until all the uranium
nuclei have ﬁssioned. (a) Show that the cumulative total
of ﬁssions, N, that have occurred up to and including the
nth generation after the zeroth generation is given by

N ⫽ N 0冢 K n⫹1 ⫺ 1

K ⫺ 1

冣

(b) Consider a hypothetical uranium bomb made from
5.50 kg of isotopically pure 235U. The chain reaction has
a reproduction constant of 1.10 and starts with a zeroth
generation of 1.00 ⫻ 1020 ﬁssions. The average time be-
tween  one  ﬁssion  generation  and  the  next  is  10.0  ns.
How  long  after  the  zeroth  generation  does  it  take  the
uranium in this bomb to ﬁssion completely? (c) Assume
that the bulk modulus of uranium is 150 GPa. Find the
speed of sound in uranium. You may ignore the density
difference between 235U and natural uranium. (d) Find
the  time  interval  required  for  a  compressional  wave  to
cross  the  radius  of  a  5.50-kg  sphere  of  uranium.  This
time indicates how quickly the motion of explosion be-
gins.  (e)  Fission  must  occur  in  a  time  interval  that  is
short compared to that in part (d), for otherwise most
of  the  uranium  will  disperse  in  small  chunks  without
having ﬁssioned. Can the bomb considered in part (b)
release the explosive energy of all of its uranium? If so,
how much energy does it release, in equivalent tons of
TNT?  Assume  that  1  ton  of  TNT  releases  4.20 GJ  and
that each uranium ﬁssion releases 200 MeV of energy.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15
Elementary Particles

Chapter Outline

15.1 The Fundamental Forces 

in Nature

15.2 Positrons and Other Antiparticles
15.3 Mesons and the Beginning 

15.8 The Eightfold Way
15.9 Quarks

The Original Quark Model
Charm and Other Developments

of Particle Physics

15.10 Colored Quarks, or Quantum

15.4 Classiﬁcation of Particles

Hadrons
Leptons
The Solar Neutrino Mystery and

Neutrino Oscillations

15.5 Conservation Laws

Baryon Number
Lepton Number

15.6 Strange Particles and Strangeness
15.7 How Are Elementary Particles

Produced and Particle 
Properties Measured?
Resonance Particles
Energy Considerations in Particle

Production

Chromodynamics
Experimental Evidence for Quarks
Explanation of Nuclear Force in

Terms of Quarks

15.11 Electroweak Theory and 

the Standard Model

15.12 Beyond the Standard Model
Grand Uniﬁcation Theory and

Supersymmetry

String Theory — A New Perspective

Summary
ESSAY How to Find a Top Quark, by
Melissa Franklin and David Kestenbaum

The  word  atom is  from  the  Greek  atomos,  which  means  “indivisible.”  At  one
time,  atoms  were  thought  to  be  the  indivisible  constituents  of  matter;  that  is,
they  were  regarded  as  elementary  particles.  From  as  far  back  as  the  ancient
Greek  philosopher  Democritus  to  the  relatively  recent  works  of  John  Dalton
and  Dmitri  Mendeleev,  the  idea  that  everything  consists  of  elementary  atoms
has  been  quite  successful  in  explaining  many  properties  of  matter.  When  dis-
coveries  in  the  early  part  of  the  20th  century  revealed  that  the  atom  is  com-
posed  of  other  constituents,  another  simpliﬁcation  occurred  with  Bohr’s
atomic model and the invention of quantum mechanics. The variety of physical
and chemical properties of approximately 100 elements has been explained in
terms  of  rules  governing  just  three  constituents:  electrons,  protons,  and  neu-
trons. With the exception of the free neutron, these particles are very stable.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

547

548

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Beginning  in  about  1945,  many  new  particles  were  discovered  in  experi-
ments involving high-energy collisions between known particles. Such particles
are  highly  unstable  and  have  very  short  half-lives,  ranging  between  10⫺6 and
10⫺23 s.  So  far,  more  than  400  of  these  unstable,  temporary  particles  have
been catalogued.

Since  the  early  1960s,  many  powerful  particle  accelerators  have  been  con-
structed  throughout  the  world,  making  it  possible  to  observe  collisions  of
energetic particles under controlled laboratory conditions so as to reveal the
subatomic world in ﬁner detail. Until the 1960s, physicists were puzzled by the
large number and variety of subatomic particles being discovered. They won-
dered whether the particles were like the varied animals in a zoo, with no sys-
tematic relationship connecting them, or whether a pattern was emerging that
would provide a better understanding of the elaborate structure of the subnu-
clear  world.  Since  about  1970,  physicists  have  tremendously  advanced  our
knowledge  of  the  structure  of  matter  by  recognizing  that  all  particles  except
electrons,  photons,  and  a  few  others  are  made  of  smaller  particles  called
quarks. Thus  protons  and  neutrons,  for  example,  are  not  truly  elementary
but  are  systems  of  tightly  bound  quarks.  The  quark  model  has  reduced  the
array of particles to a manageable number and has successfully predicted new
quark  combinations  that  have  subsequently  been  observed  in  many  experi-
ments.  A  kind  of  wave  mechanics  for  quarks  (quantum  chromodynamics)
has  also  been  developed.  This  theory,  although  mathematically  difﬁcult,  has
deepened our understanding of elementary particles and has helped to tame
the particle “zoo.”

This chapter examines the properties and classiﬁcations of the known ele-
mentary  particles,  the  interactions  that  govern  their  behavior,  and  the  meth-
ods of producing elementary particles and measuring their properties. We also
discuss  the  current  theory  of  elementary  particles,  the  standard  model,  in
which  elementary  particles  are  divided  into  two  catagories:  particles  of  spin
1
— quarks  and  leptons — and  force-carrying,  or  “ﬁeld”  particles  with  integral
2
spin like the photon and gluon.

15.1 THE FUNDAMENTAL FORCES IN NATURE

To understand the properties of elementary particles, we must be able to de-
scribe the forces between them. Particles in nature are subject to four funda-
mental forces; in order of decreasing strength, these are the strong force, the
electromagnetic force, the weak force, and the gravitational force.

The strong force is responsible for binding quarks tightly together to form
protons, neutrons, and other heavy particles. It is extremely short-range and is
negligible  for  separations  greater  than  approximately  10⫺15 m.  The  nuclear
force  that  binds  neutrons  and  protons  in  nuclei  is  currently  believed  to  be  a
residual  effect  of  the  more  basic  strong  force  between  quarks,  much  as  the
molecular  force  binding  electrically  neutral  atoms  together  in  molecules  is  a
residual electrical interaction.

The electromagnetic force, which binds electrons and protons within atoms
and molecules to form ordinary matter, is approximately two orders of magni-
tude  weaker  than  the  strong  force.  It  is  a  long-range  force  that  decreases  in
strength as the inverse square of the separation between interacting particles.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.1

THE FUNDAMENTAL FORCES IN NATURE

549

The weak  force  is  a  short-range  force  that  accounts  for  the  beta  decay  of
nuclei and the decay of heavier quarks and leptons. Its strength is only about
10⫺6 times that of the strong force. (As we shall discuss later, scientists now be-
lieve that the weak and electromagnetic forces are two manifestations of a uni-
ﬁed force called the electroweak force.)

Finally,  the  gravitational  force  is  a  long-range  force  that  has  a  strength
only about 10⫺43 times that of the strong force. Although this familiar interac-
tion  holds  the  planets,  stars,  and  galaxies  together,  its  effect  on  elementary
particles is negligible.

Classically,  the  entity  that  is  responsible  for  transmitting  a  force  from  one
particle to another is the ﬁeld. For example, a positive electric charge produces
an electric ﬁeld in space, which in turn exerts an attractive force on a nearby
negative charge. Furthermore, the ﬁeld can carry energy and momentum from
one particle to the other. According to quantum ﬁeld theories, the energy and
momentum of all ﬁelds are quantized, and the quantum that carries a “chunk”
of momentum and energy from one type of particle to another is called a ﬁeld
particle. In  particle  physics,  interactions  between  particles  are  described  in
terms of the exchange of ﬁeld particles, or quanta, which  are  all  bosons. In the
case of the familiar electromagnetic interaction, for instance, the ﬁeld particles
are photons. In the language of modern physics, one can say that the electro-
magnetic  force  is  mediated,  or  carried,  by  photons  and  that  photons  are  the
quanta of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Likewise, the strong force is mediated by
ﬁeld particles called  gluons, the weak force is mediated by particles called the
W⫾ and Z0 bosons, and the gravitational force is carried by quanta of the gravita-
tional ﬁeld called gravitons. These interactions, the particles they act on, their
ranges, their relative strengths, and the corresponding ﬁeld particles, are sum-
marized in Table 15.1. Note that the fourth column of Table 15.1 presents an-
other  way  of  classifying  interactions — by  means  of  the  observed  lifetime  of  a
decaying particle. In fact, with only a few exceptions, the lifetimes of decaying
particles are excellent indicators of what interaction has caused the decay, with
shorter lifetimes being associated with stronger forces. As shown in Table 15.1,
particles decaying via the strong force are usually the shortest-lived; next come

Table 15.1 Particle Interactions

Typical

Lifetimes
for Decays
via a Given
Interaction

Range of
Force

ⱕ10⫺20 s

Short (⬇1 fm)

⬇10⫺16 s

Long (⬁)

Force-
Carrying
Particle
Exchanged

Gluon

Photon

ⱖ10⫺10 s

Short (⬇10⫺3 fm)

W⫾, Z0 bosons

Relative
Strengtha

1

⬇10⫺2

⬇10⫺6

⬇10⫺43

?

Long (⬁)

Gravitonb

Interaction
(Force)

Strong

Electromagnetic

Weak

Gravitational

Particles
Acted on by
Force

Quarks, 
hadrons
Charged 
particles
Quarks, 
leptons
All particles

aFor two u quarks at 3 ⫻ 10⫺17 m.
bNot experimentally detected.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

550

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

e–

those decaying via electromagnetic forces; and ﬁnally, particles decaying by the
weak interaction have the longest observed lifetimes.

E

+ mec2

0

– mec2

E ⬘ ⱖ mec2

Dirac
Sea

e+

Figure  15.1 Dirac’s  model  for
the  existence  of  antielectrons
(positrons).  The  states  lower  in
energy  than  ⫺m ec 2 are  ﬁlled
with  electrons  (the  Dirac  sea).
One of these electrons can make
a transition out of its state only if
it  is  provided  with  energy  equal
to  or  larger  than  2m ec 2.  This
leaves a vacancy in the Dirac sea,
which  can  behave  as  a  particle
identical  to  the  electron  except
for its positive charge.

Pair production

15.2 POSITRONS AND OTHER ANTIPARTICLES

E ⫽ ⫾√p2c2 ⫹ m 2

In  the  1920s  the  English  theoretical  physicist  Paul  Adrien  Maurice  Dirac
(1902 – 1984) developed a version of quantum mechanics that incorporated spe-
cial relativity. Dirac’s theory automatically explained the origin of the electron’s
spin  and  its  magnetic  moment.  However,  it  also  presented  a  major  difﬁculty.
Dirac’s relativistic wave equation required solutions corresponding to both posi-
tive and negative energies for free electrons.1 We can easily see this from the ex-
ec4
pression  for  the  total  relativistic  energy  of  an  electron 
,
which has both positive and negative roots. But if negative energy states existed,
one would expect an electron in a state of positive energy to make a rapid transi-
tion to one of these lower energy states, emitting a photon in the process. Even-
tually  all  electrons  in  the  universe  would  end  up  locked  in  negative  energy
states, contradicting the common observation of electrons with positive total en-
ergies. Dirac avoided this difﬁculty by postulating that all negative energy states
are ﬁlled. Electrons that occupy the negative energy states are called collectively
the “Dirac sea.” Electrons in the Dirac sea are not directly observable, because
the Pauli exclusion principle does not allow them to react to external forces —
there  are  no  available  states  to  which  an  electron  can  make  a  transition  in  re-
sponse to an external force. Therefore, an electron in such a state acts as an iso-
lated system, unless enough energy (ⱖ2m ec 2) is supplied to excite the electron
to a positive energy state. Such an excitation causes one of the negative energy
states  to  become  vacant,  as  in  Figure  15.1,  leaving  a  hole  in  the  sea  of  ﬁlled
states. The hole can react to external forces and is observable. The hole reacts in a way
similar to that of the electron, except that it has a positive charge — it is the an-
tiparticle to the electron. The electron’s antiparticle, the positron, has a rest
energy of 0.511 MeV and a positive charge of ⫹1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C.

Carl Anderson (1905 – 1991) observed the positron experimentally in 1932,
and in 1936 he was awarded a Nobel prize for his achievement. Anderson dis-
covered  the  positron  while  examining  tracks  created  in  a  cloud  chamber  by
electron-like  particles  of  positive  charge.  (These  early  experiments  used  cos-
mic  rays — mostly  energetic  protons  passing  through  interstellar  space — to
initiate  high-energy  reactions  on  the  order  of  several  GeV.)  To  discriminate
between positive and negative charges, Anderson placed the cloud chamber in
a  magnetic  ﬁeld,  causing  moving  charges  to  follow  curved  paths.  He  noted
that some of the electron-like tracks deﬂected in a direction corresponding to
a positively charged particle.

Since  Anderson’s  discovery,  positrons  have  been  observed  in  a  number  of
experiments.  A  common  source  of  positrons  is  pair  production. In  this
process,  a  gamma-ray  photon  with  sufﬁciently  high  energy  interacts  with  a
nucleus,  and  an  electron – positron  pair  is  created  from  the  photon.  (The
presence of the nucleus allows the principle of conservation of momentum to
be  satisﬁed.)  Because  the  total  rest  energy  of  the  electron – positron  pair  is

1P. A.  M.  Dirac,  The  Principles  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  3rd  ed.,  New  York,  Oxford  University  Press,
1947, Chapter 11.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.2

POSITRONS AND OTHER ANTIPARTICLES

551

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

γ

γ

Lead sheet

B

(b)

e+

e–

e+

e–

Figure  15.2

  (b)  A  sketch  of  the  pertinent  pair-production  events.  Note  that  the
positrons deﬂect upward while the electrons deﬂect downward in an applied magnetic
ﬁeld directed into the page.

2m ec 2 ⫽ 1.02 MeV, the photon must have at least this much energy to create
an electron – positron pair. Therefore, the electromagnetic energy of a photon
is converted mainly to rest energy of the electron and positron in accordance
with  Einstein’s  relationship  E ⫽ mc 2.  If  the  gamma-ray  photon  has  energy  in
excess  of  the  rest  energy  of  the  electron – positron  pair,  the  excess  appears
as kinetic  energy  of  the  two  particles.  Figure  15.2  shows  tracks  of
electron – positron pairs created by 300-MeV gamma rays striking a lead sheet.
The reverse process can also occur. Under the proper conditions, an elec-
tron and a positron can annihilate each other to produce two gamma-ray pho-
tons with a combined energy of at least 1.02 MeV:

e⫺ ⫹ e⫹ 9: 2␥

Electron – positron
annihilation

A  practical  application  of  electron – positron  annihilation  occurs  in  the  med-
ical diagnostic technique called positron emission tomography (PET). The
patient  is  injected  with  a  glucose  solution  containing  a  radioactive  substance
that  decays  by  positron  emission,  and  the  material  is  carried  by  the  blood
throughout  the  body.  A  positron  emitted  during  a  decay  event  in  one  of  the
radioactive  nuclei  in  the  glucose  solution  annihilates  with  an  electron  in  the
surrounding  tissue,  resulting  in  two  gamma-ray  photons  emitted  in  opposite
directions. A gamma detector surrounding the patient pinpoints the source of
the photons and, with the assistance of a computer, displays an image of the
sites  at  which  the  glucose  accumulates.  (Glucose  is  metabolized  rapidly  in
cancerous tumors and accumulates at those sites, providing a strong signal for
a  PET  detector  system.)  The  images  from  a  PET  scan  can  indicate  a  wide
variety of disorders in the brain, including Alzheimer’s disease (Fig. 15.3). In
addition,  because  glucose  metabolizes  more  rapidly  in  active  areas  of  the
brain,  a  PET  scan  can  indicate  which  areas  of  the  brain  are  involved  in
activities  in  which  a  patient  is  engaging  at  the  time  of  the  scan,  such  as  lan-
guage use, music, and vision.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

552

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Figure 15.3 PET scans of the brain of a healthy older person (left) and that of a pa-
tient suffering from Alzheimer’s disease (right). (National Institute of Health)

Prior to 1955, on the basis of the Dirac theory, it was expected that every
particle  had  a  corresponding  antiparticle,  but  antiparticles  such  as  the
antiproton  and  antineutron  had  not  been  detected  experimentally.  Since
the relativistic Dirac theory had had some failures (it predicted the wrong-
size  magnetic  moment  for  the  proton)  as  well  as  many  successes,  it  was
important  to  determine  whether  the  antiproton  really  existed.  In  1955  a
team  led  by  Emilio  Segrè  (1905 – 1989,  Italian-American  physicist)  and
Owen  Chamberlain  (b.  1920,  American  physicist)  used  the  Bevatron  parti-
cle  accelerator  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  to  produce  both
antiprotons and antineutrons. They thus established with certainty the exis-
tence  of  antiparticles.  For  this  work  Segrè  and  Chamberlain  received  the
Nobel prize in 1959. It is now accepted that every particle has a corre-
sponding antiparticle of equal mass and spin and of equal and oppo-
site  charge,  magnetic  moment,  and  strangeness. (The  property  of
strangeness is explained in Section 15.6.) The only exceptions to these rules
for particles and antiparticles are the neutral photon, pion, and eta, each of
which is its own antiparticle.

EXAMPLE 15.1 Pair Production

When an electron and a positron meet at low speeds in
free  space,  why  are  two 0.511-MeV  gamma  rays  pro-
duced  rather  than  one gamma  ray  with  an  energy  of
1.022 MeV ?

Reasoning Gamma  rays  are  photons,  and  photons
carry  momentum.  If  only  one  photon  were  produced,

momentum  would  not  be  conserved,  because  the  total
momentum  of  the  electron – positron  system  is  approxi-
mately  0,  whereas  a  single  photon  of  energy  1.022 MeV
would have a very large momentum. On the other hand,
the two gamma-ray photons that are produced travel off
in opposite directions, so their total momentum is 0.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.3 MESONS AND THE BEGINNING

OF PARTICLE PHYSICS

15.3

MESONS AND THE BEGINNING OF PARTICLE PHYSICS

553

In the mid-1930s, physicists had a fairly simple view of the structure of matter.
The  building  blocks  were  the  proton,  the  electron,  and  the  neutron.  Three
other  particles  were  known  or  had  been  postulated  at  the  time:  the  photon,
the neutrino, and the positron. These six particles were considered the funda-
mental  constituents  of  matter.  With  this  marvelously  simple  picture  of  the
world,  however,  no  one  could  provide  an  answer  to  an  important  question:
Since the many protons close together in a nucleus should strongly repel each
other because of their like charges, what is the nature of the force that holds
the nucleus together? Scientists recognized that this mysterious force must be
much stronger than anything encountered in nature up to that time.

In  1935  the  Japanese  physicist  Hideki  Yukawa  (1907 – 1981)  proposed  the
ﬁrst  theory  to  successfully  explain  the  nature  of  the  nuclear  force,  an  effort
that  later  earned  him  the  Nobel  prize.  To  understand  Yukawa’s  theory,  it  is
useful  to  recall  that  in  the  modern  view  of  electromagnetic  interactions,
charged particles interact by exchanging photons. Yukawa used this idea to explain
the nuclear force by proposing a new particle whose exchange between nucle-
ons  in  the  nucleus  produces  the  nuclear  force.  Furthermore,  he  established
that the range of the force is inversely proportional to the mass of this particle
and  predicted  that  the  mass  would  be  about  200  times  the  mass  of  the  elec-
tron.  Since  the  new  particle  would  have  a  mass  between  that  of  the  electron
and that of the proton, it was called a meson (from the Greek meso, “middle”).
In an effort to substantiate Yukawa’s predictions, physicists began an experi-
mental  search  for  the  meson  by  studying  cosmic  rays  entering  the  Earth’s
atmosphere. In 1937 Carl Anderson and his collaborators discovered a particle
of  mass  106 MeV/c 2,  about  207  times  the  mass  of  the  electron.  However,
subsequent  experiments  showed  that  the  particle  interacted  very  weakly
with matter  and  hence  could  not  be  the  carrier  of  the  strong  force.  The
puzzling  situation  inspired  several  theoreticians  to  propose  that  there  were
two  mesons  with  slightly  different  masses.  This  idea  was  conﬁrmed  by  the
discovery in 1947 of the pi (␲) meson, or simply pion, by Cecil Frank Powell
(1903 – 1969) and Giuseppe P. S. Occhialini (b. 1907). The particle discovered
by  Anderson  in  1937,  the  one  thought  to  be  a  meson,  is  not  really  a  meson.
Instead, it takes part in the weak and electromagnetic interactions only, and it
is now called the muon.

The  pion,  Yukawa’s  carrier  of  the  nuclear  force,  comes  in  three  varieties,
corresponding to three charge states: ␲⫹, ␲⫺, and ␲0. The ␲⫹ and ␲⫺ parti-
cles  have  masses  of  139.6 MeV/c 2,  and  the  ␲0 has  a  mass  of  135.0 MeV/c 2.
Both pions and muons are unstable particles. For example, the ␲⫺, which has
a mean lifetime of 2.6 ⫻ 10⫺8 s, ﬁrst decays to a muon and a muon antineu-
trino. The muon, which has a mean lifetime of 2.2 ␮s, then decays to an elec-
tron, a neutrino, and an electron antineutrino:
␲⫺ 9: ␮⫺ ⫹ ␯␮
␮⫺ 9: e⫺ ⫹ ␯␮ ⫹ ␯e

(15.1)

The  interaction  between  two  particles  can  be  represented  in  a  useful
diagram  called  a  Feynman  diagram, developed  by  the  American  physicist
Richard  P.  Feynman  (1918 – 1988).  Figure  15.4  is  such  a  diagram  for  the

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Hideki  Yukawa  (1907 – 1981),  a
Japanese  physicist,  was  awarded
the Nobel prize in 1949 for pre-
dicting the existence of mesons.
This  photograph  of  Yukawa  at
work  was  taken  in  1950  in  his
ofﬁce  at  Columbia  University.
(© Bettmann/CORBIS)

e–

e–

Time

Virtual
Photon

e–

e–

Figure  15.4 Feynman  dia-
gram  showing  how  a  photon
carries 
electromagnetic
force  between  two  interacting
electrons. The blue arrow shows
the direction of increasing time.

the 

554

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

p

p

Time

0π

n

n

Figure  15.5 Feynman  dia-
gram  representing  a  proton  in-
teracting with a neutron via the
strong  force.  In  this  case,  the
pion mediates the strong force.
The blue arrow shows the direc-
tion of increasing time.

electromagnetic  interaction  between  two  electrons.  A  Feynman  diagram  is  a
qualitative  graph  of  time  on  the  vertical  axis  versus  space  on  the  horizontal
axis. It is qualitative in the sense that actual values of time and space are not
important,  but  the  overall  appearance  of  the  graph  conveniently  serves  to
categorize  different  interaction  processes.  In  this  simple  case,  a  photon  is
the ﬁeld  particle  that  mediates  the  electromagnetic  force  between  the  elec-
trons. The photon transfers energy and momentum from one electron to the
other in this interaction. The photon is called a virtual photon because it is
emitted  and  reabsorbed  without  being  detected.  Virtual  photons  can  violate
the law of conservation of energy by ⌬E for a very short time, ⌬t, provided that
⌬E ⌬t ⬇ ប/2  (from  the  minimum  form  of  the  uncertainty  principle).  Note
that  such  quantum  violations  of  energy  conservation  take  place  only  in  the
short term and that system energy is conserved in the long run when the pho-
ton is reabsorbed by the other electron.

Now  consider  the  pion  exchange  between  a  proton  and  a  neutron  that
transmits  the  nuclear  force  according  to  Yukawa  (Fig.  15.5).  We  can  reason
that the energy  ⌬E needed to create a pion of mass m␲ is given by Einstein’s
equation ⌬E ⫽ m␲c 2. Again, the very existence of the pion would violate con-
servation of energy if it lasted for a time greater than ⌬t ⬇ ប/2 ⌬E, where ⌬E
is the energy of the pion and ⌬t is the time it takes the pion to travel from one
nucleon to the other. Therefore,

⌬t ⬇

ប

2 ⌬E

⫽

ប

2m␲c 2

(15.2)

Because the pion cannot travel faster than the speed of light, the maximum
distance d it can travel in a time ⌬t is c⌬t. Using Equation 15.2 and d ⫽ c⌬t, we
ﬁnd this maximum distance to be

d ⬇

ប

2m␲c

(15.3)

We know that the range of the nuclear force is approximately 1.0 ⫻ 10⫺15 m.
Using  this  value  for  d in  Equation  15.3,  we  calculate  the  rest  energy  of  the
pion to be

m␲c2 ⬇

បc
2d

⫽

197 MeV ⭈fm

2(1 ⫻ 10⫺15 m)

⬇ 100 MeV

This corresponds to a mass of 100 MeV/c 2 (approximately 250 times the mass
of the electron), a value in reasonable agreement with the observed pion mass.
The concept we have just described is quite important. In effect, it says that
a proton can change into a proton plus a pion as long as it returns to its origi-
nal  state  in  a  very  short  time.  Physicists  often  say  that  a  nucleon  undergoes
“ﬂuctuations”  as  it  emits  and  absorbs  pions.  As  we  have  seen,  these  ﬂuctua-
tions  are  a  consequence  of  a  combination  of  quantum  mechanics  (through
the  uncertainty  principle)  and 
special  relativity  (through  Einstein’s
energy – mass relationship, E ⫽ mc 2). Also, as seen in Chapter 13, these virtual
ﬂuctuations  can  become  real  particles  in  collision  processes  if  the  incident
particle can furnish the “missing” energy and momentum.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.3

MESONS AND THE BEGINNING OF PARTICLE PHYSICS

555

R ichard Phillips Feynman was a

brilliant  theoretical  physicist
who  shared  the  1965  Nobel
Prize 
Julian  S.
in  Physics  with 
Schwinger and Shinichiro Tomonaga
for  their  fundamental  work  in  the
principles  of  quantum  electrody-
namics.  Feynman’s  many  important
contributions  to  physics  include  the
invention  of  simple  diagrams  to  rep-
resent  particle  interactions  graphi-
cally,  the  theory  of  the  weak  interac-
tion  of 
subatomic  particles,  a
reformulation  of  quantum  mechan-
ics,  the  theory  of  superﬂuid  helium,
and  his  contribution  to  physics  edu-
cation 
the  magniﬁcent
three-volume  text  The  Feynman  Lec-
tures on Physics.

through 

studied  under 

Feynman  did  his  undergraduate
work  at  MIT  and  received  his  Ph.D.
in  1942  from  Princeton  University,
where  he 
John
Archibald  Wheeler.  During  World
War II he worked on the Manhattan
Project  at  Princeton  and  at  Los
Alamos,  New  Mexico.  He 
then
joined the faculty at Cornell Univer-
sity  in  1945  and  in  1950  was  ap-
pointed  professor  of  physics  at  Cali-
fornia 
Institute  of  Technology,
where  he  remained  for  the  rest  of
his career.

It  is  well  known  that  Feynman
had  a  passion  for  ﬁnding  new  and
better  ways  to  formulate  each  prob-
lem  or,  as  he  would  say,  “turning  it
around.”  In  the  early  part  of  his
career,  he  was  fascinated  with  elec-
trodynamics  and  developed  an  intu-
itive  view  of  quantum  electrodynam-
ics.  Convinced  that  the  electron
could not interact with its own ﬁeld,
he  said,  “That  was  the  beginning,
and  the  idea  seemed  so  obvious
to me  that  I  fell  deeply  in  love  with
it. . . .”  Often  called  the  outstand-
ing intuitionist of our age, he said in
his  Nobel  acceptance  speech,  “Of-
ten, even in a physicist’s sense, I did
not  have  a  demonstration  of  how  to

B I O G R A P H Y

RICHARD P. FEYNMAN

(1918 – 1988)

get  all  of  these  rules  and  equations,
from  conventional  electrodynamics.
. . . I never really sat down, like Eu-
clid did for the geometers of Greece,
and  made  sure  that  you  could  get  it
all from a single set of axioms.”

commission  members 

In  1986  Feynman  was  a  member
of the presidential commission to in-
vestigate  the  explosion  of  the  space
shuttle Challenger. In this capacity, he
performed  a  simple  experiment  for
the 
that
showed  that  one  of  the  shuttle’s  O-
ring seals was the likely cause of the
disaster.  After  placing  a  seal  in  a
pitcher of ice water and squeezing it
with  a  clamp,  he  demonstrated  that
the  seal  failed  to  spring  back  into
shape once the clamp was removed.1
Feynman  worked  in  physics  with
a  style  commensurate  with  his  per-
sonality — that  is,  with  energy,  vital-
ity, and humor. The following quota-
tions  from  some  of  his  colleagues
hint at the great impact he made on
the scientiﬁc community.2

and 

amusing 

Murray  Gell-Mann:  “A  brilliant,
vital, 
neighbor,
Feynman was a stimulating (if some-
times  exasperating)  partner  in  dis-
cussions  of  profound 
issues — we
would exchange ideas and silly jokes

in  between  bouts  of  mathematical
calculation — we  struck  sparks  off
each other, and it was exhilarating.”
David  Pines:  “Reading  Feynman
is  a  joy  and  a  delight,  for  in  his  pa-
pers,  as  in  his  talks,  Feynman  com-
municated  very  directly,  as  though
the reader were watching him derive
the results at the blackboard.”

David  L.  Goodstein:  “He  loved
puzzles  and  games.  In  fact,  he  saw
all  the  world  as  a  sort  of  game,
whose progress of ‘behavior’ follows
certain rules, some known, some un-
known. . . .  Find  places  or  circum-
stances  where  the  rules  don’t  work,
and invent new rules that do.”

Valentine  L.  Telegdi:  “Feynman
was  not  a  theorist’s  theorist,  but  a
physicist’s  physicist  and  a  teacher’s
teacher.”

Laurie M. Brown, one of his grad-
uate  students  at  Cornell,  noted  that
Feynman,  a  playful  showman,  was
“undervalued  at  ﬁrst  because  of  his
rough manners [but] in the end tri-
umphs  through  native  cleverness,
psychological 
common
sense  and  the  famous  Feynman  hu-
mor. . . .  Whatever  else  Dick  Feyn-
man may have joked about, his love
for physics approached reverence.”

insight, 

1Feynman’s  own  account  of  this  inquiry
can  be  found  in  Physics  Today,  4:26,  Feb-
ruary 1988.
2For more on Feynman’s life and contri-
butions,  see  the  articles  in  a  special
memorial  issue  of  Physics  Today,  42,  Feb-
ruary  1989.  For  a  personal  account  of
Feynman, see his popular autobiographi-
cal books, Surely You’re Joking Mr. Feynman,
New  York,  Bantam  Books,  1985,  and
What Do You Care What Other People Think,
New York, W. W. Norton & Co., 1987.

(© Shelly Grazin/CORBIS)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

556

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

This  section  has  dealt  with  early  ideas  about  particles  that  carry  the  nu-
clear  force,  namely  the  pions,  and  the  mediators  of  the  electromagnetic
force,  photons.  Current  ideas  indicate  that  the  nuclear  force  is  more
accurately  described  as  an  average  or  residual  effect  of  the  strong
color  force  between  quarks, as  will  be  explained  in  Section  15.10.  The
graviton,  which  is  the  mediator  of  the  gravitational  force,  has  yet  to  be
observed. The W⫾ and Z0 particles that mediate the weak force were discov-
ered in 1983 by the Italian physicist Carlo Rubbia (b. 1934) and his associ-
ates, using a proton – antiproton collider. Rubbia and Simon van der Meer,
both  at  CERN  near  Geneva,  Switzerland,  shared  the  1984  Nobel  prize  for
the  discovery  of  the  W⫾ and  Z0 particles  and  the  development  of  the  pro-
ton – antiproton  collider.  In  this  accelerator,  protons  and  antiprotons  that
have  a  momentum  of  270 GeV/c undergo  head-on  collisions  with  each
other. In some of the collisions W⫾ and Z0 particles are produced, which in
turn are identiﬁed by their decay products.

15.4 CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICLES

All  particles  other  than  ﬁeld  particles  can  be  classiﬁed  into  two  broad  cate-
gories, hadrons and leptons, according to their interactions.

Hadrons
Particles  that  interact  through  the  strong  force  are  called  hadrons. The  two
classes  of  hadrons,  mesons and baryons, are  distinguished  by  their  masses
and spins.

Mesons all have spin 0 or 1, with masses between that of the electron and
that  of  the  proton.  All  mesons  are  known  to  decay  ﬁnally  into  electrons,
positrons,  neutrinos,  and  photons.  The  pion  is  the  lightest  of  known
mesons;  it  has  a  mass  of  approximately  140 MeV/c 2 and  a  spin  of  0.
Another  is  the  K  meson,  with  a  mass  of  approximately  500 MeV/c 2 and
a spin of 0.

Baryons, the second class of hadrons, have masses equal to or greater than
the  proton  mass  (baryon means  “heavy”  in  Greek),  and  their  spins  are always
odd half-integer values ( ,  ,  , etc.). Protons and neutrons are baryons, as are
many  other  particles.  With  the  exception  of  the  proton,  all  baryons  decay  in
such a way that the end products include a proton. For example, the baryon
called the ⌶⫺ hyperon ﬁrst decays to the ⌳0 baryon and a ␲⫺ in about 10⫺10 s.
The ⌳0 then decays to a proton and a ␲⫺ in approximately 3 ⫻ 10⫺10 s.

3
2

1
2

5
2

It is important to note that hadrons are composite particles, not point parti-
cles, and have a measurable size of about 1 fm (10⫺15 m). Hadrons are com-
posed  of  more  elemental  units  called  quarks,  which  are  believed  to  be  truly
structureless  point  particles.  Mesons  consist  of  two  quarks  and  baryons  of
three.  For  now,  however,  we  defer  discussion  of  the  ultimate  constituents  of
hadrons to Section 15.9 and continue with our empirical classiﬁcation of parti-
cles.  Table  15.2  lists  important  properties  of  the  leptons  and  some  hadrons.
The  symbols  B, L e, L ␮, L ␶,  and  S stand  for  baryon,  electron,  muon,  and
tau numbers  and  strangeness,  respectively,  and  are  explained  in  Sections
15.5 and 15.6.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Table 15.2 Some Particles and Their Properties

15.4

CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICLES

557

Category Particle Name

Symbol particle

Anti-

Leptons

Electron
Electron-neutrino
Muon
Muon-neutrino
Tau

Tau-neutrino

Hadrons
Mesons

Pion

Kaon

Baryons

Eta

Proton
Neutron
Lambda
Sigma

Delta

Xi

Omega

e⫺
␯e
␮⫺
␯␮
␶⫺

␯␶

␲⫹
␲0
K⫹

0
KS

0
KL

␩
␩⬘

p
n
⌳0
⌺⫹
⌺0
⌺⫺
⌬⫹⫹
⌬⫹
⌬0
⌬⫺
⌶0
⌶⫺
⍀⫺

e⫹
␯e
␮⫹
␯␮
␶⫹

␯␶

␲⫺
Self
K⫺

0
KS

0
KL

Self
Self

p
n
⌳0
兺⫺
兺0
兺⫹
⌬
⌬⫺
⌬0
⌬⫹
⌶0
⌶⫹
⍀⫹

Mass 
(MeV/c2)

0.511

⬍2.8 ⫻ 10⫺6
105.7
⬍3.5 ⫻ 10⫺6

1784

⬍8.4 ⫻ 10⫺6

139.6
135.0
493.7

497.7

497.7

548.8
958

938.3
939.6
1115.6
1189.4
1192.5
1197.3
1230
1231
1232
1234
1315
1321
1672

B

Le L␮ L␶ S

0 ⫹1
0 ⫹1
0
0
0

0
0
0 ⫹1
0 ⫹1
0

0
0
0
0
0 ⫹1

Lifetime
(s)

Principal
Decay
Modesa

0 Stable
0 Stable
0 2.19 ⫻ 10⫺6
0 Stable
0 3.3 ⫻ 10⫺13

e⫺␯e␯␮

␮⫺␯␮␯␶,
e⫺␯e␯␶

0

0
0
0

0

0

0
0

⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1
⫹1

0

0
0
0

0

0

0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0 ⫹1

0 Stable

0
0
0

0

0

0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0 2.60 ⫻ 10⫺8 ␮⫹␯␮
0 0.83 ⫻ 10⫺16 2␥

0
0
0 ⫹1 1.24 ⫻ 10⫺8 ␮⫹␯␮
␲⫹␲0
0 ⫹1 0.89 ⫻ 10⫺10 ␲⫹␲⫺

0 ⫹1 5.2 ⫻ 10⫺8

2␲0
␲⫾e⫿␯e
3␲0
␲⫾␮⫿␯␮
0 ⬍10⫺18
2␥, 3␲0
0 2.2 ⫻ 10⫺21 ␩␲⫹␲⫺

0
0

0 Stable
0 624

0
pe⫺␯e
0
p␲⫺, n␲0
0 ⫺1 2.6 ⫻ 10⫺10
0 ⫺1 0.80 ⫻ 10⫺10 p␲0, n␲⫹
0 ⫺1 6 ⫻ 10⫺20
⌳0␥
n␲⫺
0 ⫺1 1.5 ⫻ 10⫺10
p␲⫹
0
p␲0, n␲⫹
0
n␲0, p␲⫺
0
n␲⫺
0
0 ⫺2 2.9 ⫻ 10⫺10
⌳0␲0
0 ⫺2 1.64 ⫻ 10⫺10 ⌳0␲⫺
0 ⫺3 0.82 ⫻ 10⫺10 ⌶⫺␲0, ⌶0␲⫺,

0 6 ⫻ 10⫺24
0 6 ⫻ 10⫺24
0 6 ⫻ 10⫺24
0 6 ⫻ 10⫺24

aNotations in this column such as p␲⫺, n␲0 indicate two possible decay modes. In this case, the two possible decays are ⌳0 : p ⫹ ␲⫺ and
⌳0 : n ⫹ ␲0.

⌳0K⫺

Leptons
Leptons (from  the  Greek  leptos ,  meaning  “small”  or  “light”)  are  a  group
of particles  that  participate  in  the  electromagnetic  and  weak  interactions.
All  leptons  have  spins  of 
.  Unlike  hadrons,  which  have  size  and  structure,
leptons  appear  to  be  truly  elementary  point-like  particles  with
no structure. Also unlike hadrons, the number of known leptons is small.
Currently,  scientists  believe  there  are  only  six  leptons:  the  electron,  the

1
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

558

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

muon, the tau, and — associated with each of these particles — three differ-
ent  neutrinos,  the  electron  neutrino  (␯e),  the  muon  neutrino  (␯␮),  and
the tau neutrino (␯␶). We now classify the six known leptons into three pairs
called families:

␯e冣    冢␮⫺
冢e⫺

␯␮冣    冢␶⫺
␯␶冣

Table 15.2 shows that the tau lepton is actually quite massive and has a mass
about twice that of the proton. Also note in the table that each lepton has
an  antiparticle.  It  is  quite  unexpected  and  interesting  that  neutrinos  and
antineutrinos  each  have  a  distinct  helicity,  or  relation  between  linear  mo-
mentum and spin directions. The spin of a neutrino is opposite to its direc-
tion of travel, and the spin of an antineutrino is parallel to its direction of
travel. Current evidence suggests that neutrinos have a small mass of several
eV/c 2 as shown in Table 15.2. Problem 23 investigates an interesting time-
of-ﬂight  method  for  setting  an  upper  limit  on  neutrino  mass.  As  we  shall
see, a ﬁrm knowledge of the neutrino’s mass has great signiﬁcance in physi-
cal models of energy production in stars and in grand uniﬁed theories of el-
ementary particles.

The Solar Neutrino Mystery and Neutrino Oscillations
Conclusive  measurements  of  the  ability  of  neutrinos  to  change  from
one type  or  “ﬂavor’’  to  another,  along  with  indirect  measurements  of
neutrino masses have recently been made at the Sudbury Neutrino Obser-
vatory  (SNO)  in  Canada  and  the  Super  Kamiokanda  detector  in  Japan.
These  ﬁndings  solve  a  puzzle  over  40  years  old  and  provide  new  conﬁ-
dence that  physicists  really  do  understand  how  energy  is  produced  in  the
Sun’s core.

The warming sunlight we receive on Earth should be accompanied by bil-
lions  of  neutrinos  per  square  centimeter  per  second.  In  particular,  electron
neutrinos are produced in the Sun’s fusion engine by typical reactions like

p ⫹ p 9: 2

1H ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯e ⫹ 0.42 MeV

and the boron decay

8
5B 9: 8

4Be ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯e ⫹ 14.6 MeV

Measurements  of  the  ␯e ﬂux  dating  back  to  the  1960s  have,  however,
been consistently  mysterious  because  only  about  one-third  of  the  expected  ﬂux
has  been  observed.  (The  expected  ﬂux  of  solar  electron  neutrinos  was  cal-
culated  using  the  trusted  standard  solar  model  of  the  Sun’s  properties
and energy  production.)  One  proposed  explanation  of  the  mystery  is  that
some ␯e’s  have  changed  into  ␯␮’s  or  ␯␶’s  during  the  journey  from  the  Sun
to the Earth, and these ␯␮’s or ␯␶’s would not show up in detectors designed
to spot ␯e’s.

The basic idea is that the change from ␯e to, say, ␯␮ would not be perma-
nent  but  would  just  be  part  of  an  ongoing  oscillation  between  ␯e and ␯␮.
The  best  part  is  that  the  frequency  of  oscillation  would  depend  on
the masses.  Thus  measurement  of  neutrino  oscillation frequencies  could
indirectly  determine  neutrino  masses,  which  are  small  and  extremely

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.5

CONSERVATION LAWS

559

(a)

(b)

(a) Artist’s concept of the underground SNO detector showing the 12 m diameter spheri-
cal acrylic vessel containing 1000 tons of D2O. (b) A photo of the detector under construc-
tion.  Photomultipliers  mounted  on  the  frame  shown  detect  Cerenkov  light ﬂashes  pro-
duced by neutrino reactions in the D2O. (Photos courtesy of Sudbury Neutrino Observatory)

hard to measure directly. We can think of each ﬂavor of neutrino — ␯e, ␯␮,
␯␶— as  a  linear  combination  of  three  other  neutrinos — ␯1, ␯2, ␯3 — each
having  a  different  mass  m1, m 2,  and  m 3 and  different  energy  for  a  given
momentum.  Since  the  time  dependence  of  each  state  ␯1, ␯2, ␯3 is  oscilla-
tory and of the form exp(⫺iEt/ប), with time, the states ␯1, ␯2, ␯3 move out-
of-phase  with  each  other  and  interfere,  producing  an  oscillation  between
flavors.  Problem  15.22  explores  how  to  calculate  the  probabilty  that  a  ␯␮
oscillates to a ␯␶.

The  latest  ﬁndings  from  SNO  scientists,  who  used  a  new  detection  tech-
nique  equally  sensitive  to  electron,  muon,  and  tau  neutrinos,  conclusively
show  that  the  missing  electron  neutrinos  are  accounted  for  by  oscillation
of ␯e’s  into  ␯␮’s  and  ␯␶’s.  Further,  plans  are  under  way  at  SNO  to  study  how
neutrino oscillation depends on the passage of neutrinos through matter. This
can  be  done  by  observing  day – night  differences  in  neutrino  ﬂux  from
the Sun, because at night neutrinos must penetrate the whole Earth to reach
the detector.

15.5 CONSERVATION LAWS

Conservation  laws  are  important  to  an  understanding  of  why  certain  decays
and reactions occur and others do not. In general, the laws of conservation of
energy,  linear  momentum,  angular  momentum,  and  electric  charge  provide

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

560

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

us  with  a  set  of  rules  that  all  processes  must  absolutely  follow.  For  example,
conservation of electric charge requires that the total charge before a reaction
equals the total charge after the reaction.

Certain new conservation laws are important in the study of elementary par-
ticles. Two of these laws, concerning baryon number and lepton number, are
described in this section, and others will be discussed later in this chapter. Al-
though the two described here have no theoretical foundation, they are sup-
ported  by  abundant  empirical  evidence  and  serve  to  indicate  probable  reac-
tions, but do not absolutely hold 100% of the time.

Baryon Number
To apply conservation of baryon number, we assign a baryon number B ⫽ ⫹1
for  all  baryons,  B ⫽ ⫺1  for  all  antibaryons,  and  B ⫽ 0  for  all  other  particles.
The law of conservation of baryon number states that whenever a nuclear re-
action or decay occurs, the sum of the baryon numbers before the process must equal the
sum of the baryon numbers after the process. An equivalent statement is that the net
number of baryons remains constant in any process.

If  baryon  number  is  absolutely  conserved,  the  proton  must  be  absolutely
stable. If it were not for the law of conservation of baryon number, the proton
could decay to a positron and a neutral pion. However, such a decay has never
been observed. At present, we can say only that the proton has a half-life of at
least 1032 years (the estimated age of the Universe is only about 1010 years). In
one recent version of a grand uniﬁed theory, physicists predicted that the pro-
ton is unstable. According to this theory, baryon number is not absolutely or
perfectly conserved.

Conservation of baryon
number

EXAMPLE 15.2 Checking Baryon Numbers

Determine  whether  or  not  each  of  the  following  reac-
tions can occur on the basis of the law of conservation of
baryon number.

(1)    p ⫹ n 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ n ⫹ p
(2)    p ⫹ n 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ p

Solution For reaction 1, recall that B ⫽ ⫹1 for baryons
and B ⫽ ⫺1 for antibaryons. Hence the left side of reac-

tion  1  gives  a  total  baryon  number  of  1 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2.  The
right  side  of  reaction  1  gives  a  total  baryon  number  of
1 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 1 ⫹ (⫺1) ⫽ 2. Thus the reaction can occur, pro-
vided the incoming proton has sufﬁcient energy.

The left side of reaction 2 gives a total baryon number
of  1 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2.  However,  the  right  side  gives  1 ⫹ 1 ⫹
(⫺1) ⫽ 1. Because the baryon number is not conserved,
the  reaction  cannot  occur  or  at  most  has  a  small  proba-
bility of occurrence.

Conservation of lepton
number

Lepton Number
From observations of commonly occurring decays of the muon and tau we
arrive  at  three  conservation  laws  involving  lepton  numbers,  one  for  each
variety  of  lepton.  The  law  of  conservation  of  electron-lepton  number
(lepton ﬂavor conservation) states that the sum of the electron-lepton numbers
before a reaction or decay must equal the sum of the electron-lepton numbers after the
reaction or decay.

The electron and the electron neutrino are assigned a positive lepton num-
ber, L e ⫽ ⫹1; the antileptons e⫹ and e are assigned a negative lepton num-

v

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.6

STRANGE PARTICLES AND STRANGENESS

561

ber, L e ⫽ ⫺1; all others (the muon and tau families) have L e ⫽ 0. For exam-
ple, consider the decay of the neutron

n 9: p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯e

Before the decay the electron-lepton number is L e ⫽ 0; after the decay it is
0 ⫹ 1 ⫹  (⫺1) ⫽ 0.  Thus  the  electron-lepton  number  is  conserved,  although
not perfectly in view of the proven neutrino oscillation previously mentioned.
It is important to recognize that the baryon number must also be conserved.
We can easily check this by noting that before the decay B ⫽ ⫹1, and after the
decay B ⫽ ⫹1 ⫹ 0 ⫹ 0 ⫽ ⫹1.

␯

Similarly, when a decay involves muons, the muon-lepton number, L␮, is
conserved. The ␮⫺ and the ␯␮ are assigned positive numbers, L␮ ⫽ ⫹1; the
antimuons ␮⫹ and ␮ are assigned negative numbers, L ␮ ⫽ ⫺1 and all oth-
ers have L ␮ ⫽ 0. Finally, the tau-lepton number, L ␶, is conserved, and simi-
lar assignments can be made for the tau lepton and its neutrino. In all cases
it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  lepton  ﬂavor  conservation  is  not
absolute,  and  that  lepton  ﬂavor-violating  reactions  have  a  small  probability
of occurrence.

EXAMPLE 15.3 Checking Lepton Numbers

Determine which of the following decay schemes can occur
on the basis of conservation of electron-lepton number:

(1)    ␮⫺ 9: e⫺ ⫹ ␯e ⫹ ␯␮
(2)    ␲⫹ 9: ␲⫹ ⫹ ␯␮ ⫹ ␯e

Solution Because decay 1 involves both a muon and an
electron, L␮ and L e must both be conserved. Before the

decay,  L␮ ⫽ ⫹1  and  L e ⫽ 0.  After  the  decay,  L␮ ⫽ 0 ⫹
0 ⫹ 1 ⫽ ⫹1, and L e ⫽ ⫹1 ⫺ 1 ⫹ 0 ⫽ 0. Thus both num-
bers  are  conserved,  and  on  this  basis  the  decay  mode  is
possible.

Before  decay  2  occurs,  L␮ ⫽ 0  and  L e ⫽ 0.  After  the
decay, L␮ ⫽ ⫺1 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 0 ⫽ 0, but L e ⫽ ⫹1. Thus the de-
cay is not possible, because the electron-lepton number is
not conserved.

Exercise 1 Determine whether the decay ␮⫺ : e⫺ ⫹ e can occur.
Answer No. The muon-lepton number is ⫹1 before the decay and 0 after the decay.

␯

15.6 STRANGE PARTICLES AND STRANGENESS

Many particles discovered in the 1950s were produced by the nuclear interac-
tion  of  pions  with  protons  and  neutrons  in  the  atmosphere.  Three  of  these
particles — namely,  the  kaon  (K),  lambda  (⌳),  and  sigma  (兺)  particles —
exhibited unusual properties in production and decay and hence were called
strange particles.

One unusual property of these particles is their production in pairs. For ex-
ample,  when  a  pion  collides  with  a  proton,  two  neutral  strange  particles  are
produced with high probability (Fig. 15.6):

␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: K0 ⫹ ⌳0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

562

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

On  the  other  hand,  the  reaction  ␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: K0 ⫹ n  never  occurred,  even
though no known conservation laws would have been violated and the energy
of the pion was sufﬁcient to initiate the reaction.

The  second  peculiar  feature  of  strange  particles  is  that  although  they
are produced by the strong interaction at a high rate, they do not decay into
particles  that  interact  via  the  strong  force  at  a  very  high  rate.  Instead,  they
decay  very  slowly,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  weak  interaction,  as  shown
in Table  15.1.  Their  half-lives  are  in  the  range  10⫺10 s  to  10⫺8 s;  most
other particles that interact via the strong force have lifetimes on the order of
10⫺20 s and less.

To codify these unusual properties of strange particles, a law called conser-
vation  of  strangeness  was  introduced  with  a  new  quantum  number  S,  called
strangeness. The  strangeness  numbers  for  some  particles  are  given  in
Table 15.2. The production of strange particles in pairs is explained by assign-
ing S ⫽ ⫹1  to  one  of  the  particles  and  S ⫽ ⫺1  to  the  other.  All  nonstrange
particles are assigned strangeness S ⫽ 0. The law of conservation of strange-

Conservation of strangeness
number

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.7

HOW ARE ELEMENTARY PARTICLES PRODUCED AND PARTICLE PROPERTIES MEASURED?

563

ness states that whenever a nuclear reaction or decay occurs, the sum of the strange-
ness  numbers  before  the  process  must  equal  the  sum  of  the  strangeness  numbers  after
the process.

The slow decay of strange particles can be explained by assuming that the
strong  and  electromagnetic  interactions  obey  the  law  of  conservation  of
strangeness but the weak interaction does not. Because the decay reaction in-
volves the loss of one strange particle, it violates strangeness conservation and
hence proceeds slowly via the weak interaction.

EXAMPLE 15.4 Is Strangeness Conserved?

(a) Determine whether the following reaction occurs on
the basis of conservation of strangeness.

(b)  Show  that  the  following  reaction  does  not  conserve
strangeness:

␲0 ⫹ n 9: K⫹ ⫹ 兺⫺

␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: ␲⫺ ⫹ 兺⫹

Solution The initial state has strangeness S ⫽ 0 ⫹ 0 ⫽ 0.
Because  the  strangeness  of  the  K⫹ is S ⫽ ⫹1  and  the
strangeness of the 兺⫺ is S ⫽ ⫺1, the strangeness of the ﬁ-
nal state is ⫹1 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0. Thus strangeness is conserved and
the reaction is allowed.

Solution The initial state has strangeness S ⫽ 0 ⫹ 0 ⫽ 0,
and  the  ﬁnal  state  has  strangeness  S ⫽ 0 ⫹ (⫺1) ⫽ ⫺1.
Thus strangeness is not conserved.

Exercise  2 Show  that  the  reaction  p ⫹ ␲⫺ 9: K0 ⫹ ⌳0 obeys  the  law  of  conserva-
tion of strangeness.

15.7 HOW ARE ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

PRODUCED AND PARTICLE
PROPERTIES MEASURED?

Examination of the bewildering array of entries in Table 15.2 leaves one yearn-
ing  for  ﬁrm  ground.  It  is  natural  to  wonder  about  a  particle  that  exists  for
10⫺20 s and has a mass of 1192.5 MeV/c 2. How is it possible to detect a particle
that exists for only 10⫺20 s? Furthermore, how can the mass be measured? If a
standard attribute of a particle is some type of permanence or stability, in what
sense is a ﬂeeting entity that exists for 10⫺20 s a particle? In this section we at-
tempt to answer such questions and explain how elementary particles are pro-
duced and how their properties are measured.

Elementary particles, most of which are unstable and occur rarely naturally,
are created abundantly in man-made collisions of high-energy particles with a
suitable  target.  Since  very  high  energy  beams  of  incident  particles  are  desir-
able, stable charged particles such as electrons or protons generally make up
the incident beam, because it takes considerable time to accelerate particles to
high  energies  with  electromagnetic  ﬁelds.  Similarly,  targets  must  be  simple
and  stable,  and  the  simplest  target,  hydrogen,  serves  nicely  as  both  a  target
and a detector. In a liquid hydrogen bubble chamber, which is basically a large

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

564

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

container  ﬁlled  with  hydrogen  near  its  boiling  point,  a  charged  particle  tra-
versing  the  chamber  ionizes  the  atoms  along  its  path,  and  the  ionization
causes a visible track of tiny bubbles. The liquid hydrogen also serves as an efﬁ-
cient source of target protons, with a proton density sufﬁcient to ensure many
incident particle – target collisions within a reasonable time.

Figure 15.6 shows a typical event in which a bubble chamber has served as
both target and detector. In this ﬁgure, many parallel tracks of negative pions
are visible entering the photograph from the bottom. One of the pions has hit
a  stationary  proton  in  the  hydrogen  and  produced  two  strange  particles,  the
⌳0 and K0, according to the reaction

␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: ⌳0 ⫹ K0

Neither  neutral  strange  particle  leaves  a  track,  but  their  subsequent  decays
into charged particles can be seen clearly, as indicated in Figure 15.6. A mag-
netic ﬁeld directed into the plane of the photograph causes the track of each
charged  particle  to  curve,  and  from  the  measured  curvature  the  particle’s
charge  and  linear  momentum  can  be  determined.  If  the  mass  and  momen-
tum  of  the  incident  particle  are  known,  we  can  then  usually  calculate  the
product  particle  mass,  kinetic  energy,  and  speed  from  conservation  of
momentum and energy (see Section 1.10 and Example 1.18). Finally, combin-
ing  a  product  particle’s  speed  with  a  measurable  decay  track  length,  we  can
calculate  the  product  particle’s  lifetime.  Figure  15.6  shows  that  sometimes
one  can  use  this  lifetime  technique  even  for  a  neutral  particle,  which  leaves
no track. As long as the particle speed and the start and ﬁnish of the missing
track are known, one can infer the missing track length and ﬁnd the lifetime
of the neutral particle.

Resonance Particles
With  clever  experimental  technique  and  much  effort,  decay  track  lengths  as
short as 1 micron (10⫺6 m) can be measured. This means that lifetimes as short
as 10⫺16 s can be measured with this technique in the case of high-energy parti-

A colliding beam detector at CERN. (Philippe Plailly/Eurelios/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers, Inc.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

15.7

HOW ARE ELEMENTARY PARTICLES PRODUCED AND PARTICLE PROPERTIES MEASURED?

565

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

cles  traveling  at  about  the  speed  of  light.  We  arrive  at  this  result  by  assuming
that a decaying particle travels 1 micron in the laboratory at a speed of 0.99c,
yielding  a  laboratory  lifetime  of  ␶lab ⫽ 10⫺6 m/0.99c ⬇ 0.33 ⫻ 10⫺14 s.  Now,
relativity helps us. Since the proper lifetime, as measured in the decaying parti-
cle’s rest frame, is shorter than ␶lab by a factor of 
, we can actually
measure lifetimes of duration:

√1 ⫺ ␯2/c 2

␶proper ⫽ ␶lab√1 ⫺

␯2

c 2 ⫽ (0.33 ⫻ 10⫺14 s) √1 ⫺

(0.99c)2

c 2

⫽ 4 ⫻ 10⫺16 s

Unfortunately,  even  with  Einstein’s  help,  we  are  several  orders  of  magnitude
away  from  minimum  hadron  lifetimes  of  10⫺23 s  with  the  best  efforts  of  the
track-length  method.  How  then,  can  we  detect  the  presence  of  particles  that
exist  for  as  short  a  time  as  10⫺23 s?  As  we  shall  see  shortly,  the  masses,  life-
times,  and  very  existence  of  these  very  short-lived  particles,  known  as  reso-
nance particles, can be inferred from peaks (resonances) in the cross section
versus energy plots describing their decay products.

Let’s  consider  this  in  more  detail  by  looking  at  the  case  of  the  resonance
particle  called  the  delta  plus  (⌬⫹),  which  has  a  mass  of  1231 MeV/c 2 and  a
lifetime of about 6 ⫻ 10⫺24 s. The ⌬⫹ is produced in the reaction

e⫺ ⫹ p 9: e⫺ ⫹ ⌬⫹

which is followed in 6 ⫻ 10⫺24 s by the decay

⌬⫹ 9: ␲⫹ ⫹ n

(15.4)

(15.5)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

566

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Because the ⌬⫹ lifetime is so short, it leaves no measurable track, and it might
seem impossible to distinguish the reactions given in Equations 15.4 and 15.5
from the net direct reaction in which no ⌬⫹ is produced:

e⫺ ⫹ p 9: e⫺ ⫹ ␲⫹ ⫹ n

(15.6)
In  fact,  we  can  tell  whether  a  ⌬⫹ was  formed  by  measuring  the  momentum
and energy of the suspected decay products (pion and neutron) and using the
conservation of momentum and energy to see whether these values combine
to give a ⌬⫹ mass of 1231 MeV/c 2.

To understand this in detail, consider the decay of the ⌬⫹ shown in Figure

15.7. The energy and momentum of the ⌬⫹ must satisfy the equation

or

2 ⫽ (p⌬c)2 ⫹ (m⌬c 2)2

E ⌬

m ⌬c 2 ⫽ √E ⌬

2 ⫺ (p⌬c)2

(15.7)
where m⌬ is  the  ⌬⫹ mass.  Although  we  cannot  directly  measure  E⌬ and p⌬,
since the delta particle leaves no track, we can measure the energies and mo-
menta  of  the  outgoing  particles,  E␲, p␲, E n,  and  pn.  Using  conservation  of
momentum and energy, we can then ﬁnd an expression for m⌬c 2 in terms of
these  measured  quantities.  Thus  we  have  E⌬ ⫽ E␲ ⫹ E n and p⌬ ⫽ p␲ ⫹ pn,
and substituting into Equation 15.7,

m⌬c2 ⫽ √(E␲ ⫹ En)2 ⫺ (p␲ ⫹ pn)2c2

(15.8)
Equation 15.8 holds for all events in which a ⌬⫹ particle actually formed and
decayed. That is, for many different measured values of E␲, p␲, En, and pn cor-
responding to many repeated experiments, we will always ﬁnd the same value
of the quantity m⌬c 2 ⫽ 1231 MeV within experimental uncertainty if the decay of
a ⌬⫹ is  involved. On the other hand, if no ⌬⫹ is involved and the direct reac-
tion e⫺ ⫹  p :  e⫺ ⫹  ␲⫹ ⫹  n  occurs, 
will  not
equal 1231 MeV but will sweep over a broad range of values, some larger and
some smaller than m⌬c 2, as the experiment is repeated. The typical method for
showing the existence of a resonance particle involves calculating the quantity
Z ⫽ √(E␲ ⫹ En)2 ⫺ (p␲ ⫹ pn)2c 2
for a large number of events in which a ␲⫹

√(E␲ ⫹ En)2 ⫺ (p␲ ⫹ pn)2c2

∆+

p∆, E∆

p , E
π π

p

n, E n

+
π

n

Before

10 –23 s  After

Figure 15.7 The decay of a ⌬⫹ particle into a positive pion and a neutron.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.7

HOW ARE ELEMENTARY PARTICLES PRODUCED AND PARTICLE PROPERTIES MEASURED?

567

∆+ resonance

Γ = 115 MeV

 

V
e
M
0
5
 
r
e
p
 
s
t
n
e
v
E

1000

1500

2000

Z in MeV

Figure  15.8 Experimental  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  ⌬⫹ particle.  The  sharp
peak near 1230 MeV was produced by the events in which a ⌬⫹ formed and promptly
decayed into a ␲⫹ and neutron.

and a neutron are produced and then drawing a histogram of those events. By
plotting  the  number  of  events  with  a  given  value  of  Z against  this  value  of  Z,
we obtain  a  slowly  varying  curve  with  sharp  peaks  superimposed,  the
peaks showing the existence of resonance particles. Figure 15.8 shows such an
experimental  histogram  for  the  ⌬⫹ particle.  The  broad  background  (dashed
curve) is produced by direct events in which no ⌬⫹ was created; the sharp peak
near Z ⫽ 1230 MeV, containing many events, was produced by all the events in
which  a  ⌬⫹ formed  and  decayed  into  a  pion  and  neutron  with  just  the  right
energies and momenta to make up a delta particle. Peaks corresponding to two
other resonance particles of larger mass can also be seen in Figure 15.8.

Histograms  like  Figure  15.8  can  tell  us  not  only  the  mass  of  a  short-lived
particle  but  also  the  lifetime  of  the  particle  from  the  full  width  at  half
maximum  of  the  resonance  peak,  denoted  by  ⌫ in  Figure  15.8.  Because  ⌫ is
twice  the  uncertainty  in  energy  of  the  delta,  (⌫ ⫽ 2 ⌬E),  we  can  use  the
energy – time  uncertainty  relation,  ⌬E ⌬t ⬇ ប/2,  to  infer  the  lifetime  of  the
delta, ⌬t:

⌬t ⬇

ប

2 ⌬E

⫽

ប
⌫

(15.9)

The  measured  width  of  ⌫ ⫽ 115 MeV  leads  to  a  value  for  the  lifetime  of  the
delta particle:

⌬t ⬇

ប
⌫

⫽

6.6 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈s

115 ⫻ 106 eV

⫽ 5.7 ⫻ 10⫺24 s

In this incredibly short lifetime, a delta particle moving at the highest possible
speed of c travels only 10⫺15 m, or about one nuclear diameter.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

568

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Energy Considerations in Particle Production
It  is  ironic  that  the  highly  sophisticated  branch  of  physics  known  as  elemen-
tary particle physics relies for its very existence on the most brutish of experi-
mental  methods:  smashing  an  incident  particle  moving  at  relativistic  speed
into a stationary target particle and observing what pieces come ﬂying out! Yet
this process is at the heart of experimental particle physics, and in this section
we shall determine the threshold energy that is required for the production of
new  particles  in  a  collision.  Since  the  energy  needed  to  manufacture  new
particles comes from the kinetic energy of the incident particle, and incident
particle  energies  are  quite  large  (the  Fermi  National  Laboratory  produces
1000-GeV  protons),  we  must  use  relativistic  equations  in  the  calculation  of
these threshold energies.

Consider the speciﬁc particle production process

m1 ⫹ m 2 9: m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5

(15.10)

Here m1 is the mass of the incident particle, m 2 is the mass of the target par-
ticle that is at rest in the laboratory, and m3, m4, and m 5 are product-particle
masses. Figure 15.9a shows such a particle reaction in the laboratory refer-
ence  frame.  The  energies  shown  in  Figure  15.9 — E 1, E 2,  and  so  on — are
total energies (kinetic energy ⫹ rest energy) and the momenta are labeled

LAB Frame

p

3, E3

m3

m4

m5

4, E4
p

5, E5
p

m1

1, E1
p

m2
p

2 = 0, E2

Before

After

(a)

CM Frame

(p

total = 0)

p′ E ′
3, E 3
p

m3

m1

p′ E ′
1, E 1
p

m2

p′ E ′
2, E 2
p

m4

p′ E ′
4, E 4
p

Before

(b)

m5

After

p′ E ′
5, E 5
p

Figure  15.9 (a)  The  reaction  m1 ⫹ m 2 : m3 ⫹ m4 ⫹ m 5 viewed  in  the  laboratory
frame,  where  m 2 is  initially  at  rest  and  the  energies  are  total  relativistic  energies  (ki-
netic  plus  rest  energy).  (b)  The  same  reaction  viewed  from  the  center-of-mass  (CM)
frame, in which the total momentum is always zero.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.7

HOW ARE ELEMENTARY PARTICLES PRODUCED AND PARTICLE PROPERTIES MEASURED?

569

p1, p2, and so on. At ﬁrst glance it might seem that the total initial energy
of m 1 and m 2, E 1 ⫹ E 2, could be converted completely to rest energy of par-
ticles  3,  4,  and  5.  However,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  the  calculation  of
nuclear reaction thresholds in Chapter 14, some of the initial energy must
go  into  energy  of  motion  of  the  product  particles  in  order  to  conserve
momentum in the collision. This means that not all of the initial energy can
go into creating new masses. The issue is to ﬁnd out how much of the initial
energy  can  go  toward  creating  masses  m 3, m 4,  and  m 5.  That  is,  we  wish
to calculate  the  minimum  or  threshold  kinetic  energy  Kth that m 1 must
have  in  order  to  create  particles  with  masses  of  m 3, m 4,  and  m 5 and  also
conserve momentum.

An  important  clue  to  ﬁnding  K th comes  from  understanding  that  if  we
could somehow arrange for a zero initial momentum, all of the initial energy
could be converted into new particles. What we can do is solve for K th in the
frame  in  which  the  initial  momentum  is  zero — the  center-of-mass  frame —
and then transform that result back into the frame in which the experiment is
actually carried out, the laboratory frame. Here’s how it goes.

Figure 15.9b shows the same reaction as 15.9a but viewed from the center-
of-mass  (CM)  frame,  in  which,  by  deﬁnition,  the  total  momentum  is  always
zero.  Thus,  in  Figure  15.9b,  m 1 and m 2 have  equal  and  opposite  momenta,
and the vector sum of the momenta of m 3, m 4, and m 5 is zero. Actually, Figure
15.9b shows the case of an incident particle with more than threshold energy.
A  moment’s  reﬂection  reveals  that  when  m 1 has  the  minimum,  or  thresh-
old, energy  in  the  CM  frame,  all  of  the  initial  energy,  E ⬘1 ⫹ E ⬘2,  should  be
converted to the masses of particles 3, 4, and 5. This occurs when the product
particles  are  created  at  rest  in  the  CM  frame,  which  is  now  possible  since
the total momentum is zero in the CM frame. Figure 15.10 shows the reaction
m 1 ⫹ m 2 :  m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5 in  the  CM  frame  when  m 1 has  the  threshold
kinetic energy and m 3, m 4, and m 5 are created at rest.

To calculate  a  numerical  expression  for  K th,  we  make  use  of  the  invariant
quantity E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2, introduced in Chapter 2. Recall that E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2 is called an in-
variant because it has the same numerical value for a system of particles in any in-
ertial frame (see Problem 16 in Chapter 2). Applying the invariance of E 2 ⫺ p 2c 2
to the CM and laboratory frames, we have, for the period before the collision,

E 2
CM ⫺ p 2

CMc 2 ⫽ E 2

lab ⫺ p 2

labc 2

(15.11)

E ′E 4

E ′E 3
m3 m4m5

E ′E 5
p′
p′
p′
5 = 0
3 = p
4 = p
p
After

CM Frame
(p
total = 0)

p′ E ′
2, E 2
p

m2

m1

p′ E ′
1, E 1
p

Before

Figure 15.10 The reaction m 1 ⫹ m 2 : m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5 in the CM frame when m 1 has
the  threshold  kinetic  energy  required  to  produce  m 3, m 4,  and  m 5.  For  the  threshold
condition, m 3, m 4, and m 5 are created at rest.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

570

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Here, E CM and E lab stand for the sum of the energies of particles m 1 and m 2 in
the CM and laboratory frames, respectively. Likewise, p CM and p lab stand for the
sum of the momenta of particles m 1 and m 2 in the CM and laboratory frames.
Because p CM ⫽ 0, E lab ⫽ E1 ⫹ m 2c 2, and p lab ⫽ p1, Equation 15.11 becomes

We can eliminate p 1 from Equation 15.12 by using E 1

2c 2 ⫹ m 1

2c 4 to obtain

2c 2
2 ⫽ p 1
2)c 4

(15.12)

(15.13)

E 2

CM before ⫽ (E 1 ⫹ m 2c 2)2 ⫺ p 1

E 2

CM before ⫽ 2E1m2c 2 ⫹ (m 2

2 ⫹ m1

Observe that Equation 15.13 is in a useful form, since we can readily solve for
E 1 or K th (E 1 ⫽ K th ⫹ m 1c 2)  in  terms  of  all  the  masses  if  we  can  ﬁnd  an
expression for E CM before in terms of the product masses m 3, m 4, and m 5. We
can ﬁnd such an expression by conserving relativistic energy in the CM frame:

E CM before ⫽ E CM after ⫽ E ⬘3 ⫹ E ⬘4⫹ E ⬘5 ⫽ (m 3 ⫹ m 4⫹ m 5)c 2

(15.14)
Substituting  this  expression  into  Equation  15.13  and  using  E1 ⫽ K th ⫹ m1c 2,
after a bit of algebra we obtain our ﬁnal result:

Kth ⫽

(m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5)2c2 ⫺ (m 1 ⫹ m 2)2c2

2m 2

(15.15)

Equation  15.15  gives  the  threshold  kinetic  energy  of  an  incident  particle  m 1
colliding with a stationary target m 2 required to produce three product parti-
cles of mass m 3, m 4, and m 5. For more than three product particles, inspection
of our derivation shows that Equation 15.15 can be generalized as
(m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5 ⫹ m 6 ⫹ ⭈  ⭈  ⭈)2c 2 ⫺ (m 1 ⫹ m 2)2c2

(15.16)

Kth ⫽

2m 2

EXAMPLE 15.5 How to Make a Virtual

Particle Real

Consider  the  scattering  of  two  protons.  Assume  that  the
protons  interact  by  exchanging  virtual  ﬁeld  particles  or
ﬁeld quanta. Thus, if the protons are attracted gravitation-
ally,  they  exchange  a  graviton;  if  they  are  repelled  electri-
cally, they exchange a photon. In the present case we wish
to consider the nuclear force between two protons that we
assume is carried by the ﬁeld particle called the pi meson
or pion. When an incoming proton scatters from a station-
ary proton at low energy, a virtual pion with a mass of about
140 MeV/c 2 can blink into existence, transport energy and
momentum from one proton to the other, and then blink
out of existence in a time so short that violation of energy
conservation is not observable. However, if an incident pro-
ton  interacts  with  a  stationary  target  at  high  enough  en-
ergy,  the  incident  proton  may  supply  enough  energy  to
make a virtual pion real according to the reaction

p ⫹ p 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ ␲0

(15.17)

where ␲0 represents a neutral pion. In this example, we
wish  to  ﬁnd  the  threshold  energy  for ␲0 production  ac-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

cording  to  the  reaction  given  by  Equation  15.17.  The
neutral pion has a rest energy of 135 MeV.

Solution Use  Equation  15.15  with  m 1 ⫽ m 2 ⫽ m 3 ⫽
m 4 ⫽ m p ⫽ 938.3 MeV/c 2 and m 5 ⫽ m␲ ⫽ 135 MeV/c 2.
Equation 15.15 becomes

(2m p ⫹ m␲)2c 2 ⫺ (2m p)2c 2

Kth ⫽

⫽

2m p
(4m pm␲ ⫹ m␲

2)c 2

2m p

⫽ 2(135 Mev/c 2)c 2 ⫹

⫽ 280 MeV

⫽ 2m␲c 2 ⫹

m 2
␲c 2
2m p
(135 MeV/c 2)2c 2
2(938.3 MeV/c 2)

Thus,  if  stationary  protons  are  bombarded  with  protons
of  at  least  280  MeV  kinetic  energy,  particle  accelerators
can produce neutral pion beams that can be used for ad-
ditional pion studies.

 

15.8

THE EIGHTFOLD WAY

571

Exercise 3 Since equally strong nuclear forces exist between proton and proton, neu-
tron and neutron, and proton and neutron, we might expect the pion to come in three
different charge states, ⫹e, ⫺e, and 0, and this is indeed the case. Three different pi-
ons exist —␲⫹, ␲⫺, and ␲0 — with masses m␲⫺ ⫽ 139.6 MeV/c 2, m␲⫹ ⫽ 139.6 MeV/c 2,
and m␲0 ⫽ 135 MeV/c 2. Two reactions involving the production of the ␲⫹ and ␲⫺ are

p ⫹ p 9: p ⫹ n ⫹ ␲⫹

p ⫹ p 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ ␲⫹ ⫹ ␲⫺

(15.18)

(15.19)

Calculate the threshold energy for these reactions.
Answers K th ⫽ 292 MeV for Equation 15.18; K th ⫽ 600 MeV for Equation 15.19.

15.8 THE EIGHTFOLD WAY

One of the tools scientists use is the detection of patterns in data, patterns that
contribute  to  our  understanding  of  nature.  One  of  the  best  examples  of
the use  of  this  tool  is  the  development  of  the  periodic  table,  which  provides
a fundamental  understanding  of  the  chemical  behavior  of  the  elements.
The periodic  table  explains  how  more  than  100  elements  can  be  formed
from three  particles — the  electron,  the  proton,  and  the  neutron.  The  table
of nuclides  contains  hundreds  of  nuclides,  but  all  can  be  built  from  protons
and neutrons.

The  number  of  observed  particles  and  resonances  observed  by  particle
physicists is also in the hundreds. Is it possible that a small number of entities
exist  from  which  all  of  these  can  be  built?  Taking  a  hint  from  the  success  of
the periodic table and the table of nuclides, let us explore the historical search
for patterns among the particles.

Many classiﬁcation schemes have been proposed for grouping particles into
families. Consider, for instance, the baryons listed in Table 15.2 that have spins
of  : p, n, ⌳0, 兺⫹, 兺0, 兺⫺, ⌶0, and ⌶⫺. If we plot strangeness versus charge for

1
2

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

572

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

n

p

S = 0

K°

K+

S = +1

_

Σ

Λ°

Σ°

Σ+

S = _1

_
π

°η

°
π

π+

S = 0

_
Ξ

Ξ+

S = _2

Q = +1

Q = _1

(a)

Q = 0

°
η

_

K

K°

S = _1

Q = _1

Q = 0

Q = +1

(b)

Figure  15.11 (a)  The  hexagonal  eightfold-way  pattern  for  the  eight  spin- baryons.
This strangeness-versus-charge plot uses a sloping axis for the charge number Q but a
horizontal  axis  for  the  strangeness  (S)  values.  (b)  The  eightfold-way  pattern  for  the
nine spin-0 mesons.

1
2

these  baryons  using  a  sloping  coordinate  system,  as  in  Figure  15.11a,  we
observe  a  fascinating  pattern:  Six  of  the  baryons  form  a  hexagon,  and  the
remaining two are at the hexagon’s center.

As a second example, consider the following nine spin-zero mesons listed in
Table  15.2:  ␲⫹, ␲0, ␲⫺,  K⫹,  K0,  K⫺, ␩, ␩⬘,  and  the  antiparticle 
.  Figure
15.11b is a plot of strangeness versus charge for this family. Again, a hexagonal
pattern emerges. In this case, each particle on the perimeter of the hexagon
lies opposite its antiparticle, and the remaining three (which form their own
antiparticles) are at the center of the hexagon. These and related symmetric
patterns  were  developed  independently  in  1961  by  Murray  Gell-Mann  and
Yuval Ne’eman (b. 1925). Gell-Mann called the patterns the eightfold way, af-
ter the eightfold path to nirvana in Buddhism.

K0

3
2

Groups of baryons and mesons can be displayed in many other symmetric
patterns  within  the  framework  of  the  eightfold  way.  For  example,  the  family
of  spin- baryons  known  in  1961  contained  nine  particles  arranged  in  a
pattern like that of the pins in a bowling alley, as in Figure 15.12. (The parti-
cles 兺*⫹, 兺*0, 兺*⫺, ⌶*0, and ⌶*⫺ are excited states of the particles 兺⫹, 兺0, 兺⫺,
⌶0,  and  ⌶⫺.  In  these  higher-energy  states,  the  spins  of  the  three  quarks
3
making up the particle are aligned so that the total spin of the particle is  .
2
When this pattern was proposed, an empty spot occurred in it (at the bottom
position),  corresponding  to  a  particle  that  had  never  been  observed.  Gell-
Mann predicted that the missing particle, which he called the omega minus
(⍀⫺),  should  have spin 
,  charge  ⫺1,  strangeness  ⫺3,  and  rest  energy  of
approximately  1680 MeV.  Shortly  thereafter,  in  1964,  scientists  at  the
Brookhaven National Laboratory found the missing particle through careful
analyses  of  bubble-chamber  photographs  (Fig.  15.13)  and  conﬁrmed  all  its
predicted properties.

3
2

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

S = 0

∆–

∆0

∆+

∆++

15.9

QUARKS

573

S = –1

Σ*–

Σ*0

Σ*+

S = –2

Ξ*–

Ξ*0

Q = +2

Q = +1

S = –3

?

Q = _1

Q = 0

1
2

3
2

Figure 15.12 The pattern for the higher-mass, spin- baryons known at the time the
pattern was proposed. The three 兺* and two ⌶* particles are excited states of the corre-
sponding  spin- particles  in  Figure  15.11.  These  excited  states  have  higher  mass  and
spin  . The absence of a particle in the bottom position was evidence of a new particle
yet to be discovered, the ⍀⫺.

3
2

The  prediction  of  the  missing  particle  in  the  eightfold  way  has  much  in
common with the prediction of missing elements in the periodic table. When-
ever a vacancy occurs in an organized pattern of information, experimentalists
have a guide for their investigations.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

π–

p

1γ

K+

Λ0

K0

Ξ0

Ω–

K–

2γ

π–

Figure 15.13 Discovery of the ⍀⫺ particle. The photograph on the left shows the orig-
inal bubble-chamber tracks. The drawing on the right isolates the tracks of the impor-
tant events. The K⫺ particle at the bottom collides with a proton to produce the ﬁrst de-
tected ⍀⫺ particle plus a K0 and a K⫹. (Courtesy of Brookhaven National Laboratory)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

574

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

15.9 QUARKS

As we have noted, leptons appear to be truly elementary particles because they
have no measurable size or internal structure, are limited in number, and do
not  seem  to  break  down  into  smaller  constituents.  Hadrons,  on  the  other
hand,  are  complex  particles  having  size  and  structure.  The  existence  of  the
eightfold-way  patterns  suggests  that  baryons  and  mesons — in  other  words,
hadrons — have  a  more  elemental  substructure.  Furthermore,  we  know  that
hadrons  decay  into  other  hadrons  and  are  many  in  number.  Table  15.2  lists
only  the  hadrons  that  are  stable  against  hadronic  decay;  hundreds  of  others
have  been  discovered.  These  facts  strongly  suggest  that  hadrons  cannot  be
truly elementary. In this section we show that the complexity of hadrons can
be explained by a simpler substructure.

The Original Quark Model
In  1963  Gell-Mann  and  George  Zweig  independently  proposed  that  hadrons
have a more elemental substructure. According to their model, all hadrons are
composite  systems  of  two  or  three  fundamental  constituents  called  quarks
(pronounced to rhyme with forks). (Zweig called them “aces.” Gell-Mann bor-
rowed  the  word  quark from  the  passage  “Three  quarks  for  Muster  Mark”  in
James Joyce’s Finnegan’s Wake.) In the original quark model, there were three
types of quarks designated by the symbols u, d, and s. These were given the ar-
bitrary names up, down, and sideways or, now more commonly, strange.

Table 15.3 Properties of Quarks and Antiquarks

Name

Up

Down

Strange

Charmed

Bottom

Top

Symbol

Spin

Charge

u

d

s

c

b

t

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

2
⫹ e
3
1
⫺ e
3
1
⫺ e
3
2
⫹ e
3
1
⫺ e
3
2
⫹ e
3

Quarks

Baryon
Number

Strangeness

Charm

Bottomness

Topness

1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3

Antiquarks

0

0
⫺1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫹1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫹1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫹1

Name

Symbol

Spin

Charge

Anti-up

Anti-down

Anti-strange

Anti-charmed

Anti-bottom

Anti-top

u

d

s

c

b

t

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

2
⫺ e
3
1
⫹ e
3
1
⫹ e
3
2
⫺ e
3
1
⫹ e
3
2
⫺ e
3

Baryon
Number

1
⫺
3
1
⫺
3
1
⫺
3
1
⫺
3
1
⫺
3
1
⫺
3

Strangeness

Charm

Bottomness

Topness

0

0
⫹1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫺1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫺1

0

0

0

0

0

0
⫺1

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

15.9

QUARKS

575

Table 15.4 Quark
Compositions of Several
Hadrons

Particle

Composition

Quark

Mesons
␲⫹
␲⫺
K⫹
K⫺
K0

Baryons
p
n
⌳0
兺⫹
兺0
兺⫺
⌶0
⌶⫺
⍀⫺

ud
ud
us
us
ds

uud
udd
uds
uus
uds
dds
uss
dss
sss

 

Mesons

+π

u

d

_

K

u

s

Baryons

p

u

u

d

n

u

d

d

Figure 15.14 Quark compositions of two mesons and two baryons. Note that each me-
son on the left contains two quarks, while each baryon on the right contains three quarks.

An  unusual  property  of  quarks  is  that  they  had  to  be  assigned  fractional
electronic charges. The u, d, and s quarks have charges of ⫹2e/3, ⫺e/3, and
⫺e/3,  respectively,  where  e is  the  charge  of  a  positron.  Each  quark  has  a
baryon number of  and a spin of  . The u and d quarks have strangeness 0,
and  the  s  quark  has  strangeness  ⫺1.  Associated  with  each  quark  is  an  anti-
quark  of  opposite  charge,  baryon  number,  and  strangeness.  Table  15.3  gives
other properties of quarks and antiquarks. 

1
2

1
3

The compositions of all hadrons that were known when Gell-Mann and Zweig

presented their models could be completely speciﬁed by three simple rules:

• A meson consists of one quark and one antiquark, which gives it a baryon
number  of  0,  as  required.  Mesons  are  thus  quark – antiquark  combina-
tions (quarkonium) bound together by a swarm of gluons, which are the
ﬁeld particles that transmit the strong force between quarks.

• A baryon consists of three quarks and is a sort of quark “molecule” held

together by gluons.

• An antibaryon consists of three antiquarks.
Table 15.4 lists the quark compositions of several mesons and baryons. Note
that just two of the quarks, u and d, are contained in all hadrons encountered
in ordinary matter (protons and neutrons). The third quark, s, is needed only
to construct strange particles with a strangeness number of either ⫹1 or ⫺1.
Figure 15.14 is a pictorial representation of the quark compositions of several
particles.

Charm and Other Developments
Although  the  original  quark  model  was  highly  successful  in  classifying  particles
into families, some discrepancies occurred between predictions of the model and
certain  experimental  decay  rates.  Consequently,  several  physicists  proposed  a
fourth  quark  in  1967.  The  fourth  quark,  denoted  by  c,  was  given  a  property

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

576

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

charm. A charmed quark would have charge ⫹2e/3, but its charm would distin-
guish  it  from  the  other  three  quarks.  The  new  quark  would  have  a  charm  of
C ⫽ ⫹1, its antiquark would have a charm of C ⫽ ⫺1, and all other quarks would
have C ⫽ 0,  as  indicated  in  Table  15.3.  Charm,  like  strangeness,  would  be  con-
served in strong and electromagnetic interactions but not in weak interactions.

Evidence that the charmed quark exists began to accumulate in 1974 when a
new heavy particle called the J/⌿ particle (or simply ⌿) was discovered indepen-
dently  by  two  groups,  one  led  by  Burton  Richter  at  the  Stanford  Linear
Accelerator  (SLAC)  and  the  other  led  by  Samuel  Ting  at  the  Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Richter and Ting were awarded the Nobel prize in 1976 for
this work. Although massive, the J/⌿ particle was not a three-quark baryon but
had the properties of a combination of a charmed quark and its antiquark (c ).
It was much more massive (⬃3100 MeV/c 2) than the other known mesons, and
its  lifetime  was  much  longer  than  those  that  decay  via  the  strong  force.  Soon,
related charmed mesons were discovered that corresponded to such quark com-
binations as  d and c , all of which have large masses and long lifetimes. The ex-
istence of these new mesons provided ﬁrm evidence for the fourth quark ﬂavor.

d

c

c

In 1975 researchers at Stanford University reported strong evidence for the
tau (␶) lepton, with a mass of 1784 MeV/c 2. This was the ﬁfth type of lepton to
be discovered, which led physicists to propose that two new quarks, top (t) and
bottom (b),  might  exist.  (Some  physicists  prefer  the  designators  truth and
beauty.)  To  distinguish  these  quarks  from  the  old  ones,  quantum  numbers
called topness and bottomness (with allowed values ⫹1, 0, ⫺1) were assigned
to all quarks and antiquarks (see Table 15.3). In 1977 researchers at the Fermi
National Laboratory, under the direction of Leon Lederman, reported the dis-
covery of a very massive new meson, Y, whose composition is considered to be
b . In  March  1995  researchers  at  the  Fermi  National  Laboratory  announced
the discovery of the top quark (supposedly the last of the quarks), with a mass
of  173 GeV/c 2.  The  researchers  identiﬁed  t pairs  from  their  decay  into  W
bosons and bottom quarks and the subsequent decay of those particles into lep-
tons, neutrinos, and hadrons. The original t pairs were produced by the colli-
sion  of  0.9 TeV  protons  with  0.9 TeV  antiprotons.  An  interesting  essay  by
Melissa Franklin and David Kestenbaum at the end of this chapter explains the
operation of the accelerator and the particle detectors used to ﬁnd the “top.”

b

t

t

You  are  probably  wondering  whether  such  discoveries  will  ever  end.  How
many “building blocks” of matter really exist? At the present, physicists believe
that the fundamental particles in nature are 12 fermions, including 6 quarks
and 6 leptons (together with their antiparticles) and the ﬁeld particles listed
in Table 15.1. Table 15.5 lists properties of these 12 fermions as well as proper-
ties of the ﬁeld particles excepting the graviton.

Despite  extensive  experimental  efforts,  no  isolated  quark  has  ever  been
observed.  Physicists  now  believe  that  quarks  are  permanently  conﬁned
inside hadrons because of an exceptionally strong force that prevents them
from escaping. This force, called the strong or “color” force, increases with
separation distance, eventually approaching a constant value — implying a
potential energy that grows linearly with quark separation and the require-
ment of inﬁnite energy to produce two truly free quarks

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Table 15.5 Properties of the Fundamental Point Particles

15.10

COLORED QUARKS, OR QUANTUM CHROMODYNAMICS

577

Particle

Leptons

Quarks

e⫺, ␮, ␶
␯e, ␯␮, ␯␶

u, c, t

d, s, b

冦
冦

1
All are fermions with spin  .
2

Field Particles
Photon

Intermediate
bosons

冦

␥
W⫾
Z0
g

Gluons
All are bosons with spin 1.

Approximate Rest Mass

in Terms of Proton

Massa

Interactions
Experiencedb

Interaction
Mediated

Electric
Charge in
Units of 兩e兩

Color
Charge

,  , 1.9

1
1836
⬍3 ⫻ 10⫺9, ⬍4 ⫻ 10⫺9,
⬍9 ⫻ 10⫺9
1
, 1.6, 185
2.8
1
, 5.3
2.8

1
1.7

1
9

, 

0

86
97

0

EM, W
W

EM, W, S

EM, W, S

EM

W, EM
W

S

None
None

None

None

EM

W
W

S

⫺1
0

2
⫹
3
1
⫺
3

0
⫾1
0

0

No
No

Yes

Yes

No

No
No

Yes

aFor quarks these are inferred values because free quarks have never been observed.
bEM ⫽ electromagnetic, W ⫽ weak, S ⫽ strong

15.10 COLORED QUARKS, OR QUANTUM

CHROMODYNAMICS

1
2

3
2

Shortly  after  the  concept  of  quarks  was  proposed,  scientists  recognized  that
certain  particles  had  quark  compositions  that  violated  the  Pauli  exclusion
principle.  Because  quarks  are  fermions  with  spins  of 
,  they  are  expected  to
follow the exclusion principle. One example of a particle that violates the ex-
clusion principle is the ⍀⫺ (s s s) baryon, which contains three s quarks with
parallel spins, giving it a total spin of  . Other examples of baryons that have
identical  quarks  with  parallel  spins  are  the  ⌬⫹⫹ (u u u)  and  the  ⌬⫺ (d d d).
To resolve  this  problem,  Moo-Young  Han  and  Yoichiro  Nambu  suggested  in
1965  that  quarks  possess  a  new  property,  called  color or color  charge. This
property is similar in many respects to electric charge except that it occurs in
three  varieties,  called  red,  green,  and  blue.  (The  antiquarks  have  the  colors
antired, antigreen, and antiblue.) To satisfy the exclusion principle, all three
quarks  in  a  baryon  must  have  different colors.  Just  as  a  combination  of  actual
colors  of  light  can  produce  the  neutral  color  white,  a  combination  of  three
quarks with different colors is said to be white, or colorless. A meson consists
of a quark of one color and an antiquark of the corresponding anticolor. The
result is that both baryons and mesons are always colorless (or white).

Although the concept of color in the quark model was originally conceived to
satisfy the exclusion principle, it also provided an improved theory for explaining
certain experimental results. For example, the modiﬁed theory correctly predicts
the  lifetime  of  the ␲0 meson.  The  general  theory  of  how  quarks  interact  with
each  other  is  called  quantum  chromodynamics (QCD),  to parallel  quantum

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

578

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Red

q

Antired

q

Meson

(a)

Red

Blue

Baryon

Green

(b)

Figure  15.15 (a)  A  red  quark
is  attracted  to  an  antired  quark.
This forms a meson whose quark
structure  is  (q ).  (b)  Three  dif-
ferently  colored  quarks  attract
each other to form a baryon.

q

electrodynamics, the theory of interaction between electric charges. In QCD the
quark  is  said  to  carry  a  color  charge, in  analogy  with  electric  charge,  and  the
color charge is responsible for the strong force between quarks. The strong force
between quarks is often called the color force. The color force between quarks is
analogous  to  the  electric  force  between  charges;  like  colors  repel  and  opposite
colors attract. Therefore, two red quarks repel each other, but a red quark is at-
tracted to an antired quark. The attraction between quarks of opposite color to
form a meson (q ) is indicated in Figure 15.15a. Differently colored quarks also
attract each other, but with less intensity than the oppositely colored quark and
antiquark.  For  example,  the  red,  blue,  and  green  quarks  in  a  cluster  all  attract
each  other  to  form  baryons,  as  indicated  in  Figure  15.15b.  Thus  every  baryon
contains three quarks of three different colors.

q

As  stated  earlier,  the  strong  force  between  quarks  is  carried  by  massless
particles  that  travel  at  the  speed  of  light  called  gluons (g).  According  to
QCD, there  are  eight  gluons,  all  carrying  two  color  charges,  a  color  and  an
anticolor,  such  as  a  “blue-antired”  gluon.  When  a  quark  emits  or  absorbs  a
gluon, its color changes. For example, a blue quark that emits a blue-antired
gluon becomes a red quark, and a red quark that absorbs this gluon becomes
a blue quark. Because gluons carry color charge, they should clump together
to  form  entities  called  glue-balls, but  no  glue-ball  particles  have  yet  been
experimentally detected.

Experimental Evidence for Quarks
As already mentioned, an isolated quark has never been observed and proba-
bly never will be, according to QCD. This leaves us with the question of how
quarks can be detected and what experimental evidence we have for the exis-
tence of quarks.

Experiments  at  the  Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  (SLAC)  in  the  late  1960s
established two important results concerning quarks. (1) The recoils of high-
energy  electrons  scattered  from  protons  could  be  completely  modeled  by  as-
suming three point-like  quarks  within  the  proton.  (2)  Although  gluons  were
not directly detected, it was found that the incident electrons (which carry no
color charge) interacted with only about half the mass making up the proton.
This is exactly what is expected if approximately half the material in a proton
consists of gluons that are electrically neutral and do not interact electromag-
netically with the electron (see Table 15.5).

q
It  is  interesting  to  consider  what  happens  to  a  quark – antiquark  pair  (q )
formed in a high-energy collision as the pair attempts to separate. Because the
color force is so strong, all quarks must form colorless baryons (three quarks)
or  mesons  (two  quarks).  The  process  goes  like  this.  As  two  quarks  separate,
the increase  in  energy  of  the  color  ﬁeld  between  them  is  so  large  that  addi-
tional  quark – antiquark  pairs  are  created  in  streams  (or  jets)  following
the original  (q )  pair.  When  all  the  available  energy  is  used  up,  the  quarks
cluster  into  color-neutral  or  colorless  combinations,  which  continue  to  sepa-
rate  indeﬁnitely  as  two  jets  of  hadrons,  as  in  Figure  15.16a.  Figure  15.16b
shows actual experimental data corresponding to three jets of hadrons emerg-
ing  from  a  collision  in  which  a  quark  and  antiquark  were  produced  and
a gluon  was  radiated.  Because  gluons  carry  color  charge,  they,  like  quarks,

q

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.10

COLORED QUARKS, OR QUANTUM CHROMODYNAMICS

579

q

q

M M

B

B

M M

(a)

(b)

Figure 15.16 (a) As the quark – antiquark pair separates, the potential energy in the
color ﬁeld is transformed into additional q pairs, which quickly condense into color-
less mesons (M) and baryons (B). These separate as jets of hadrons. (b) Three jets of
hadrons produced by a quark, an antiquark, and a gluon. This ﬁgure is from the JADE
detector at the German laboratory DESY in Hamburg. (Adapted from Gordon Kane, The
Particle Garden, Figure 6.2, p. 100)

q

must  also  appear  as  a  jet  of  hadrons.  Thus  experimental  signatures  of  quarks
and gluons are narrow “jets” of hadrons.

Time

n

p

p

n

–π

(a)

Explanation of Nuclear Force in Terms of Quarks
Although  the  color  force  between  two  color-neutral  hadrons  is  negligible
at large  separations,  the  strong  color  force  between  their  constituent  quarks
does  not  exactly  cancel  at  small  separations.  This  residual  strong  force  is,
in fact, the short-range nuclear force that binds protons and neutrons to form
nuclei. In Section 15.3 we explained the nuclear interaction of a proton with a
neutron using Yukawa’s early theory of pion exchange. According to QCD, a
more basic explanation of nuclear force can be given in terms of quarks and
gluons, as shown by contrasting Feynman diagrams of the same process in Fig-
ure 15.17. Each quark within the neutron and proton is continually emitting
and absorbing virtual gluons and creating and annihilating virtual (q ) pairs.
When the neutron and proton approach within 1 fm of each other, these vir-
tual gluons and quarks can be exchanged between the two nucleons, and such
exchanges produce the nuclear force. Figure 15.17b depicts one likely possi-
bility or contribution to the general process shown in Figure 15.17a. A down
quark emits a virtual gluon (represented by a wavy line, g), which creates, a lit-
tle later, a u pair. Both the recoiling d quark and the  are transmitted to the
proton,  where  the 
annihilates  a  proton  u  quark  (with  the  creation  of  a
gluon) and the d is captured.

u

q

u

u

p

d   u   u

Time

d   u   d

n

n

d   d  u

u   d   u

p

uu

annihilation

g

d

g

u
uu
pair

production

(b)

Figure 15.17 (a) A nuclear in-
teraction  between  a  proton  and
a neutron explained in terms of
Yukawa’s  pion-exchange  model.
(b)  The  same  interaction  as  in
(a), explained in terms of quarks
and  gluons.  Note  that  the  ex-
changed  d quark pair makes up
a ␲

⫺ meson.

u

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

580

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

15.11 ELECTROWEAK THEORY AND

THE STANDARD MODEL

Recall that the weak interaction is an extremely short-range force with an inter-
action  distance  of  approximately  10⫺18 m.  Such  a  short-range  interaction  im-
plies that the quantized particles that carry the weak ﬁeld (the spin-1 W⫹, W⫺,
and Z0 bosons) are quite massive, as is indeed the case (see Table 15.5). These
bosons are especially amazing when we realize they are structureless, point-like
particles as massive as krypton atoms! As mentioned earlier, the weak interac-
tion  is  responsible  for  neutron  decay  and  the  beta  decay  of  other,  heavier
baryons. More important, the weak interaction is responsible for the decay of
the c, s, b, and t quarks into lighter, more stable u and d quarks as well as the
decay of the massive ␮ and ␶ leptons into (lighter) electrons. Thus, the weak in-
teraction is very important because it governs the stability of the basic matter particles.

A mysterious feature of the weak interaction is its lack of symmetry, especially
in  comparison  with  the  high  degree  of  symmetry  shown  by  the  strong,  electro-
magnetic, and gravitational interactions. For example, the weak interaction, un-
like  the  strong  interaction,  is  not  symmetric  under  mirror  reﬂection  or  charge
exchange.  (Mirror  reﬂection  means  that  all  the  quantities  in  a  given  particle
reaction  are  exchanged  as  in  a  mirror  reﬂection — left  for  right,  an  inward
motion toward the mirror for an outward motion. Charge exchange means that
all the electric charges in a particle reaction are converted to their opposites — all
positives  to  negatives  and  vice  versa.)  When  we  say  that  the  weak  interaction  is
not symmetric, we mean that the reaction with all quantities changed occurs less
frequently  than  the  direct  reaction.  For  example,  the  decay  of  the  K0,  which  is
governed by the weak interaction, is not symmetric under charge exchange, since

K0 9: ␲⫺ ⫹ e⫹ ⫹ ␯e

occurs much more frequently than

K0 9: ␲⫹ ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ e
␯

In 1979 Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven Weinberg won a Nobel
prize for developing a theory that uniﬁes the electromagnetic and weak inter-
actions. This electroweak theory postulates that the weak and electromagnetic in-
teractions have the same strength at very high particle energies. Thus the two interac-
tions  are  viewed  as  two  different  manifestations  of  a  single,  unifying
electroweak  interaction.  The  photon  and  the  three  massive  bosons  (W⫾ and
Z0)  play  key  roles  in  the  electroweak  theory.  Perhaps  the  most  spectacular  of
the theory’s many concrete predictions was the prediction of the masses of the
W  and  Z  particles  at  about  80 GeV/c 2 and  91 GeV/c 2,  respectively.  The  1984
Nobel  prize  was  awarded  to  Carlo  Rubbia  and  Simon  van  der  Meer  for  their
work leading to the discovery of these particles with just those masses at CERN.
The combination of the electroweak theory and QCD for the strong interac-
tion  is  called  the  Standard  Model in  high-energy  physics.  It  includes  almost
all  the  constituents  of  matter — six  leptons,  six  quarks,  and  three  forces  and
their ﬁeld particles — but not the gravitational force at this time. Physicists, in
continuing  pursuit  of  uniﬁcation,  hope  that  string  theory,  mentioned  in  the
next section, will provide the uniﬁcation of gravity with the Standard Model.

The Standard Model does not answer all questions. It requires as input pa-
rameters  over  a  dozen  measured  numbers  such  as  the  lepton  and  quark

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

15.11

ELECTROWEAK THEORY AND THE STANDARD MODEL

581

masses. Further, it does not explain the mysterious ratios of these masses, why
there  are  only  six  types  of  leptons,  or  why  there  are  six  types  of  both leptons
and quarks. A speciﬁc question regarding ﬁeld particles is why the photon has
no mass while the W and Z bosons do have mass. Because of this difference,
the electromagnetic and weak forces are quite distinct at low energies but be-
come  similar,  or  symmetric,  at  very  high  energies,  where  the  rest  energies  of
the W and Z bosons are insigniﬁcant fractions of their total energies. This be-
havior in the transition from high to low energies is called symmetry break-
ing. In 1964 Peter Higgs (b. 1929, Scottish physicist) introduced a mechanism
for electroweak symmetry breaking by proposing a new ﬁeld, called the Higgs
ﬁeld, which permeates all of space and gives particles their mass. Roughly, the
Higgs ﬁeld may be viewed as causing a kind of drag force on particles as they
interact  with  it,  giving  particles  their  characteristic  inertia.  As  with  all  other
classical ﬁelds, quantization of the Higgs ﬁeld results in a force-carrying parti-
cle called the Higgs boson. The Standard Model, including the Higgs mecha-
nism, provides a logically consistent explanation of the massive nature of the
W and Z bosons. Unfortunately, the Higgs boson has not yet been found, but
physicists think its mass should be less than 1 TeV (1012 eV).

To determine whether the Higgs boson exists, two quarks of at least 1 TeV of
energy must collide, but calculations show that this requires injecting 40 TeV of
energy within the volume of a proton. Scientists are convinced that because of
the limited energy available in conventional accelerators using ﬁxed targets, it is
necessary to build colliding-beam accelerators called colliders. The concept of
colliders  is  straightforward.  Particles  with  equal  masses  and  kinetic  energies,
traveling  in  opposite  directions  in  an  accelerator  ring,  collide  head-on  to  pro-
duce the required reaction and form new particles. Because the total momen-
tum of the interacting particles is zero, all of their kinetic energy is available for
the  reaction.  The  Large  Electron – Positron  Collider  (LEP)  at  CERN  and  the
Stanford  Linear  Collider  in  California  collide  electrons  and  positrons.  The
Super  Proton  Synchrotron  at  CERN  accelerates  protons  and  antiprotons  to

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

582

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

energies  of  270 GeV,  while  the  world’s  highest-energy  proton  accelerator,  the
Tevatron,  at  the  Fermi  National  Laboratory  in Illinois  produces  protons  at
almost  1000 GeV  (1 TeV).  CERN  expects  a  2007  completion  of  the  Large
Hadron Collider (LHC), a proton – proton collider that will provide a center-of-
mass  energy  of  14 TeV  and  allow  an  exploration  of  Higgs  boson  physics.  The
accelerator  is  being  constructed  in  the  same  27-km-circumference  tunnel  as
CERN’s LEP Collider, and many countries are participating in the project.

15.12 BEYOND THE STANDARD MODEL

Grand Uniﬁcation Theory and Supersymmetry
Following  the  success  of  the  electroweak  theory,  scientists  attempted  to  com-
bine it with QCD in a grand uniﬁcation theory, or GUT. In this model, the
next step is taken of merging the electroweak force with the strong color force
to  form  a  grand  uniﬁed  force.  GUT  considers  leptons  and  quarks  to  be  spe-
ciﬁc states of a single particle called a leptoquark and it is this identity that leads
to  the  same  number  of  ﬂavors  for  leptons  and  quarks.  Also,  because  leptons
and quarks are states of the same particle, GUT predicts that quarks and lep-
tons  should  be  able  to  change  into  each  other  given  sufﬁcient  time.  Thus
GUT predicts that quark-ﬁlled protons are unstable and will decay with a life-
time  of  about  1032 years  to  a  positron,  which  is  a  lepton,  and  other  non-
baryons. Attempts to detect such proton decays have so far been unsuccessful.
The search for uniﬁcation has also led to another beautiful symmetry prin-
ciple, Supersymmetry (SUSY). According to this principle the fundamental
equations of nature are unchanged by the exchange of a fermion for a boson
in these equations. SUSY suggests that every elementary particle has a super-
partner, called a sparticle, although no sparticle has yet been observed. It is
believed  that  supersymmetry  is  a  broken  symmetry  (like  the  broken  elec-
troweak  symmetry  at  low  energies)  and  that  the  masses  of  the  superpartners
are too large to be produced in current accelerators. Continuing with the fun
and whimsey in naming particles and their properties, superpartners are given
the  names  squarks and sleptons (the  boson  superpartners  of  quarks  and  lep-
tons)  and  photinos,  winos, and gluinos (the  fermion  superpartners  of  the  ﬁeld
bosons — photons, W⫾ s, and gluons).

String Theory — A New Perspective
String theory is an effort to unify the four fundamental forces by modeling all
particles  as  various  vibrational  modes  of  a  single  entity — an  incredibly  small
string.  The  typical  length  of  such  a  string  is  on  the  order  of  10⫺35 m,  called
the Planck length. In string theory each quantized mode of vibration of the
string corresponds to a different elementary particle in the Standard Model.

One  of  the  complicating  factors  in  string  theory  is  that  it  requires  space-
time to have 10 dimensions. Despite the theoretical and conceptual difﬁculties
in  dealing  with  10  dimensions,  string  theory  holds  promise  in  incorporating
gravity with the other forces. Four of the 10 dimensions are visible to us — 3 space
dimensions and 1 time dimension — and the other 6 are said to be compactiﬁed.
That is, the 6 dimensions are curled up so tightly that they are not visible in
the macroscopic world.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

SUMMARY

583

x

(a)

y

x

(b)

Figure 15.18 (a) A piece of paper is cut into a rectangular shape. As a rectangle, the
shape has two dimensions. (b) The paper is rolled up into a soda straw. From far away,
it appears to be one-dimensional. The curled-up second dimension is not visible when
viewed from a distance large compared to the diameter of the straw.

As an analogy, consider a soda straw. We can build a soda straw by cutting a
rectangular  piece  of  paper  (Fig.  15.18a),  which  clearly  has  two  dimensions,
and rolling it up into a small tube (Fig. 15.18b). From far away, the soda straw
looks  like  a  one-dimensional  straight  line.  The  second  dimension  has  been
curled up and is not visible. String theory claims that 6 space-time dimensions
are  curled  up  in  an  analogous  way,  with  the  curling  being  on  the  size  of  the
Planck length — impossible to see from our viewpoint.

Another complicating factor with string theory is that it is difﬁcult for string
theorists  to  guide  experimentalists  as  to  what  to  look  for  in  an  experiment.
The Planck length is so small that direct experimentation on strings is impossi-
ble. Until the theory has been further developed, string theorists are restricted
to applying the theory to known results and testing for consistency.

Other theorists are working on M-theory, which is an 11-dimensional the-
ory based on membranes rather than strings. In a way reminiscent of the cor-
respondence  principle,  M-theory  is  claimed  to  reduce  to  string  theory  if  one
compactiﬁes from 11 dimensions to 10 dimensions.

SUMMARY

The strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational forces are the four funda-
mental forces in nature. All the interactions in which these forces take part are
mediated by ﬁeld particles. The electromagnetic interaction is mediated by the
photon;  the  weak  interaction  is  mediated  by  the  W⫾ and  Z0 bosons;  the  grav-
itational interaction is mediated by gravitons; the strong interaction is mediated
by gluons.

A  charged  particle  and  its  antiparticle have  the  same  mass  but  opposite
charge, and other properties may have opposite values, such as lepton number
and baryon number. It is possible to produce particle – antiparticle pairs in nu-
clear reactions if the available energy is greater than 2mc 2, where m is the mass
of the particle (or antiparticle).

Particles  other  than  ﬁeld  particles  are  classiﬁed  as  hadrons  or  leptons.
Hadrons interact via all four fundamental forces. They have size and structure
and are not elementary particles. There are two types — baryons and mesons.
Baryons, which generally are the most massive particles, have nonzero baryon
number and  a  spin  of  or 
.  Mesons  have  baryon  number  zero  and  either
zero or integral spin.

3
2

1
2

Leptons have  no  structure  or  size  and  are  considered  truly  elementary.
They interact only via the weak, gravitational, and electromagnetic forces. Six

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

584

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

types of leptons exist: the electron e⫺, the muon ␮⫺, the tau ␶⫺; and their neu-
trinos ␯e, ␯␮, and ␯␶.

In reactions and decays, quantities such as energy, linear momentum, angu-
lar momentum, electric charge, baryon number, and lepton number are gen-
erally conserved. Conservation of relativistic energy and momentum yields the
following expression for the threshold energy for particle production:

K th ⫽

(m 3 ⫹ m 4 ⫹ m 5 ⫹ ⭈  ⭈  ⭈)2c2 ⫺ (m 1 ⫹ m 2)2c2

2m 2

Here, K th is  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  incident  particle  of  mass  m 1, m 2 is
the mass of the stationary target particle, and the remaining m’s are product-
particle masses.

Certain particles have properties called strangeness and charm. These un-
usual  properties  are  conserved  only  in  the  decays  and  nuclear  reactions  that
occur via the strong force.

Theorists  in  elementary  particle  physics  have  postulated  that  all  hadrons
are composed of smaller units known as quarks, and experimental evidence
agrees with this model. Quarks have fractional electric charge and come in six
ﬂavors: up  (u),  down  (d),  strange  (s),  charmed  (c),  top  (t),  and  bottom
(b). Each baryon contains three quarks, and each meson contains one quark
and one antiquark.

According  to  the  theory  of  quantum  chromodynamics, quarks  have  a
property called color charge, and the force between quarks is referred to as
the strong force or the color force. The strong force is now considered to be
a fundamental force. The nuclear force, which was originally considered to be
fundamental, is now understood to be a secondary effect of the strong force,
due to gluon exchanges between hadrons.

The electromagnetic and weak forces are now considered to be manifestations
of  a  single  force  called  the  electroweak  force. The  combination  of  quantum
chromodynamics and the electroweak theory is called the Standard Model.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

Particle Physics

1. J.  Bahcall,  “The  Solar  Neutrino  Problem,”  Sci.  Amer.,

May 1990.

2. H.  Breuker  et  al.,  “Tracking  and  Imaging  Elementary

Particles,” Sci. Amer., August 1991.

3. F.  Close,  The  Cosmic  Onion:  Quarks  and  the  Nature  of  the
Universe,  New  York,  The  American  Institute  of  Physics,
1986.  A  timely  monograph  on  particle  physics,  includ-
ing lively discussions of the Big Bang theory.

4. H.  Fritzsch,  Quarks,  The  Stuff  of  Matter,  London,  Allen
and Lane, 1983. An excellent introductory overview of
elementary particle physics.

5. S.  Glashow, 

Interactions:  A 

the
Mind of a  Particle  Physicist,  New  York,  Warner  Books,
1988.

Journey  Through 

6. H. Harari, “The Structure of Quarks and Leptons,” Sci.

Amer., April 1983.

7. L. M. Lederman, “The Value of Fundamental Science,”

Sci. Amer., November 1984.

8. N. B. Mistry, R. A. Poling, and E. H. Thorndike, “Parti-

cles with Naked Beauty,” Sci. Amer., July 1983.

9. C. Quigg, “Elementary Particles and Forces,” Sci. Amer.,

April 1985.

10. M. Riordan, “The Discovery of Quarks,” Science 29, May,

1992.

11. M.  J.  G.  Veltman,  “The  Higgs  Boson,”  Sci.  Amer.,  No-

vember 1986.

12. E.  Witten,  “Reﬂections  on  the  Fate  of  Spacetime,”
Physics  Today,  April  1996.  This  article  discusses  the
string theory of elementary particles.

13. M.  Perl,  “The  Leptons  After  100  Years,”  Physics  Today,
October  1997.  An  excellent  overview  of  leptons  by
Nobel  prize  winner  and  discoverer  of  the  tau  lepton,
Martin L. Perl.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

14. G.  Kane,  Supersymmetry,  Cambridge,  MA,  Helix  Books,
2000.  A  clear  and  nonmathematical  description  of  su-
persymmetry.

15. B.  Greene,  The  Elegant  Universe,  New  York,  Vintage
Books, 2000. A clear and nonmathematical description
of string theory.

PROBLEMS

585

QUESTIONS

1. Name the four fundamental interactions and the ﬁeld

particle that mediates each.

2. Describe  the  quark  model  of  hadrons,  including  the

properties of quarks.

baryon  number,  lepton  number,  and  strangeness.  Are
all  of  these  laws  based  on  fundamental  properties  of
nature? Explain.

12. An antibaryon interacts with a meson. Can a baryon be

3. What are the differences between hadrons and leptons?
4. Describe the properties of baryons and mesons and the

produced in such an interaction? Explain.

13. Describe  the  essential  features  of  the  Standard  Model

important differences between them.

of particle physics.

5. Particles known as resonances have very short lifetimes,
of  the  order  of  10⫺23 s.  From  this  information,  would
you guess they are hadrons or leptons? Explain.

6. Kaons all decay into ﬁnal states that contain no protons

or neutrons. What is the baryon number of kaons?

7. The ⌶0 particle decays by the weak interaction accord-
ing  to  the  decay  mode  ⌶0 : ⌳0 ⫹ ␲0.  Would  you  ex-
pect this decay to be fast or slow? Explain.

14. How  many  quarks  are  in  (a)  a  baryon?  (b)  an  an-
tibaryon? (c) a meson? (d) an antimeson? How do you
account  for  the  fact  that  baryons  have  half-integral
spins while mesons have spins of 0 or 1? (Hint: Quarks
have spin  .)

1
2

15. In  the  theory  of  quantum  chromodynamics,  quarks
come  in  three  colors.  How  would  you  justify  the  state-
ment that “all baryons and mesons are colorless”?

8. Identify the particle decays listed in Table 15.2 that oc-

16. Which  baryon  did  Murray  Gell-Mann  predict  in  1961?

cur by the weak interaction. Justify your answers.

9. Identify the particle decays listed in Table 15.2 that occur

What is the quark composition of this particle?

17. What is the quark composition of the ⌶⫺ particle? (See

by the electromagnetic interaction. Justify your answers.

Table 15.4.)

10. Two protons in a nucleus interact via the strong inter-

action. Are they also subject to the weak interaction?

11. Discuss  the  following  conservation  laws:  energy,  linear
momentum,  angular  momentum,  electric  charge,

18. The W⫾ and Z bosons were ﬁrst produced at CERN in
1983 (by the collision of a beam of protons and a beam
of antiprotons at high energy). Why was this an impor-
tant discovery?

PROBLEMS

15.1 The Fundamental Forces in Nature

1. When a high-energy proton or pion traveling near the
speed of light collides with a nucleus, it travels an aver-
age  distance  of  3  ⫻  10⫺15 m  before  interacting.  From
this  information,  estimate  the  time  required  for  the
strong interaction to occur.

2. The neutral ␳0 meson decays by the strong interaction
into two pions according to ␳0 : ␲⫹ ⫹ ␲⫺, with a half-
life of about 10⫺23 s. The neutral K0 meson also decays
into two pions according to K0 : ␲⫹ ⫹ ␲⫺ but with a
much  longer  half-life,  about  10⫺10 s.  How  do  you  ex-
plain these observations?

15.2 Positrons and Other Antiparticles

3. Two  photons  are  produced  when  a  proton  and  an  an-
tiproton annihilate each other. What are the minimum
frequency  and  the  corresponding  wavelength  of  each
photon?

4. A  photon  produces  a  proton – antiproton  pair  at  rest
according  to  the  reaction ␥ : p ⫹ 
.  If  a  nearby  nu-
cleus of mass 100 u (initially at rest) carries off the pho-

p

ton’s momentum, what is the frequency of the photon?
What is its wavelength?

15.3 Mesons and the Beginning of Particle Physics
5. One of the mediators of the weak interaction is the Z0
boson,  which  has  a  mass  of  91 GeV/c 2.  Use  this  infor-
mation  to  ﬁnd  an  approximate  value  for  the  range  of
the weak interaction.

15.5 Conservation Laws

6. High-energy  muons  occasionally  collide  with  electrons
and  produce  two  neutrinos  according  to  the  reaction
␮⫹ ⫹ e⫺ : 2␯. What kind of neutrinos are these?

7. (a)  Show  that  baryon  number  and  charge  are  con-
served  in  the  following  reactions  of  a  pion  with  a
proton.

␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: K⫺ ⫹ 兺⫹
␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: ␲⫺ ⫹ 兺⫹

(1)

(2)

(b) The ﬁrst reaction is observed, but the second never
occurs. Explain these observations.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

586

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

8. The following reactions or decays involve one or more
neutrinos. Supply the missing neutrinos (␯e, ␯␮, or ␯␶).
(a) ␲⫺ : ␮⫺ ⫹ ?
(b) K⫹ : ␮⫹ ⫹ ?
(c) ? ⫹ p : n ⫹ e⫹
(d) ? ⫹ n : p ⫹ e⫺
(e) ? ⫹ n : p ⫹ ␮⫺
(f) ␮⫺ : e⫺ ⫹ ? ⫹ ?

9. Determine which of the following reactions can occur.
For  those  that  cannot  occur,  determine  the  conserva-
tion law (or laws) that is violated.
(a) p : ␲⫹ ⫹ ␲0
(b) p ⫹ p : p ⫹ p ⫹ ␲0
(c) p ⫹ p : p ⫹ ␲⫹
(d) ␲⫹ : ␮⫹ ⫹ ␯␮
(e) n : p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ 
(f) ␲⫹ : ␮⫹ ⫹ n

␯e

15.6 Strange Particles and Strangeness
10. Determine whether strangeness is conserved in each of

the following decays and reactions:
(a) ⌳0 : p ⫹ ␲⫺
(b) ␲⫺ ⫹ p : ⌳0 ⫹ K0
(c) ⫹ p : ⫹ ⌳0
(d) ␲⫺ ⫹ p : ␲⫺ ⫹ 兺⫹
(e) ⌶⫺ : ⌳0 ⫹ ␲⫺
(f) ⌶0 : p ⫹ ␲⫺

⌳0

p

11. The following decays are forbidden. Determine a con-

servation law that each violates.
(a) ␮⫺ : e⫺ ⫹ ␥
(b) n : p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ ␯e
(c) ⌳0 : p ⫹ ␲0
(d) p : e⫹ ⫹ ␲0
(e) ⌶0 : n ⫹ ␲0

12. The  following  reactions  are  forbidden.  Determine  a

p

conservation law that each violates.
(a) p ⫹  : ␮⫹ ⫹ e⫺
(b) ␲⫺ ⫹ p : p ⫹ ␲⫹
(c) p ⫹ p : p ⫹ ␲⫹
(d) p ⫹ p : p ⫹ p ⫹ n
(e) ␥⫹ p : n ⫹ ␲0

15.7 How Are Elementary Particles Produced and
Particle Properties Measured?
13. In  1959  Emilio  Segrè  and  Owen  Chamberlain  were
awarded  the  Nobel  prize  for  demonstrating  the  exis-
tence  of  the  antiproton.  In  a  series  of  experiments
started  in  1955,  using  the  Bevatron  accelerator  at
Berkeley, they produced both antiprotons and antineu-
trons in the reactions

p ⫹ p 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ p ⫹ p

p ⫹ p 9: p ⫹ p ⫹ n ⫹ n

(a)  Calculate  the  threshold  kinetic  energy  of  the
incident  proton  (fixed-target  proton)  required
.  (b)  For  the
for the  production  of  an  antiproton, 
same 
threshold
kinetic energy needed for the production of an anti-
neutron, 

initial  conditions,  calculate 

p
the 

n

.

14. Calculate the threshold for production of strange parti-
cles  in  the  following  reactions.  Assume  that  the  ﬁrst
particle is moving and the second is at rest.

(a) p ⫹ p 9: n ⫹ 兺⫹ ⫹ K0 ⫹ ␲⫹

(b) ␲⫺ ⫹ p 9: 兺0 ⫹ K0

15. Efficiency  of  fixed-target  accelerators  vs.  colliding-beam
accelerators.  The  efficiency  is  the  percentage  of  the
initial kinetic energy that is converted to the mass of
new  product  particles  in  a  given  reaction.  Calculate
the  efficiencies  of  the  reactions  in  Example  15.5,
Exercise  3,  and  Problem  13.  If  one  could  arrange
these  experiments  so  that  the  two  colliding  pro-
tons approached  each  other  with  equal  speed  at
threshold,  the  total  momentum  would  be  zero  and
none  of  the  initial  kinetic  energy  would  go  into
kinetic  energy  of  the  products.  All  of  the  initial
kinetic energy would then go into creating new mass,
and  the  efficiency  would  be  100%.  That  is  why  most
current  experiments 
the  production
of heavy particles are carried out with colliding-beam
accelerators.  Although  there  are  formidable  exp-
erimental  difficulties  in  storing,  focusing,  and  caus-
ing  two  oppositely  circulating  low-density  beams  of
particles to collide, the great gain in efficiency makes
colliders worthwhile.

involving 

16. Consider  the  reaction  p  ⫹  p : p ⫹  p ⫹  X.  (a)  For
a ﬁxed-target  accelerator  capable  of  producing
incident  protons  with  a  kinetic  energy  of  1000  GeV,
ﬁnd  the  heaviest  particle  X  that  can  be  produced.
(b) If  colliding  protons,  each  with  a  kinetic  energy  of
500 GeV, are available in a collider, what is the mass of
the  heaviest  particle  X  that  can  be  produced  in  the
same reaction?

15.9 Quarks
17. A 兺0 particle traveling through matter strikes a proton,
and  a  兺⫹ and  a  gamma  ray,  as  well  as  a  third  parti-
cle, emerge.  Use  the  quark  models  of  the  兺⫹ and
the gamma  ray  to  determine  the  identity  of  the  third
particle.

s

18. The  quark  compositions  of  the  K0 and ⌳0 particles
are  d and  uds,  respectively.  Show  that  the  charge,
baryon  number,  and  strangeness  of  these  particles
equal  the  sums  of  these  numbers  for  the  quark
constituents.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

19. Neglecting binding energies, estimate the masses of the
u and d quarks from the masses of the proton and neu-
tron.

20. Figure  P15.20  shows  a  neutron – proton  interaction  in
which a virtual ␲⫹ is exchanged. Draw a Feynman dia-
gram  showing  this  interaction  in  terms  of  quarks  and
gluons.

21. A neutron undergoing beta decay is believed to emit a
virtual  W⫺ that  decays  into  an  e⫺ and  an  antielectron
neutrino, 
. Draw a Feynman diagram showing this de-
cay in terms of quarks, the W⫺, the e⫺, and the 

␯e

.␯e

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

22. Neutrino  ﬂavor  oscillation Neutrino  oscillation  is  based
on  the  idea  that  the ␯e, ␯␮,  and ␯␶ neutrinos  are  mix-
tures of three other neutrinos called ␯1, ␯2, and ␯3. For
example,

␯␶ ⫽ U␶1␯1 ⫹ U␶2␯2 ⫹ U␶3␯3

where  each  of  the  neutrinos  ␯1, ␯2,  and  ␯3 is  repre-
sented  as  a  stationary  state  solution  to  the  Schro-
dinger equation and each has a different mass m1, m2,
and m3.  For  algebraic  simplicity  consider  only  oscilla-
tions  of  the  ␯␮, ␯␶ system.  We  limit  the  nonzero  U
coefﬁcients  to  those  connecting  ␯2 and ␯3 and  write
the Us  in  terms  of  a  single  variable ␪,  called  the  mix-
ing angle:

␯␮ ⫽ cos␪␯2 ⫺ sin␪␯3

␯␶ ⫽ sin␪␯2 ⫹ cos␪␯3

The  mixing  angle  controls  the  amount  of  ␯2 and ␯3
present in ␯␮ and ␯␶. Note that there is no mixing for
␪ ⫽ 0. In a typical experiment a ␯␮ (beam) with a given
momentum, p,  is  created  at  t ⫽ 0.  The  time  evolution
of the ␯␮ as it moves downstream is given by

␯␮(t ) ⫽ cos␪␯2e⫺iE2t/ប ⫺ sin␪␯3e⫺iE3t/ប

where ␯2 and ␯3 are  stationary  states  with  energies  E 2
and E 3 respectively.
(a) Write a similar expression for ␯␶(t).
(b)  Express,  mathematically,  the  initial  condition  that
the  neutrino  created  at  t ⫽ 0  is  entirely  a ␮ neutrino.
(Hint: one condition is 兩␯␶(0)兩2 ⫽ 0)
(c) Show that the probability of ﬁnding a ␶ neutrino at
time t (or  that  the  ␮ neutrino  has  oscillated  into  a  ␶
neutrino) is

P(␯␮9: ␯␶) ⫽

sin22␪

2

冢1 ⫺ cos

E2 ⫺ E3

ប

t冣

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

587

p

n

Time

+π

n

p

Figure P15.20

(d)  Show  that  for  a  ﬁxed  momentum  p and  small
masses m 2 and m 3(m 2c, m 3c ⬍⬍p)

E2 ⫺ E3 ⬵

(m 2

2 ⫺ m 3

2)c3

2p

The  results  of  (c)  and  (d)  show  that  observation  of
neutrino oscillation ﬁxes the difference of the squared
masses and determines the mixing angle.

23. The  most  recent  naked-eye  supernova  was  Supernova
Shelton  1987A  (Fig.  P15.23).  It  was  170,000  ly  away  in
the  next  galaxy  to  ours,  the  Large  Magellanic  Cloud.
About  3  h  before  its  optical  brightening  was  noticed,
two  continuously  running  neutrino  detection  experi-
ments  simultaneously  registered  the  ﬁrst  neutrinos
from  an  identiﬁed  source  other  than  the  Sun.  The
Irvine-Michigan-Brookhaven experiment in a salt mine
in Ohio registered eight neutrinos over a 6-second pe-
riod, and the Kamiokande II experiment in a zinc mine
in Japan counted 11 neutrinos in 13 s. (Because the su-
pernova is far south in the sky, these neutrinos entered
the  detectors  from  below.  They  passed  through  the
Earth before they were by chance absorbed by nuclei in
the  detectors.)  The  neutrino  energies  were  between
about  8  MeV  and  40  MeV.  If  neutrinos  have  no  mass,
then neutrinos of all energies should travel together at
the  speed  of  light — the  data  are  consistent  with  this
possibility.  The  arrival  times  could  show  scatter  simply
because  neutrinos  were  created  at  different  moments
as the core of the star collapsed into a neutron star. If
neutrinos  have  nonzero  mass,  then  lower-energy  neu-
trinos  should  move  comparatively  slowly.  The  data  are
consistent  with  a  10-MeV  neutrino  requiring  at  most
about 10 s more than a photon would require to travel
from the supernova to us. Find the upper limit that this
observation sets on the mass of a neutrino. (Other evi-
dence sets an even tighter limit.)

588

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

28. A pi meson at rest decays according to ␲⫺ : ␮⫺ ⫹  ␮.
␯
What  is  the  energy  carried  off  by  the  neutrino?  (As-
sume  that  the  neutrino  moves  off  with  the  speed  of
light.) m␲c 2 ⫽ 139.5 MeV, m␮c 2 ⫽ 105.7 MeV, m␯ ⫽ 0.

29. Two protons approach each other with 70.4 MeV of ki-
netic  energy  and  engage  in  a  reaction  in  which  a  pro-
ton and positive pion emerge at rest. What third parti-
cle,  obviously  uncharged  and  therefore  difﬁcult  to
detect, must have been created?

30. What processes are described by the Feynman diagrams
in  Figure  P15.30?  What  is  the  exchanged  particle  in
each process?

γ

γ

e+

e–

(a)

νµ

_
µ

Figure P15.23 The giant star Sanduleak ⫺69° 202 in the
“before”  picture  became  Supernova  Shelton  1987A  in  the
“after picture.” (Anglo-Australian Telescope Board)

24. An unstable particle, initially at rest, decays into a pro-
ton (rest energy 938.3 MeV) and a negative pion (rest
energy  139.5 MeV).  A  uniform  magnetic  ﬁeld  of
0.250 T exists perpendicular to the velocities of the cre-
ated particles. The radius of curvature of each track is
found to be 1.33 m. What is the rest mass of the origi-
nal unstable particle?

25. Calculate  the  kinetic  energies  of  the  proton  and  pion

resulting from the decay of a ⌳0 at rest:

⌳0 9: p⫹ ⫹ ␲⫺

26. A ⌺0 particle at rest decays according to

兺0 9: ⌳0 ⫹ ␥

d
d
u

(b)

Figure P15.30

u
d
u

31. Identify  the  mediators  for  the  two  interactions  de-

scribed in the Feynman diagrams in Figure P15.31.

ν

e–

–
d

ν

e–

d

(a)

(b)

Figure P15.31

–s

s

Find the gamma-ray energy.

27. If a K0 meson at rest decays in 0.90 ⫻ 10⫺10 s, how far
will a K0 meson travel if it is moving at 0.96c through a
bubble chamber?

32. The ⌳0 is an unstable particle that decays into a proton
and  a  negatively  charged  pion.  Determine  the  kinetic
energies  of  the  proton  and  pion  if  the  ⌳0 is  at
rest when  it  decays.  The  rest  mass  of  the  ⌳0 is

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS

589

1115.7 MeV/c 2,  the  mass  of  the  ␲⫺ is  139.5 MeV/c 2,
and the mass of the proton is 938.3 MeV/c 2.

33. A  free  neutron  beta-decays  by  creating  a  proton,  an
electron,  and  an  antineutrino  according  to  the  reac-
tion n : p ⫹ e⫺ ⫹ . For simplicity assume that a free
neutron beta-decays by creating a proton and electron
according to the reaction

␯

n 9: p ⫹ e⫺

and  assume  that  the  neutron  is  initially  at  rest  in  the
laboratory.  (a)  Determine  the  energy  released  in  this
reaction.  (b)  Determine  the  speeds  of  the  proton  and
electron  after  the  reaction.  (Energy  and  momentum
are  conserved  in  the  reaction.)  (c)  Are  any  of  these
particles moving at relativistic speeds? Explain.

34. The quark composition of the proton is uud, while that
of  the  neutron  is  udd.  Show  that  the  charge,  baryon
number,  and  strangeness  of  these  particles  equal  the
sums  of  those  same  numbers  for  their  quark  con-
stituents.

35. The particle decay 兺⫹ : ␲⫹ ⫹ n is observed in a bub-
ble  chamber.  Figure  P15.35  represents  the  curved
tracks of the particles 兺⫹ and ␲⫹ and the invisible track
of the neutron, in the presence of a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld of 1.15 T directed out of the page. The measured
radii  of  curvature  are  1.99  m  for  the  兺⫹ particle  and
0.580 m for the ␲⫹ particle. (a) Find the momenta of
the 兺⫹ and  the  ␲⫹ particles,  in  units  of  MeV/c.
(b) The angle between the momenta of the 兺⫹ and the
␲⫹ particles at the moment of decay is 64.5°. Find the
momentum of the neutron. (c) Calculate the total en-
ergy of the ␲⫹ particle, and of the neutron, from their
known  masses  (m␲ ⫽ 139.6  MeV/c 2, m n ⫽ 939.6
MeV/c 2)  and  the  relativistic  energy – momentum  rela-
tion.  What  is  the  total  energy  of  the  兺⫹ particle?
(d) Calculate the mass and speed of the 兺⫹ particle.

64.5°

n

π+

Σ+

Figure P15.35

36. Supernova  1987A,  located  about  170,000 ly  from  the
Earth, is estimated to have emitted a burst of neutrinos
carrying energy ⬃1046 J (Fig. P15.23). Suppose the av-
erage  neutrino  energy  was  6 MeV  and  your  body  pre-
sented  cross-sectional  area  5000 cm2.  To  an  order  of
magnitude,  how  many  of  these  neutrinos  passed
through you?

37. A  rocket  engine  for  space  travel  using  photon  drive
and  matter – antimatter  annihilation  has  been  sug-
gested. Suppose the fuel for a short-duration burn con-
sists of N protons and N antiprotons, each with mass m.
(a)  Assume  all  of  the  fuel  is  annihilated  to  produce
photons.  When  the  photons  are  ejected  from  the
rocket,  what  momentum  can  be  imparted  to  it?  (b)  If
half  of  the  protons  and  antiprotons  annihilate  each
other  and  the  energy  released  is  used  to  eject  the  re-
maining  particles,  what  momentum  could  be  given  to
the  rocket?  Which  scheme  results  in  the  greatest
change in speed for the rocket?

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Essay

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

In  1932  Carl  Andersen  observed  a  new  particle  in  his  cosmic  ray  experiment  at

Pike’s Peak. This was the muon, the ﬁrst in a second generation of leptons. “Who
ordered  that?,”  exclaimed  the  Nobel  prize  winner  I.  I.  Rabi.  Nature  had  spoken,
and the theory had to listen. The Standard Model was expanded to include a second
lepton generation.

In 1977 when the discovery of the bottom quark ushered in the addition of a third
family of quarks, the Standard Model demanded a “top” quark to balance it. This time
the new addition had been “ordered,” but would nature deliver? In 1994, when the top
quark was ﬁnally sighted, it marked not only a great triumph for the theory, but also a
remarkable achievement for modern detectors and accelerators. This is the story of the
accelerator  and  detector  at  Fermi  National  Accelerator  Laboratory  (“Fermilab”)  that
brought you the top quark.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

THE ACCELERATOR

In quantum mechanics a particle is described as a wave with wavelength inversely pro-
portional to the particle momentum. Using waves with smaller and smaller wavelengths
enables  scientists  to  probe  smaller  and  smaller  structures.  Therefore,  being  able  to
accelerate particles up to large momenta enables us to probe small structures such as
the proton. In order to create new high-mass particles in the laboratory, we need high-
energy particle beams, since the available energy to create new states is approximately
√2mE
in  a  ﬁxed  target  experiment,  or  2E for  a  collider  experiment,  where  E is  the
energy of the particle beam and m is the mass of the target particle. For these two rea-
sons it is necessary to understand techniques used to accelerate charged particles.

A particle accelerator has two main elements, the beam and the accelerating struc-
ture.  All  acceleration  techniques  use  only  electromagnetic  ﬁelds.  Particles  are  usually
accelerated  in  evacuated  pipes  to  reduce  scattering.  The  accelerating  ﬁelds  must  be
carefully  controlled,  and  methods  for  aligning  the  beam  are  necessary.  Finally,  since
the magnets get very hot, they need to be cooled.

There  are  different  types  of  accelerating  techniques.  One  uses  a  DC  electric  ﬁeld,
and another uses either standing or traveling radio frequency (RF) waves to accelerate
particles.  The  DC  technique  is  limited  by  arcing.  It  is  used  for  initial  acceleration  of
particles, followed by the RF wave technique, which leads to bunched beams.

The source of charged particles for the beam is either a hot metal ﬁlament for elec-
trons or a bottle of hydrogen for protons. The particles must be guided down the beam
pipe.  This  involves  steering  or  bending  the  beam,  focusing  it,  and  breaking  it  up  to
form bunches of particles rather than a continuous beam.

The proton accelerator at Fermilab consists of many parts (Fig. 1). First, hydrogen is
ionized  to  form  H⫺ ions  which  are  then  introduced  into  an  accelerating  structure
(“PreAcc” in Fig. 1) which produces a DC electric ﬁeld of 750 kV. After the ions are accel-
erated  in  this  ﬁeld,  they  enter  a  linear  accelerator  (LINAC)  which  uses  201  MHz –
805 MHz RF waves supplied to accelerating cavities. The RF signal produces an alternat-
ing electric ﬁeld in a cavity pointed ﬁrst along the beam and then opposite to it. The ions
are  accelerated  in  the  forward  direction  by  shielding  them  from  the  RF  signal  in  drift
tubes  while  the  E ﬁeld  is  of  the  wrong  sign.  The  ions  are  accelerated  down  the  145-m
long LINAC to an energy of 400 MeV. The particles introduced into the ﬁrst accelerating
cavity do not all arrive simultaneously and have a spread of energies. A particle arriving
with exactly the right energy and at the right time will be accelerated to the desired en-
ergy. Because of the alternating nature of the electric ﬁeld, particles arriving slightly after

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

590

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

591

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

or before the “ideal” particle will be accelerated in such a way that they tend toward the
ideal particle trajectory. This feature is called phase stability and is a necessary feature for
our accelerators. Both electrons in the H⫺ ion are then stripped off by a foil, and the pro-
tons are introduced into a circular accelerator called the Synchrotron Booster.

The Booster’s structure also uses RF electromagnetic ﬁelds to accelerate the protons
by 550 keV per turn. The protons, kept inside the ring by magnetic ﬁelds, are now trav-

Antiproton
debuncher

LINAC

Booster

PreAcc

Tevatron extraction
for fixed target experiments

Antiproton
accumulator
Antiproton
injection
Antiproton
target
Tevatron

RF

Tevatron
injection

Mainringproto

Tevatron

Main Ring

Main Ring RF

n

i
n
j
e

c

t
i

o

n

CDF
detector

Proton and
antiproton

aborts

Antiprotons

Protons

Figure 1 Fermilab accelerator complex.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

592

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Proton

v

D ip ole

B-field lines

y

Proton

o l e

p

u

r

d

a

Q u

x

y
Bx = B0 –
a

x
By = B0 –
a

a

N

S

S

N

z

B-field lines

Figure 2 A dipole magnet in the synchrotron exerts a force on the proton toward the
center of the ring. A quadrupole magnet exerts a force on protons traveling off axis.

eling at a speed of 0.37c. Each time around the ring, the protons pass through acceler-
ating cavities and pick up energy. Dipole magnets (shown schematically in Fig. 2) are
used  to  bend  the  particles  in  a  circle.  The  magnetic  ﬁelds  in  these  magnets  are  in-
creased  from  0.05  to  0.7  T  as  the  particles  change  energy  from  400 MeV  to  8 GeV  in
such  a  way  that  the  protons  stay  in  the  same  orbit  in  the  circular  beam  pipe.  When
their energy reaches 8 GeV, the protons are extracted using fast-rising magnetic ﬁelds
and introduced into the 2000-m diameter main proton synchrotron. The 6000-m tun-
nel  houses  two  accelerating  structures,  one  atop  the  other.  The  ﬁrst,  called  the  Main
Ring, built in 1969 with conventional dipole magnets whose ﬁeld ranges from 0.04 to
0.67 T, can accelerate protons up to 400 GeV.

The superconducting magnet accelerator, the Tevatron, built in 1979, makes use of
superconducting  magnets  that  produce  strong,  uniform  magnetic  ﬁelds.  The  ﬁeld  in
the superconducting dipole magnets ranges from 0.66 to 4.4 T, thus enabling the Teva-
tron to accelerate particles to 900 GeV in the same radius as the Main Ring. In general,
we  can  describe  the  relationship  between  accelerator  radius,  energy  achieved,  and
magnetic ﬁeld as follows:

Radius ⫽ 44

E (GeV)
B (kG)

m

This assumes that 75% of the ring is ﬁlled with dipole magnets. In the case of the Teva-
tron, there are 774 dipoles, each 6 m long, comprising 74% of the Tevatron circumfer-
ence. This shows that the limitation for accelerators is either building magnets with a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

1

2

s

ESSAY

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

593

Figure 3 Strong focusing using quadrupole magnets separated by a distance s and ro-
tated 90° in series. Quadrupole magnets in series with equal and opposite focal lengths
f have a total focal length given by 1/f12 ⫽ s/f 2.

high  uniform  magnetic  ﬁeld  or  having  enough  money  to  make  an  accelerator  with  a
huge radius.

The synchrotron would be unable to keep the protons inside the beampipe during
acceleration without a method of focusing the beam. The concept of Strong Focusing
developed in 1952 is crucial. Quadrupole magnets shown in Figure 2 have zero ﬁeld on
axis, but have a ﬁeld gradient off axis. As a particle wanders away from the axis in the x
direction, it experiences a force that pushes it back toward the axis. A particle that wan-
ders off in the y direction experiences a force away from the axis. Strong Focusing re-
lies on a series of focusing and defocusing magnets that have an overall effect of focus-
ing the beam, provided the magnets are spaced sufﬁciently closely together, as shown
in Figure 3. The ﬁeld gradients in the quadrupoles in the Tevatron reach as high as 67
T/m. The synchrotron consists of strings of magnets, something like F-B-B-B-B-D-B-B-B-
B-F etc., where F stands for focusing, B stands for bending, and D stands for defocusing
magnets.

Particles in the Tevatron are accelerated by RF cavities driven at 53 MHz. The pro-
tons are accelerated through a beampipe maintained at a vacuum of 10⫺9 torr to a ﬁ-
nal energy of 900 ⫾ 0.72 GeV.

The top quark was discovered at a proton – antiproton collider. The antiprotons are
produced by extracting the proton beam at 120 GeV and shining it on a copper target.
Approximately  2.5 ⫻ 1012 protons  are  extracted  from  the  Main  Ring  every  2.4 s,  and
3 ⫻ 107 antiprotons  are  produced  with  a  distribution  of  energy  peaked  at  8.9 GeV.  A
smaller 250-m radius ring ﬁrst debunches the antiprotons into a continuous beam and
then  “cools”  the  antiprotons  until  they  form  an  intense,  monoenergetic  and  focused
beam.  The  method  used,  called  stochastic  cooling,  was  invented  by  Simon  Van  der
Meer in 1972. The antiprotons are cooled and stored in the accumulator, a ring con-
centric  with  the  debuncher  held  at  a  vacuum  of  2 ⫻ 10⫺10 torr  for  a  few  hours  until
enough antiprotons are accumulated for reentry into the Main Ring.

The  antiprotons  are  introduced  into  the  Main  Ring  in  bunches  approximately
50 cm long and are accelerated to 900 GeV in the same accelerating structure used for
accelerating  the  protons.  Bunches  of  roughly  3 ⫻ 1011 protons  and  1 ⫻ 1011 antipro-
tons circulating in opposite directions in the Tevatron collide at two interaction regions
containing the particle detectors every 3.5 ␮s.

THE DETECTOR

Because the mass of the top quark is almost 200 times the mass of a proton, it is very
rarely produced, even in collisions where the center of mass energy is 1.8 TeV. Only a
few  top  quark  pairs  are  produced  from  a  typical  50  billion  collisions  per  day.  The
Standard Model predicts that the top quark (with a lifetime of 10⫺24 s) should decay
in a manner similar to the familiar ␤-decay which converts a neutron to a proton by
emitting a W boson which then decays to an electron and neutrino. Each top quark
decays  to  a  W  and  a  b-quark.  We  focus  on  the  case  where  one  W  decays  either  to  a

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

594

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

␮␯␮ or e␯e and the other W decays to a quark and an antiquark, for example, an up
quark  and  an  anti-down  quark  (Fig.  4).  Quarks  are  conﬁned  to  hadronic  bound
states;  hence  the  outgoing  quarks  in  this  interaction  manifest  themselves  as  colli-
mated “jets” of hadrons.

To ﬁnd  the  top  quark  pairs  produced,  the  detector  must  then  be  able  to  identify
electrons, muons, neutrinos, light quark jets, and b-quark jets and to measure their mo-
mentum and energy.

All  detectors  function  by  registering  the  effects  of  energy  lost  by  particles  as  they
pass through matter. Fortunately electrons, hadrons, jets, neutrinos, and muons all be-
have quite differently, which allows us to identify each type.

eν

W

t

t–

e

p

b

Jet

b

W

Jet
p–

–
d

Jet

u

Jet

Figure 4 Schematic of top quark pair production and subsequent top quark decays.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ESSAY

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

595

 

η

 = 0

Central muon upgrade

Steel absorber

C

e

n

e

xte

tr

al 
sio

n

Central muon

η

= 0.9

m

u

o

n

n

Central
hadron

CES
CPR

Central EM

Solenoid

Central
tracking
chamber

End
plug
EM

Vertex tracking chamber
Silicon vertex detector
SVX

Interaction point

CDF

Detector

Forward

(not-to-scale)

End
wall
hadron

End
plug
hadron

η

= 2.4

EM Hadron

z

η

= 4.2

Figure 5 Schematic of a quadrant of the CDF detector.

The experiment that ﬁrst observed the production of top quarks, called the Collider
Detector at Fermilab (CDF), was designed for a variety of physics measurements. The
detector surrounds the point where the protons and antiprotons collide (called the in-
teraction  point),  and  measures  the  momentum,  energy,  and  identity  of  the  particles
produced in the collision. Figure 5 is a schematic view of one quadrant of the CDF de-
tector. To measure the momentum of high-energy particles, we require a large region
with a B ﬁeld to measure their curvature. To measure their energy, we use a calorime-
ter that contains enough material to bring the particles to rest. Hence, detectors must
be  large  and  heavy;  CDF,  which  weighs  over  6000  tons,  is  12  m  high  and  32  m  long.
From each collision, it records over 50 000 pieces of information. CDF, like most col-
lider  detectors,  surrounds  the  collision  point  with  tracking  chambers,  followed  by
calorimeters and muon chambers.

Charged  Particle  Tracking The  momentum  of  charged  particles  emerging  from  a
collision can be measured in a drift chamber. In its simplest form, a drift chamber is a
gas-ﬁlled rectangular tube with a high-voltage wire running along its axis, similar to a
Geiger counter. The wire (called a “sense” wire) is held at a high potential relative to
the tube to create an electric ﬁeld. By adding wires of different voltages, the ﬁeld can
be made roughly constant over the width of the tube. When a charged particle passes
through the tube, it ionizes some of the atoms in the gas. The electrons from ioniza-
tion drift in the ﬁeld toward the sense wire (Fig. 6). With a suitably chosen electric ﬁeld
strength  and  gas,  the  drift  velocity  can  be  made  roughly  constant.  Near  the  wire,  the
electric  ﬁeld  strength  increases  proportional  to  1/r.  In  this  region  the  electrons  gain
enough energy to ionize more atoms in the gas. This process continues, producing an
“avalanche” of electrons that appears as a small electronic pulse.

By measuring the drift time, we can determine the position of the original particle.
Drift velocities are typically 5 cm/␮s, and although the drift time can be measured to
less than 1 ns, the position resolution (typically 250 ␮m) is dominated by variations in
the arrival time of the avalanche as a result of collisions with the gas molecules. A single
planar drift chamber measures position in one dimension, but if a drift chamber with
two planes of wires is used (one, for example, with its sense wire along the x direction,
the other along the y direction) the particle’s position can be reconstructed in two di-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

596

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Particle trajectory

–HV

–HV

–HV

Drift
region

t1

t2

t3

+HV

+HV

+HV
Sense
wire

"Avalanche"

region

–HV

–HV

–HV

Electric field lines

Figure 6 Schematic of a planar drift chamber showing E ﬁeld lines, avalanche region,
electron drift region, sense wires (⫹HV), incident particle trajectory, and the times mea-
sured between traversal of the particle in each cell and avalanche at each sense wire.

mensions. If a series of drift chambers are placed in a magnetic ﬁeld, the particle’s mo-
mentum can be determined by measuring the curvature of its track.

CDF uses a 1-m-radius, 3-m-long cylindrical drift chamber surrounding the collision
point,  containing  over  4000  sense  wires.  The  wires  are  grouped  into  nine  layers.  Five
layers run parallel to the beam line and alternate with the other four, which are tilted
at ⫾3  degrees  to  the  beam  line  to  provide  3D  position  information.  Another  30  000
wires  along  the  length  of  the  cylinder  create  drift  ﬁelds  (of  about  1  kV/cm)  around
each sense wire. The entire chamber is immersed in a 1.4-T magnetic ﬁeld, which is di-
rected parallel to the beam line and is generated by a superconducting solenoid. Mo-
mentum is measured more accurately for low-momentum tracks with large curvatures
than  for  high-momentum  tracks  which  bend  only  a  few  degrees  in  the  ﬁeld.  A  20-
GeV/c particle  traveling  in  the  radial  direction  can  be  measured  to  about  4%,  but  a 
1-GeV/c particle’s momentum can be determined to 0.2%.

For extremely short-lived particles, we need a detector with higher resolution than
the drift chamber can provide. Although b-hadrons have a lifetime of only 1.5 ps, they
can often be identiﬁed by the short distance they travel from the collision before decay-
ing.  B-hadrons  from  top  decays  that  have  an  average  momentum  of  40  GeV/c trans-
verse to the beam and travel an average of 3.4 mm before decaying. B-hadrons can be
identiﬁed by tracing back the tracks from the decay to a vertex which is displaced from
the  collision  point  (Fig.  7).  We  use  a  high-precision  silicon  microstrip  detector  (an 
8-cm-radius,  60-cm-long  cylindrical  device)  which  is  placed  inside  the  drift  chamber
and immediately surrounds the beampipe.

Strips of silicon separated by about 20 ␮m provide the necessary resolution for ﬁnd-
ing  displaced  vertices.  The  semiconducting  strips  are  reverse-biased  with  voltages  ap-
plied to the n and p sides. This produces an electric ﬁeld in the depletion region, while
preventing  much  current  ﬂow.  A  charged  particle  passing  through  the  detector  can
create electron – hole pairs that move in the electric ﬁeld and appear as small pulses on
the n and p electrodes.  The  CDF  microstrip  detector  uses  four  layers  of  silicon  strips
placed at small radii inside the main drift chamber. The combination of the two track-
ing  devices  provides  enough  resolution  to  pick  out  tracks  and  identify  displaced  ver-
tices from b-hadron decays. For a b-hadron traveling in the radial direction, the posi-
tion of the displaced vertex can be resolved to about 130 ␮m.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

597

tt Event

SVX Display

Jet 2

Jet 3

Primary
vertex

l1

Secondary

vertex

+

l 2

Jet 1 (b-jet)

l1 = 4.5 mm

l 2 = 2.2 mm

e +

ν

Jet 4 (b-jet)

mtop = 170 ± 10 GeV/c 2

24 September, 1992

run #40758, event #44414

Figure 7 Schematic of top quark candidate event.

Calorimetry:  Measuring  the  Energy  of  Particles We now  have  a  snapshot  of  the
event which tells us the direction and momentum of many of the particles. Outside the
tracking chambers and the solenoid coil are calorimeters designed to measure particle en-
ergies.  The  energy  of  the  hadron  jets  is  crucial  to  the  determination  of  the  top  quark
mass. Most particles lose energy in the calorimeters by producing a shower of lower-energy
particles. Figure 8 illustrates the various effects of these particles in the detector. Calorime-
ters contain alternate layers of an “absorber” like lead or iron, with “active” layers of detec-
tors for sampling the particles in the shower as it develops. Since we would like to contain
the entire shower, high-energy particles require deep calorimeters, and since we want to
know roughly where the energy was deposited, the calorimeters are segmented into hun-
dreds  of  read-out  towers.  Unlike  tracking  chambers  which  are  sensitive  only  to  charged
particles, calorimeters can also provide information about neutral particles like photons
and neutrons. As we will see, they also aid in distinguishing electrons from hadrons.

Electrons, because of their low mass, are accelerated by the protons in the lead nu-
clei, and lose much of their energy through bremsstrahlung, or “braking radiation.” Be-
cause  energy  loss  due  to  bremsstrahlung  radiation  for  a  particle  falls  as  M⫺2,  this
process is neglible for the heavy particles. Hadrons, instead, lose most of their energy
through inelastic collisions with the lead nuclei, producing secondary hadrons.

from  bremsstrahlung  will  subsequently  convert 

In  both  these  cases,  the  loss  of  energy  results  in  the  production  of  other,  lower-
energy  particles.  Photons 
to
electron – positron  pairs  which  continue  in  the  same  manner.  Hadrons  also  shower,
producing lower-energy hadrons. Eventually, all the particles in the “shower” will come
to  rest.  By  measuring  the  energy  deposited  in  the  active  layers  of  the  calorimeter,  a
good  measurement  of  the  energy  of  the  particle  is  made.  The  more  times  we  sample
the shower the better our estimate of the energy of the incident particle.

In  practice,  although  we  use  the  same  method  to  measure  both  electron  and
hadron energies, we often use two separate devices, an “electromagnetic” calorimeter

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

598

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

 

Muon
chambers

Steel

Hadronic calorimeter

EM calorimeter

µ

e

Figure 8 Schematic of muons (␮), electrons (e) and jets interacting in a detector.

Jet

(in  our  case  containing  about  7.5  cm  of  lead)  followed  by  a  “hadronic”  calorimeter
with  much  more  material  (about  80  cm  of  steel).  Each  uses  about  30  active  layers  to
sample the number of particles in the shower. The sampling layers are slabs of plastic
scintillator.  The  scintillation  light  they  produce  is  converted  to  electronic  pulses  by
photomultiplier tubes. By summing these pulses, we obtain a measure of the total en-
ergy deposited in the region.

In  the  CDF,  electrons  traverse  18  radiation  lengths  of  lead  in  the  electromagnetic
calorimeter.  A  pion  traverses  about  5  nuclear  absorption  lengths  of  iron  in  the
hadronic calorimeter. Electron and hadron showers are distinguishable by the fact that
electrons shower early. In lead a radiation length is 0.56 cm while an absorption length
is  about  10  cm.  As  a  result,  an  electron  will  lose  most  of  its  energy  in  a  very  short
amount of material compared to a pion or a proton.

Identifying  Muons  and  Neutrinos We have  discussed  some  of  the  ways  in  which
jets,  b-hadrons  and  electrons  can  be  identiﬁed  and  are  left  now  with  the  problem  of
ﬁnding  muons  and  neutrinos.  A  muon  is  just  a  heavy  version  of  the  electron.  Recall
that high-energy electrons lose energy mostly through bremsstrahlung, a process which
is  negligible  for  the  heavier  muons.  As  a  result,  muons  lose  energy  almost  entirely

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

ESSAY

HOW TO FIND A TOP QUARK

599

through the relatively slow process of ionization. A 20-GeV muon from a top quark de-
cay  will  travel  through  the  drift  chamber,  leaving  a  track,  but  then  pass  through  the
calorimeters  depositing  only  a  few  GeV  of  energy.  To  identify  muons,  we  place  small
drift  chambers  outside  the  calorimeters  and  look  for  the  track  of  a  particle.  Because
most other particles stop in the calorimeter, a track in the muon drift chambers estab-
lishes the particle as a muon candidate. We already know the muon’s momentum from
the track it left in the main drift chamber.

Neutrinos are like muons without charge and little or no mass. Because they have
no  charge,  they  cannot  lose  energy  through  ionization.  Neutrinos  interact  only
through the weak interaction. Only one out of a billion neutrinos from a top quark de-
cay will interact in the detector. Neutrinos can be detected only by measuring the miss-
ing momentum in the collision.

Top quark pairs are produced predominantly by quark – antiquark interactions. Al-
though  proton – antiproton  collisions  take  place  at  the  CDF  in  their  center-of-mass
frame, the quarks inside them carry only a fraction of their momentum. As a result, the
top quark system is typically boosted along the beamline. Fortunately, the quarks and
antiquarks collide with very little momentum transverse to the beam direction. Conser-
vation of momentum requires that the ﬁnal transverse momentum should then also be
near zero. If a large imbalance is detected, we can infer the presence of a neutrino and
estimate its momentum transverse to the beam. Since undetected particles also result
in such an imbalance, this technique requires a “hermetic” detector with few cracks, in-
tercepting most of the particles from the collision.

RECONSTRUCTING THE TOP

For over two years, this process continued, beginning with a bottle of hydrogen, and
ending with a few thousand magnetic tapes full of data. After a long period of analyz-

)
2

 

c
/
V
e
G
0
1
(
 
s
t
n
e
v
E

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
80

CDF

100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280

Reconstructed mass (GeV/c 2)

Figure 9 Top quark candidates’ invariant mass distribution. (Phys. Rev. Lett. 74:2626,
1995)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

600

CHAPTER 15

ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

ing the data, selecting electrons, muons, and b-hadrons, a small pool of 50 events were
identiﬁed  containing  about  28  top  quark  pairs.  Using  the  measured  momentum  and
energies, the mass of the top was reconstructed to be 176 ⫾ 13 GeV/c 2 (Fig. 9). The
top quark is the heaviest known fundamental particle; why it is so heavy is one of the
fundamental questions remaining to be answered.

Suggestions for Further Reading

D. A. Edwards and M. J. Syphers, An Introduction to the Physics of High Energy Accelerators,

New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1993.

T. Ferbel, Experimental  Techniques  in  High  Energy  Physics,  Frontiers  in  Physics  Lecture

Note Series, Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley, 1987.

M.  Reiser,  Theory  and  Design  of  Charged  Particle  Beams,  New  York,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,

1994.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16
Cosmology

Chapter Outline

16.1 Epochs of the Big Bang
16.2 Observation of Radiation from the

Primordial Fireball

16.3 Spectrum Emitted by a Receding

Blackbody

16.4 Ripples in the Microwave Bath

What Caused the CMB Ripples?
The Horizon Problem
Inﬂation
Sound Waves in the Early Universe

16.5 Other Evidence for the Expanding

Universe

Evidence from Observational 

Astronomy

Hubble and Company Observe

Galaxies

What the Hubble Telesope Found New 

Evidence from Exploding Stars

Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
Critical Density, ⍀m, and Dark Matter
16.6 Freidmann Models and the Age of

the Universe

16.7 Will the Universe Expand Forever?
16.8 Problems and Perspectives

One  of  the  most  exciting  and  rapidly  developing  areas  in  all  of  physics  is
cosmology,  the  study  of  the  origin,  content,  form,  and  time  evolution  of  the
Universe. Initial  cosmological  speculations  of  a  homogeneous,  eternal,  static
Universe with constant average separation of clumps of matter on a very large
scale were rather staid and dull. Now, however, proof has accumulated of a sur-
prising expanding Universe with a distinct origin in time 14 billion years ago!
In the past 50 years interesting and important reﬁnements in the expansion
rate  (recession  rate  of  all  galaxies  from  each  other)  have  been  conﬁrmed:  a
very  rapid  early  expansion  (inﬂation)  ﬁlling  the  Universe  with  an  extremely
uniform distribution of radiation and matter, a decelerating period of expan-
sion dominated by gravitational attraction in which galaxies had time to form
yet still moved apart from each other, and ﬁnally, a preposterous application
of the accelerator to the cosmic car about 5 billion years ago so that galaxies
are currently accelerating away from each other again. In this chapter we ex-
plore  the  experimental  evidence  for  these  ideas.  We  also  speculate  on  the
causes  of  a  slower  or  faster  expansion  rate.  These  include  familiar  forms  of
matter and energy as well as unusual forms like dark cold matter and dark en-
ergy, which produces gravitational repulsion.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

1

2

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

16.1 EPOCHS OF THE BIG BANG

In  this  chapter  we  describe  one  of  the  most  fascinating  theories  in  all  of
science — the  Big  Bang  theory  of  the  creation  of  the  Universe — and  the  ex-
perimental evidence that supports it. This theory of cosmology states that the
Universe had a beginning and erupted from an extremely dense, pointlike sin-
gularity  about  14  billion  years  ago.1 Such  an  extreme  of  energy  occurred  in
the ﬁrst few instants after the Big Bang that it is believed that all four interac-
tions of physics were uniﬁed and that all matter melted down into an undiffer-
entiated “quark-gluon primordial soup.”

Figure 16.1 shows the evolution of the four fundamental forces from the Big
Bang to the present. During the ﬁrst 10⫺43 s (the ultrahot epoch during which
T ⬇ 1032 K),  it  is  presumed  that  the  strong,  electroweak,  and  gravitational
forces were joined to form a completely uniﬁed force. In the ﬁrst 10⫺35 s fol-
lowing the Big Bang (the hot epoch, T ⬇ 1029 K), gravity broke free of this uni-
ﬁcation  while  the  strong  and  electroweak  forces  remained  joined.  This  was  a
period when particle energies were so great (⬎1016 GeV) that very massive par-
ticles such as those predicted by Supersymmetry (see Section 15.12) as well as
quarks,  leptons,  and  their  antiparticles  existed.  Then,  after  10⫺35 s,  the  Uni-
verse rapidly expanded and cooled (the warm epoch, T ⫽ 10 29 to 1015 K) and
the strong and electroweak forces parted company. As the Universe continued
to cool, the electroweak force split into the weak force and the electromagnetic
force about 10⫺10 s after the Big Bang. After a few more minutes, protons and
neutrons condensed out of the cooling quark-gluon plasma.

During the ﬁrst half-hour of creation, the temperature was probably about
1010 K and the Universe could be viewed as a cosmic thermonuclear bomb fus-
ing protons and neutrons into deuterium and then helium, producing most of

Quarks and leptons

Protons and

neutrons
can form

Gravitational

Strong and
electroweak

Nuclei can form
Atoms can form

Gravitation

Strong force

Weak force

Unified
force

Two
forces

Electroweak

Three
forces

Electromagnetic force

Four forces

Big Bang

10–40

10–30

10–20

10–10

100
Age of the Universe (s)

1010

1020
Present age
of Universe

Figure  16.1 A  brief  history  of  the  Universe  from  the  Big  Bang  to  the  present.  The
four forces became distinguishable during the ﬁrst nanosecond. Following this, all the
quarks combined to form particles that interact via the nuclear force. However, the lep-
tons remained separate and to this day exist as individual, observable particles.

1Data  from  the  Wilkinson  Microwave  Anisotropy  Probe  in  2003  pinpointed  the  age  of  the
Universe at 13.7 ⫾ 0.2 billion years (“WMAP Spacecraft Maps the Entire Cosmic Microwave Sky
with Unprecedented Precision,” Physics Today, April 2003, 56(4): pp. 21– 24.)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.2

OBSERVATION OF RADIATION FROM THE PRIMORDIAL FIREBALL

3

+
–

H atoms
protons, deuterium and helium nuclei
electrons
photons

+–

–

+

–

+

Earth

+

+

–

–

–

+

–
–
+
+
–

+

–

R

+

+

+

–
+
+
–
+
–
–

+

–

+

–

+

–

–

+

–

+

+

–

+

–

(a)

Expanding shell

of charged 
particles

(b)

Figure 16.3 Radiation- and matter-dominated stages in the evolution of the Universe.
(a) The radiation-dominated stage (T ⬎ 3000 K, age ⬍ 400,000 years) is an expanding
Universe ﬁlled with protons, electrons, neutrons, photons, and neutrinos. Charged par-
ticles continually scatter photons, ensuring thermal equilibrium of radiation and mat-
ter.  (b)  The  matter-dominated  state  (T ⬍ 3000  K,  age  ⬎ 400,000  years).  Hydrogen
atoms form, making the Universe transparent to photons. Photons emitted from an ex-
panding ion shell at R ≈ 14 billion lightyears are currently seen on Earth enormously
Doppler-shifted to the red.

the  helium  nuclei  that  now  exist.  (See  Fig.  16.2.)  Until  about  400,000  years
after the Big Bang, the Universe was dominated by radiation. Energetic pho-
tons prevented matter from forming clumps, or even single hydrogen and he-
lium atoms, because photon-atom collisions would instantly ionize any atoms
that happened to form. In addition, photons experienced continuous Comp-
ton scattering from vast numbers of free electrons, resulting in a universe that
was opaque to electromagnetic radiation. By the time the Universe was about
400,000 years old — it had expanded to one-thousandth of its current size and
cooled to about 3000 K — electrons could bind to protons and helium nuclei
to form atoms. Because of the drastic reduction in free charged particles, far
fewer photons were absorbed or scattered, and the Universe suddenly became
transparent  to  photons.  Radiation  no  longer  dominated  the  Universe,  and
clumps  of  neutral  matter  steadily  grew— ﬁrst  atoms,  then  molecules,  gas
clouds, stars, and ﬁnally galaxies. The state of affairs for radiation- and matter-
dominated periods is shown in Figure 16.3.

16.2 OBSERVATION OF RADIATION FROM THE

PRIMORDIAL FIREBALL

In  1965,  Arno  A.  Penzias  and  Robert  W.  Wilson  of  Bell  Laboratories  were
testing a sensitive microwave receiver and made an amazing discovery. A pesky

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Figure  16.2 George  Gamow,
1904 – 1968,  Russian-American
physicist. Gamow and two of his
students,  Ralph  Alpher  and
Robert  Herman,  were  the  ﬁrst
to take the ﬁrst half-hour of the
Universe  seriously.  In  a  mostly
overlooked  paper  published  in
1948,  they  made  truly  remark-
able  cosmological  predictions.
They  correctly  calculated  the
abundances  of  hydrogen  and
helium  after  the  ﬁrst  half-hour
(75% H and 25% He) and pre-
dicted  that  radiation  from  the
Big  Bang  should  still  be  pre-
sent, with an apparent tempera-
ture  of  about  5  K.  In  Gamow’s
own  words,  the  Universe’s  sup-
ply  of  hydrogen  and  helium
were  created  very  quickly,  “in
less time than it takes to cook a
dish  of  duck  and  roast  pota-
toes.”  The  comment  is  charac-
teristic of this interesting physi-
cist,  who  is  known  as  much  for
his  explanation  of  alpha  decay
and  his  theories  of  cosmology
as  for  his  delightful  popular
books,  his  cartoons,  and  his
wonderful  sense  of  humor.  A
classic  Gamow  story  holds  that,
having coauthored a paper with
Alpher, he made Hans Bethe an
honorary  author  so  that  the
credits  would  read  “Alpher,
Bethe,  and  Gamow”  (to  resem-
ble  the  Greek  letters  ␣, ␤,  and
␥).  (AIP  Emilio  Segre  Visual
Archives)

4

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

Figure  16.4 Robert  W.  Wilson  (left)  and  Arno  A.  Penzias  with  the  Bell  Telephone
Laboratories  horn-reﬂector  antenna.  (AIP  Emilio  Segre  Visual  Archives/Physics  Today
Collection)

signal that produced a faint background hiss was interfering with their satellite
communications  experiments.  Despite  their  valiant  efforts,  the  signal
remained. Ultimately it became clear that they were detecting microwave back-
ground radiation (at a wavelength of 7.35 cm) that represented some of the
leftover electromagnetic “glow” from the Big Bang.

The  microwave  horn  that  served  as  their  receiving  antenna  is  shown  in
Figure 16.4. The intensity of the detected signal remained unchanged as the
antenna  was  pointed  in  different  directions.  The  fact  that  the  radiation  had
equal  strengths  in  all  directions  suggested  that  the  entire  Universe  was  the
source of this radiation. Booting a ﬂock of pigeons from the 20-foot horn and
cooling  the  microwave  detector  both  failed  to  remove  the  “spurious”  signal.
Through a casual conversation, Penzias and Wilson discovered that a group at
Princeton  had  predicted  the  residual  radiation  from  the  Big  Bang  and  were
planning an experiment to conﬁrm their theory. The excitement in the scien-
tiﬁc community was high when Penzias and Wilson announced that they had
already observed an excess microwave background of a 3-K blackbody source,
which was the predicted temperature of the cooled, residual Big Bang radia-
tion at the present time.

Because  Penzias  and  Wilson  took  their  measurements  at  a  single  wave-
length, they did not completely conﬁrm the radiation as 3-K blackbody radia-
tion. One can imagine the excitement in the late 1960s and 1970s as experi-
mentalists  fought  obscuring  atmospheric  absorption  and,  point  by  point,
added  intensity  data  at  different  wavelengths.  The  results  shown  in  Figure
16.5, which include precise measurements taken around the maximum inten-
sity  wavelength  of  0.1 cm  by  the  Cosmic  Background  Explorer  Satellite
(COBE), unambiguously conﬁrm that the radiation is that of a black body at
2.7 K. Figure 16.5 is probably the most clear- cut evidence that the Big Bang

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.3

SPECTRUM EMITTED BY A RECEDING BLACKBODY

5

)
m
/
3
m
/
V
e
(
 
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
 

h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
w
 
r
e
p
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
t
n
a
i
d
a
R

108

106

104

102

100

10–2

Penzias

and

Wilson

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

Wavelength (cm)

Figure  16.5 Theoretical  blackbody  (brown  curve)  and  measured  radiation  spectra
(blue points) of the Big Bang. Most of the data were collected from the Cosmic Back-
ground Explorer (COBE) satellite. The datum of Penzias and Wilson is indicated.

occurred.  It  also  presents  the  earliest  view  of  the  Universe,  a  much  earlier
view  than  that  available  with  the  largest  optical  and  radio  telescopes.  The
1978  Nobel  Prize  was  awarded  to  Penzias  and  Wilson  for  their  important
discovery.

16.3 SPECTRUM EMITTED BY A RECEDING BLACKBODY

Since the observed 3-K blackbody spectrum is the single strongest piece of evi-
dence for the Big Bang theory of the Universe, it is important to examine this
topic in more detail. In particular, we want to show what happens to a black-
body spectrum in an expanding Universe.

Consider blackbody radiation from the Big Bang at the time when the Uni-
verse ﬁrst  became  transparent  to  photons,  400,000  years  after  the  Big  Bang
(ABB). Recall from Chapter 3 that the wavelength distribution for blackbody
radiation is

u(␭,T )d␭ ⫽

8␲hc
␭5 冢

1

e hc/␭k BT ⫺ 1

冣 d␭

(3.20)

where u(␭,T )d␭ is  the  energy  per  unit  volume  of  the  radiation  with  wave-
length between ␭ and ␭ ⫹ d␭ emitted by a blackbody at temperature T. Sup-
pose  that  between  then  (400,000  years  ABB)  and  now  (14,000,000,000  years
ABB),  the  Universe  has  expanded  and  a  photon  of  original  wavelength ␭ is

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

6

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

now  Doppler-shifted  to ␭⬘,  where ␭⬘ is  longer  than ␭.  Our  question  is:  What
happens to the form of the original wavelength distribution u(␭,T) d␭?

Let f (␭⬘,T ⬘) d␭⬘ be the current energy per unit volume of the residual Big
Bang radiation as measured from the Earth. Since the shell of charged parti-
cles that emitted the radiation is moving away from the Earth at extremely rel-
ativistic  speed  (Fig.  16.3),  we  must  use  the  relativistic  Doppler  shift  for  light
from a receding source to relate ␭⬘ to ␭. As shown in Chapter 1, Example 1.6,
this connection is

␭⬘ ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

␭

(16.1)

where v is the speed of recession of the charged shell. For our purposes, Equa-
tion 16.1 may be written more simply as

␭⬘ ⫽ F ␭

(16.2)

which shows that the present wavelength ␭⬘ is greater than the original wave-
length ␭ by  the  factor 
.  (Equation  16.2  may  be
generalized to mean that all distances in the Universe have grown by a factor
of F since  400,000  years  ABB.)  To  ﬁnd  the  relation  between  the  currently 
observed  spectrum  f (␭⬘,T ⬘)d␭⬘ and  the  original  blackbody  distribution
u(␭,T )d␭, we substitute ␭ ⫽ ␭⬘/F into the expression for u(␭,T )d␭:

F ⫽ √1 ⫹ (v/c)/√1 ⫺ (v/c)

u(␭, T )d␭ ⫽

8␲hc
␭5 冢

1

e hc/␭kBT ⫺ 1

冣 d␭ ⫽

8␲hc
(␭⬘/F )5 冢

1

ehc/(␭⬘ⲐF )kBT ⫺ 1

冣

d␭⬘
F

or

u(␭, T ) d␭

F 4

⫽

8␲hc
(␭⬘)5 冢

1

ehc/␭⬘kBT ⬘ ⫺ 1

冣 d␭⬘

(16.3)

where T ⬘ ⫽ T/F. We can identify the right side of Equation 16.3 as a (current)
blackbody spectrum f(␭⬘,T ⬘)d␭⬘ because it has the standard functional form of
a  blackbody  spectrum  with  wavelength ␭⬘ and  temperature  T ⬘.  Thus  we  can
write Equation 16.3 as

u(␭, T ) d␭

F 4

⫽ f (␭⬘, T ⬘) d␭⬘

(16.4)

where f (␭⬘,T ⬘)d␭⬘ has the explicit form

f(␭⬘, T ⬘) d␭⬘ ⫽

8␲hc
(␭⬘)5 冢

1

ehc/␭⬘kBT ⬘ ⫺ 1

冣 d␭⬘

(16.5)

with T ⬘ ⫽ T/F. Equation 16.4 shows that the radiation from a receding blackbody still
has the same spectral distribution, but its temperature T ⬘ drops by a factor of F and its
energy per unit volume decreases by a factor of F 4. In a frame of reference moving
with  the  charged  particles  that  last  scattered  the  radiation,  the  characteristic
temperature of the radiation is about 3000 K. Using the current observation of
a 3-K cosmic background from Earth, and substituting into F ⫽ T/T ⬘, we ﬁnd
F ⫽ 3000 K/3 K ⬇ 1000. This means distances in the Universe have grown by a
factor of 1000 since 400,000 years ABB and that the speed of recession from the
Earth of the charged shell which emitted the radiation is very high. 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.4

RIPPLES IN THE MICROWAVE BATH

7

Exercise 1 Find the speed of recession from the Earth of the charged shell that emit-
ted the cosmic background radiation.
Answer 0.999998 c

16.4 RIPPLES IN THE MICROWAVE BATH

The  discovery  of  the  cosmic  microwave  background  (CMB)  radiation  bathing
the Earth brought with it a problem, however—the radiation was too uniform.
Scientists believed that slight ﬂuctuations in the temperature of the CMB from
spot to spot in the sky had to occur in order to act as nucleation sites for the for-
mation of the galaxies, stars, and planets that now exist. In 1992, George Smoot
(b.  1945),  an  American  astronomer  at  the  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory,
found, by carefully analyzing data collected by COBE, that the background was
not perfectly uniform as was ﬁrst thought, but instead contained irregularities
that corresponded to temperature variations of 1 part in 100,000. While varia-
tions of this size may seem insigniﬁcant, temperature variations of just this size
have been shown by computer simulation to lead to the galaxy clusters we see to-
day.2 The  Wilkinson  Microwave  Anisotropy  Probe  (WMAP),  launched  in  June
2001, has provided the most deﬁnitive data to date showing that distinct hot and
cold  spots  in  the  CMB  have  angular  sizes  precisely  predicted  by  cosmological
theory. (See Fig. 16.6.) Additionally, WMAP has conﬁrmed the composition of
the Universe at different epochs as well as the geometry of the Universe.

What Caused the CMB Ripples?
The hot and cold spots in the CMB are believed to correspond, respectively, to
density compressions and rarefactions (sound waves) in the gaslike system of

Figure  16.6 A “baby  picture”  of
the  Universe  taken  when  it  was
only  380,000  years  old.  The  Earth
is  at  the  center  of  this  celestial
sphere  and  red  corresponds  to
warmer regions and blue to colder.
(NASA/WMAP SCIENCE TEAM)

2See “Reading the Blueprints of Creation,” by Michael A. Strauss, Sci. Am., February 2004.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

8

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

photons,  electrons,  protons,  and  neutrons  of  the  radiation-dominated  era
when radiation was trapped by matter. About 380,000 years ABB, the Universe
became transparent to radiation, and photons could travel in straight lines for
billions of lightyears without scattering. Photons emitted from compressed hot
areas  were  more  energetic  than  those  from  rariﬁed  cooler  areas,  and  when
these  photons  reached  the  Earth,  after  a  straight-line  trip  of  45  billion
lightyears, they preserved the information about the hot and cold spots pro-
duced  by  sound  waves  in  the  early  Universe.  This  explanation,  however,  just
pushes the cause of the CMB ripples back one step, since it is natural to ask
what produced the sound waves in the ﬁrst place. Here, we must invoke the
concept  of  inﬂation,  already  introduced  in  1981  by  Alan  H.  Guth  (b.  1947,
American physicist) to explain an important difﬁculty with the Big Bang the-
ory called the horizon problem.

The Horizon Problem. The horizon problem is the issue of the causal con-
nectedness  shown  by  the  uniform  temperature  of  the  entire  CMB  when,  in
fact, any two points in the sky separated by more than 1 degree (about twice
the Moon’s diameter) contain CMB radiation from regions of the universe that
were  causally  disconnected  at  380,000  years  ABB. That  is,  extrapolating  the
paths of photons from points 2 degrees apart in the sky backwards, using the
known expansion rate of the Universe, results in a separation of the photons’
points of origin such that a signal would have to travel at about 10 times the
speed  of  light  to  correlate  the  behavior  of  the  two  regions.  This  dilemma  is
called the horizon problem since the limit of the region we can observe— our
horizon — is deﬁned by signals traveling at the speed of light. Thus it is difﬁ-
cult to understand the uniform temperature of the CMB to 1 part in 100,000
on the basis of the standard Big Bang theory. What we are left with is that by
sheer coincidence all the causally disconnected regions of the early universe
happen to have a homogeneous density and temperature.

Inﬂation
In 1981, Guth proposed a more natural solution to this problem, the theory of
inﬂation.3 The theory of inﬂation states that at about 10ⴚ35 s ABB the Universe
went through a period of rapidly accelerating expansion for about 10ⴚ32 s and
exponentially increased in size with time. It is thought that after inﬂation the
volume of the Universe had increased about 10100 times more than it would
have if it had expanded at the standard expansion rate. This solves the hori-
zon  problem  because  before  inﬂation,  the  matter  and  radiation  were  so
closely packed together that collision processes would easily keep matter and
radiation in equilibrium, producing uniform density and temperature in the
CMB-emitting postinﬂation early Universe. It is most interesting that inﬂation
occurred so rapidly it actually outpaced the speed of light, and sections of the
Universe grew out of contact with each other during inﬂation. When inﬂation
ended,  the  expansion  decelerated,  and  regions  of  the  Universe  came  back
into each other’s view. This situation is shown schematically in Figure 16.7 in
terms of a space-time diagram (introduced in Section 1.7). Figure 16.7 shows
the plasma of photons and charged particles of the radiation-dominated era

3See “The Inﬂationary Universe,” by Alan H. Guth and Paul J. Steinhardt, Sci. Am., May 1984.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.4

RIPPLES IN THE MICROWAVE BATH

9

n

orizo
ne H
Lightco

Now

Space-time path
of some galaxies

First galaxies

Plasma of photons
and charged particles

CMB emitted

Inflation
Big Bang

ct

⫹

⫺

⫹

⫺

x

Figure 16.7 A schematic diagram of the inﬂationary expanding universe. The space-
time diagram shows periods of deceleration and acceleration in the cosmic expansion
during which some galaxies move in and out of the observable region of the universe.

expanding far beyond the horizon (lightcone) during inﬂation, with different
regions dropping out of each others’ view. Note that after inﬂation ended and
the expansion decelerated, some of these regions came back into view. Finally,
the current accelerating expansion is also suggested by showing some present
galaxies moving past the horizon and out of each others’ view again.

The full predictive power of the theory of inﬂation is really only seen, how-
ever,  when  it  is  realized  that  it  also  provides  answers  to  several  other  deep
problems that had been troubling cosmologists. One unsolved mystery was the
observation  that  the  present  Universe  seemed  to  obey  Euclidean  geometry
(sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°— one says the Universe is “ﬂat”) over
immense distances, which meant that at about 1 s ABB the Universe had to be
exquisitely ﬂat, precariously balanced in mass to a precision of about 1 part in
1015. While standard Big Bang theory gives no reason why the Universe started
off in such an unusual way, inﬂationary theory does — inﬂation drives an arbi-
trarily curved Universe to such a ﬂat state that the presently observed Universe
would  still  appear ﬂat.  This  occurs  in  much  the  same  way  that  blowing  up  a
balloon  (enough)  causes  a  ﬁxed  area  on  the  balloon’s  surface  to  approach
ﬂatness to any desired degree. Another puzzle facing physicists was the failure
to  detect  magnetic  monopoles  in  spite  of  extensive  experimental  searches.
(There  is  strong  theoretical  evidence  that  these  very  massive  stable  particles
should have been abundantly produced in the Big Bang.) Inﬂation solves this
dilemma  by  showing  that  magnetic  monopoles  were  so  thinly  spread  out  by
the enormous inﬂationary expansion that their calculated density in the part
of the Universe we can presently observe is below detectable limits. 

The cause of inﬂation is believed to be a new kind of quantum ﬁeld, the in-
ﬂaton,  which  carried  the  potential  energy  needed  to  cause  the  rapid  expan-
sion and trigger sound waves in the early Universe. Furthermore, a consistent
theory has been developed that directly relates microscopic quantum ﬂuctua-
tions  in  the  inﬂaton ﬁeld  to  observed  macroscopic  CMB  temperature  varia-
tions. This is a theory that essentially shows that inﬂation magniﬁed quantum

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

10

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

ﬂuctuations  into  the  temperature  variations  we  see  in  the  CMB  today.  Al-
though describing this theory in detail is beyond the scope of this chapter, we
can describe in a crude way how the pattern of sound waves inferred from the
temperature variations in the CMB ﬁt into inﬂationary theory.

Sound Waves in the Early Universe
Because inﬂation triggered sound waves with different frequencies all at the
same  time  of  10⫺35 s  ABB,  the  waves  are  believed  to  have  all  started  out  in
phase  and  oscillated  throughout  the  radiation-dominated  era  for  380,000
years.  If  this  was  the  case,  astronomers  should  be  able  to  measure  the
strengths  of  the  fundamental  and  overtones — the  power  spectrum — in  the
acoustic oscillations of the early Universe in a process similar to that of mea-
suring the sound spectrum of a musical instrument. In the case of the CMB,
cosmologists measure the magnitude of temperature variations versus the an-
gular size of hot and cold spots to get the power spectrum. When these mea-
surements  are  made,  a  series  of  peaks  with  different  strengths  are  found,
agreeing  with  the  predictions  of  inﬂationary  theory  in  strength  and  fre-
quency  and  conﬁrming  that  all  sound  waves  were  indeed  generated  at  the
same moment by inﬂation.

Another success of inﬂationary theory applied to the radiation-dominated
era  is  proof  that  the  Universe  obeys  Euclidean  geometry.  Since  cosmologists
can precisely calculate the length of the fundamental sound wave in the early
Universe ( f 0 is measured, the velocity of sound v in the plasma is known, and
␭ ⫽ v/f0), and the distance CMB photons have traveled to the Earth from op-
posite ends of the fundamental is known, the sides of a triangle, literally as big
as  all  outdoors,  are  known,  and  the  sum  of  its  angles  can  essentially  be
checked. When this is done, it is found that space is indeed quite ﬂat or Eu-
clidean, in agreement with other types of measurement.

16.5 OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

Evidence from Observational Astronomy
Most of the key discoveries supporting the theory of an expanding Universe,
and indirectly the Big Bang theory of cosmology, were made in the 20th cen-
tury.  In  1913,  Vesto  Melvin  Slipher  (1875– 1969),  an  American  astronomer
working at the Lowell Observatory, reported that most spiral galaxies4 were re-
ceding from the Earth at speeds up to several million miles per hour. Slipher
was  one  of  the ﬁrst  to  use  the  methods  of  Doppler  shifts  in  spectral  lines  to
measure velocities. The key to this method is to locate in galactic spectra the
characteristic lines of some element whose wavelengths have been measured
on Earth. The speed of the receding galaxy (for recession speeds small com-
pared to c) is then directly proportional to the wavelength shift to the red, as
shown  in  Figure  16.8.  The  symbol  Z is  used  by  astronomers  to  denote  the

4This was before Hubble had ﬁgured out what galaxies really were, very distant “island universes”
consisting of billions of stars. In Slipher’s time, galaxies with spiral arms were called spiral nebu-
lae  (nebulae  are  glowing  clouds  of  gas  and  dust),  since  individual  stars  in  the  glowing  clouds
could not be distinguished.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

11

GALAXY
PHOTO

DISTANCE IN
LIGHT-YEARS

RED-SHIFTS

78,000,000

VIRGO

1,200 km/s

1,000,000,000

URSA MAJOR

15,000 km/s

1,400,000,000

2,500,000,000

3,960,000,000

CORONA
BOREALIS

BÖTES

HYDRA

22,000 km/s

39,000 km/s

61,000 km/s

Figure 16.8 Redshift of the H and K lines of calcium for ﬁve galaxies. Redshifts are
expressed as speeds c(⌬␭/␭). Calibration spectra taken in the laboratory appear above
and below each galaxy’s spectrum.

measured redshift of receding astronomical objects, where 

Z ⬅  

⌬␭

␭

⫽

␭ ⫺ ␭0

␭0

(16.6)

␭0 is the emission wavelength of a particular line measured in the lab, and ␭ is
the measured wavelength of the same line in a receding galaxy. Slipher found
that the number  Z was positive in most cases and had the same value for all
lines in the spectrum of a particular galaxy. In general, redshift Z is related to
galaxy  recession  velocity  v by  the  relativistic  Doppler  shift  expression  (Eq.
16.1), which is frequently written in the form 

Z ⫽ √ c ⫹ v

c ⫺ v

⫺ 1

v can be explicitly given in terms of Z as

v ⫽ c 冢

Z 2 ⫹ 2Z

Z 2 ⫹ 2Z ⫹ 2

冣

(16.7)

(16.8)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

12

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

Figure  16.9 Milton  L.  Huma-
son  (1891 – 1972).  He  and  Ed-
win  Hubble  did  the  most  to
demonstrate 
the  expanding
Universe  experimentally.  The
two  astronomers  present  an  in-
teresting  contrast.  Humason
was  originally  a  mule-team 
driver and janitor at Mount Wil-
son.  He  taught  himself  astron-
omy and became a consummate
experimentalist.  (Photo  by  Mar-
garet/AIP  Emilio  Segre  Visual
Archives)

Slipher’s  measurements  of  galactic  speeds  were  quite  accurate,  but  the
distances  to  the  galaxies  were  virtually  unknown,  although  there  was  some
indication that more-distant objects had higher recessional speeds. 

Shortly after Slipher’s discovery, a ﬂowering of ideas occurred in theoretical
cosmology. In 1916, Einstein published his general theory of relativity (a new
theory of gravity replacing Newton’s), in which he formulated the differential
equations connecting the distribution of matter in the Universe with the cur-
vature of space-time. Einstein solved these equations and found that in order
to have a Universe static in time,5 he had to add a “cosmic repulsion” force be-
tween galaxies characterized by a cosmological constant, ⌳. This was a rather
unusual  force,  since  it  was  independent  of  mass  and  grew  stronger  with  in-
creasing galaxy separation. In the same year, the Dutch mathematician and as-
tronomer  Willem  de  Sitter  found  another  static  solution  to  Einstein’s  equa-
tions.  This  solution  predicted  an  increasing  redshift  for  lines  emitted  by
more-distant  objects.  De  Sitter’s  solution  stirred  much  interest  because  it
seemed capable of being conﬁrmed experimentally.

Major breakthroughs in the cosmological problem came in 1922 and 1924
when  Alexander  Friedmann,6 (1888–1925,  Russian  mathematician),  showed
that two nonstatic models were predicted by Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of general
relativity:  an  expanding  Universe,  called  an  open  Universe and  a  contracting
Universe,  called  a  closed  Universe. At ﬁrst  Einstein  found  it  difﬁcult  to  ex-
change the eternal, steady, static Universe for an expanding, dynamic Universe
that presumably had a beginning in time. He wrote to de Sitter, “This circum-
stance of an expanding Universe irritates me” and “to admit such possibilities
seems  senseless.”7 However,  by  1933  Einstein  was ﬁnally  convinced  of  the  im-
peccable logic of Friedmann’s arguments. Any remaining doubt about the non-
static nature of the Universe was erased by the powerful experimental results of
American  astronomers  Edwin  P.  Hubble  (1889–1953)  and  Milton  Humason
(1891–1972) on the redshifts of distant nebulae (see Figs. 16.9 and 16.10). We
return  to  a  consideration  of  Freidmann’s  important  work,  the  foundation  of
current cosmology theory based on general relativity, in Section 16.6.

Hubble and Company Observe Galaxies
Hubble ﬁrst established that spiral nebulae (distant clouds of glowing gas and
dust) were actually composed of billions of stars, and then went on to measure

5The average distance between clumps of matter on a large scale is constant with time.
6Freidmann  was  an  amateur  meteorologist  and  balloonist  who  taught  Gamow  relativity  theory.
Gamow reported that meteorology killed Freidmann, since he died of a severe chill and pneumo-
nia following one of his meteorological balloon ﬂights.
7There has been much scientiﬁc irritation over expanding Universe theories. Presumably the irri-
tation  derives  from  the  fact  that  the  Big  Bang  theory  places  the  cause  of  creation  beyond  the
reach of physical investigation. Fred Hoyle (b. 1915, an English astronomer) has never accepted
the Big Bang theory and prefers instead a steady-state model of the Universe in which matter is
created out of nothing at a rate necessary to compensate for the increasing distances between vis-
ible galaxies. Others have expressed their irritation as follows:

Sir Arthur Eddington: “I have no axe to grind in this discussion but the notion of a beginning
is repugnant to me . . . I simply do not believe that the present order of things started off with
a bang . . . The expanding Universe is preposterous and incredible; it leaves me cold.”
Walter Nernst: “To deny the inﬁnite duration of time would be to betray the very foundation
of science.”
Phillip Morrison: “I ﬁnd it hard to accept the big bang theory. I would like to reject it.”
Allan Sandage: “It is such a strange conclusion. . . . It cannot really be true.”

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

13

Figure 16.10 Edwin P. Hubble (1889– 1953). Hubble was born to wealth, graduated
from the University of Chicago, and was a Rhodes Scholar, lawyer, athlete, soldier, and
astronomer  with  an  unerring  eye 
in  astronomy. 
(© Bettmann/CORBIS)

important  problems 

for 

their distances. By 1923, he had already determined that the Andromeda neb-
ula  was  more  than  1  million  lightyears  distant,  well  beyond  the  100,000-
lightyear extent of our own Milky Way galaxy. Hubble measured the distances
to  nearby  galaxies,  or “island  universes,”  by  observing  the  brightness  of  stars
with ﬂuctuating intensity, called cepheid variables. Since the intrinsic luminosity,
L, the total electromagnetic energy radiated per second, was known from the
period of light ﬂuctuations, Hubble used the observed intensity ﬂux, f, the en-
ergy per second per unit area in some frequency band received at the detec-
tor, and energy conservation to ﬁnd the distance, R :

f ⫽

L

4␲R2

(16.9)

In the late 1920s, Hubble made the bold assertion that the entire Universe
was expanding. From 1928 to 1936, he and Humason toiled at Mount Wilson
to prove this assertion until they reached the limits of the 100-inch telescope.
The results of their work and its continuation on a 200-inch telescope in the
1940s showed that the recession velocity, v, of a galaxy increases in direct pro-
portion to its distance R from us (Fig. 16.11). This linear relationship, known
as Hubble’s law, may be written

v ⫽ H0R

(16.10)

Hubble’s law

where H0, Hubble’s constant, has the currently accepted value

H0 ⫽ 23 ⫻ 10⫺6 (km/s)/lightyear

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

14

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

)
s
/
m
k

 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
 
n
o
i
s
s
e
c
e
R

Hydra

Boötes

Corona
Borealis

Ursa
Major

Virgo

1

0

0

2

3

4

5

Distance (109 lightyears)

Figure 16.11 Hubble’s law: The recession velocity of a galaxy is directly proportional
to distance out to at least 5 billion lightyears. The ﬁve galaxies shown in Figure 16.8 are
plotted here.

with an uncertainty of about 25%. This large uncertainty is produced by the
great  difﬁculty  of  measuring  distances  to  far-off  galaxies  and  galaxy  clusters.
The  amazingly  simple  form  of  Hubble’s  law  follows  from  the  cosmological
principle, which states that the Universe is isotropic (has the same average fea-
tures — mass density, expansion factor, and so on — in any direction) and ho-
mogeneous (has the same average features at any position) when large enough
volumes  of  the  Universe  are  sampled. If  we  consider  several  equally  spaced
galaxies  in  a  line  moving  at  nonrelativistic  velocities  away  from  us  in  an  ex-
panding Universe, we easily ﬁnd Hubble’s law. (See Problem 2.) So, Hubble’s
law  is  a  direct  and  expected  consequence  of  an  expanding  homogeneous
Universe.

The use of the term Hubble’s constant for H0 is a bit misleading since H0 is
constant  with  distance  but  varies  slowly  with  time  because  gravity  or  other
forces (so-called vacuum repulsion or dark energy), respectively, slow down or
speed up the expansion of the Universe as time progresses. We can gain more
insight into the meaning of Hubble’s law and show that Hubble’s “constant” is
a function of time by introducing the universal expansion scaling factor, a(t ),
which is the same anywhere in the Universe. a(t ) is deﬁned by the equation

(16.11)
where R(t ) is the distance from Earth to some receding galaxy, R 0 is the cur-
rent separation in some appropriate length unit, and a(t) is the dimensionless
scaling factor with the present time denoted t 0, and a(t 0) ⫽ 1. Differentiating

R(t) ⫽ R0a(t)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

15

Equation  16.11  with  respect  to  time  and  substituting  for  R 0 from  16.11,  we
ﬁnd

v ⫽ R˙ ⫽ R0a˙ ⫽

R
a

a˙

(16.12)

where v, R, a, and  are all functions of time. Finally, comparing 16.12 to the
general form of Hubble’s law written as

a˙

we ﬁnd

v(t ) ⫽ H(t )R(t )

H(t) ⫽

a˙(t)
a(t)

(16.13)

(16.14)

Equation 16.14 shows that H is the time derivative of ln a and that a generally
depends  on  time  except  in  the  case  of  exponential  expansion  (inﬂation),
a(t ) = Ae bt. (See Problem 4.) Further, 16.14 shows that H is proportional to the
ﬁrst derivative with respect to time of a. Another parameter, q(t), the decelera-
tion parameter, determines the second derivative of a and tells whether the ex-
pansion is slowing down or speeding up with time.8 H and q can be used to
construct a ﬁrst-order approximation to the function a(t ), but in general one
needs to measure an inﬁnite set of time derivatives of a(t ) or the function it-
self  to  fully  characterize  a(t ).  We  will  further  discuss  this  important  scaling
function, which describes the expansion of the Universe, in Section 16.6.

EXAMPLE 16.1
The basic form of Hubble’s law, v ⫽ H0R, follows from as-
suming that the Universe is undergoing a nonrelativistic
uniform  expansion  and  is  homogeneous.  (See  Problem
2.)  Thus  this  law  in  its  basic  form  will  begin  to  fail  at
some maximum distance, R max, at which the recessional

velocity  is  an  appreciable  fraction  of  the  speed  of  light.
Estimate  the  maximum  distance  at  which  Hubble’s  law
applies without relativistic correction by assuming that it
fails when v ⫽ c/4.

Solution

R max ⫽

v
H0

⫽

c

4H0

⫽

3.0 ⫻ 105 km/s

80 ⫻ 10⫺6 km/s/lightyear

⬇ 4 ⫻ 109

lightyears

Hubble’s  law  can  be  corrected  for  relativistic  effects,  so
that interesting departures from this law can be observed

such as accelerations and decelerations in the expansion
of the Universe at different epochs.

New Evidence from Exploding Stars
Telescopes look farther back in time as they view more distant stars and galax-
ies, so by looking at objects over as great a range of distances as possible we can
establish the entire history of the expansion of the Universe. In particular, mea-
suring the velocity (from redshift) and distance (from apparent brightness or
ﬂux) of astronomical objects over a wide range of distances gives the history of
the expansion of the Universe. One can tell if the Universe departed from the

8The exact form of  q is given by 
down and q ⬍ 0 indicates the expansion is speeding up.

q ⫽ ⫺a(a¨/a˙)2

, where  q ⬎ 0 indicates the expansion is slowing

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

)
s
/
m
k

 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
 
n
o
i
s
s
e
c
e
R

200

150

100

50

0

0

Decelerating
universe

Hubble’s
law

Closer and brighter

Farther and dimmer
than Hubble’s law

Accelerating
universe

2.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

10.0

Distance (billions of lightyears)

Figure  16.12 Deviations  from  Hubble’s  law  (uniform  expansion)  for  decelerating
and accelerating expansions.

uniform  expansion  of  space  predicted  by  Hubble’s  law  and  if  the  expansion
accelerated or decelerated at different times by comparing the measured values
of velocity and distance of astronomical objects to those predicted by Hubble’s
law. For example, if the Universe is currently decelerating, the velocity of a very
distant galaxy, determined from the redshift of light emitted by this galaxy in
the early Universe, would be somewhat greater than the velocity predicted by
Hubble’s law; see Figure 16.12. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, an equally valid
signature of deceleration is that a galaxy with a given velocity will be closer and
brighter than expected from Hubble’s law. Similarly, an accelerating expansion
would cause galaxies in the early Universe to be more distant and dimmer than
predicted by Hubble’s law, as shown in Figure 16.12.

Attempts  to  measure  the  distance  to  very  distant  galaxies  and  groups  of
galaxies in the second half of the 20th century in order to detect departures
from Hubble’s law proved very uncertain, with great statistical scatter in data
points. The failure of galaxies to act as standardized light sources at large dis-
tances is now known to be caused by evolutionary changes in galaxies— early
galaxies  formed  at  2– 5  billion  years  ABB  have  been  shown  to  have  different
shapes and sizes compared to more current galaxies 9– 14 billion years ABB.
Thus, galaxies are too variable in structure and intrinsic brightness over very
long periods of time to serve as uniform markers of the expansion. However, a
particular  class  of  exploding  stars  undergoing  “standardized”  thermonuclear
detonation are so bright, so uniformly luminous, and so well understood phys-
ically  that  they  serve  as  excellent  tracers  of  the  Universe’s  expansion.  These
objects, as bright as 10 billion suns for a time, are called type Ia supernovae
(SNe Ia) and are formed after the collapse of white dwarf stars. Since spectra
from high-Z (Z ⱖ 1) supernova are shifted into the near IR where obscuring
emission  from  the  Earth  is  high,  supernovae  chasers  have  had  to  use  the
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to accumulate the best results on the history
of cosmic expansion. 

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

17

Figure 16.13 (a) Light curves for SNe Ia at different distances moving with different
recession speeds. (b) Universal light curve resulting from correction of the data shown
in  (a)  for  various  factors,  including  cosmic  expansion  and  time  dilation.  (Courtesy  the
Supernova  Cosmology  Project,  supported  by  the  Director,  Ofﬁce  of  Science,  High  Energy  Physics,
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098)

Two  teams,  one  led  by  Saul  Perlmutter  (Supernova  Cosmology  Project)9
and one by Adam Riess (Space Telescope Institute Baltimore) have discovered
most of the distant new Ia supernovae by surveying large sections of sky to lo-
cate  and  measure  the  rising  and  falling  light  curves  characteristic  of  SNe  Ia.
Figure 16.13a shows as-measured light curves (ﬂux versus time) of SNe Ia with
different Z’s, describing SNe located at different distances and having differ-
ent recession velocities. Note that the width and peak values of the light curves
are all greatly different. When the light curves are corrected for cosmic expan-
sion,  relativistic  time  dilation,  intervening  dust  absorption,  and  instrumental
effects, the light curves coalesce and show the same intrinsic peak luminosity
and  light  curve  width  (Fig.  16.13b).  This  universal  light  curve  shows  that

9See the article by Saul Perlmutter, Physics Today, April 2003, p. 53.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

18

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

individual type Ia supernovae explosions are incredibly uniform and that SNe Ia are ex-
cellent  probes  of  cosmic  history,  resulting  in  distance  and  lookback  time  measurements
with uncertainties of only about 5%. The correction to the light curve for cosmic
expansion is made because the distance to the SN was 1/(1 ⫹ Z ) of its present
value at the time of emission of light now seen as redshifted by  Z. (So for a
Z ⫽ 1 SN, the SN was half its current distance when the light was emitted or
the Universe was half its present linear size.) The relativistic time correction
involves  the  same  factor  of  1 ⫹ Z .  Because  the  SN  was  receding  from  us  at
high  velocity  at  the  time  its  light  was  emitted,  we  see  the  detonation  slowed
down by a factor of 1 ⫹ Z , which means that for a Z ⫽ 1 supernova, an explo-
sion lasting 40 days in its rest frame appears to us to take 80.

What HST Found. The ﬁrst results in 1998 showed that the light from SNe
which had exploded around 9 billion years ABB was fainter than predicted by
Hubble’s law. Consequently these objects were thought to be farther away than
expected and that the expansion of the Universe was currently speeding up.
Such a controversial ﬁnding immediately led to suggestions of other causes of
the dimming, such as intergalactic dust, which would make the SNe seem far-
ther away than they actually were. In 2002, a new imaging instrument installed
on the HST called the Advanced Camera for Surveys greatly boosted Hubble’s
ability to ﬁnd supernovae. Many more ancient SNe that exploded from 5 to 7
billion years ABB were located and measured, a real trick since there is only
about one SN explosion per century in a large galaxy and such ancient SNe
are  very  dim.  The  results  conclusively  show  that  the  current  acceleration  is
real,  and  that  prior  to  about  9  billion  years  ABB,  the  expansion  of  the
Universe  was  actually  decelerating!  Because  dust  ﬁlling  intergalactic  space
would  make  more-distant  (higher  redshift)  SNe  dimmer  yet,  and  the  more-
distant SNe are actually much brighter than the results predicted for dust and
not dimmer, the latest results rule out dust. Figure 16.14 shows a plot of the
departure  of  measured  brightness  of  supernovae  from  what  is  expected  at  a
speciﬁc  redshift  for  a  Universe  governed  by  the  freely  expanding  Hubble
model. (Note that increasing redshift corresponds to decreasing time after the
Big Bang, with Z = 0.5 corresponding to 9 billion years ABB and Z = 2 to about
3  billion  years  ABB.)  The  data  points  are  averages  of  several  measured  SNe
with  the  same  redshift,  and  the  curve  through  the  points  shows  a  transition
from recent acceleration to past deceleration at about Z ⫽ 0.5. Model curves
showing  constant  acceleration  (positive  slope)  and  deceleration  (negative
slope) over the age of the Universe are seen to be deﬁnitely ruled out by the
new high-Z measurements.

Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
Another important conﬁrmation of Big Bang theory comes from the predic-
tions of cosmic abundances of light elements made in the ﬁrst half-hour after
the Big Bang. When the equations of the hot Big Bang are combined with the
well-understood physics of low-energy nuclear reactions, detailed predictions
of  the  abundances  of  certain  light  elements  emerge  that  are  in  good  agree-
ment with observed values. In addition, considerations of nucleosynthesis de-
termine the amount of neutrons and protons in the Universe. Let’s investigate
this in a little more detail.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

19

)
e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
m
(
 
s
s
e
n
t
h
g
i
r
b
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

+1.0

r
e
t
n
i
a
F

+0.5

0.0

r
e
t
h
g
i
r
B

–0.5

–1.0

0.0

Constant
acceleration

Present acceleration,
past deceleration

Freely expanding
Hubble model

Constant
deceleration

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Redshift Z
Earlier Times

Figure 16.14 Observed brightness (ﬂux) of supernovae relative to the brightness pre-
dicted  by  Hubble’s  law.  The  relative  brightness  is  measured  in  terms  of  astronomical
magnitude, which is smaller for brighter objects. Constant acceleration and decelera-
tion  of  the  cosmic  expansion  are  indicated  by  the  red  and  blue  curves,  respectively.
The observed data points are best ﬁt by the green curve, showing a transition from cur-
rent  acceleration  to  past  deceleration  at  Z ⫽  0.5  and  with  cosmological  parameters
⍀m ⫽ 0.3, ⍀⌳ ⫽ 0.7. The freely expanding Hubble line has ⍀m ⫽ 0, ⍀⌳ ⫽ 0.

George Gamow and his collaborators were the ﬁrst to make serious calcula-
tions of the production of elements following a hot Big Bang. In a series of pa-
pers starting in 1946, they predicted that 75% of the observable mass in the
Universe was hydrogen and about 25% was helium, cooked up in a Big Bang
that they predicted should show residual blackbody radiation at a temperature
of  5 K.  They  also  calculated  the  changing  neutron-to-proton  ratio  as  a  func-
tion  of  time  (this  ratio  is  crucial  in  determining  what  reactions  occur)  but
were stymied in their attempts to show that all the elements from H to U were
made in the Big Bang by the occurrence of a mass 5 bottleneck. This means
that  at  the  temperature,  pressure,  and  density  calculated  for  the  expanding
Universe  in  the  ﬁrst  few  minutes,  there  were  no  mass  number  A ⫽ 5  nuclei
formed for long enough times to allow A ⫽ 6 and heavier nuclei to be formed
by combination with a neutron, proton, or other synthesized nuclei. It is now
known that 98% of the observable mass in the cosmos in the form of hydro-
gen, helium, and trace amounts of lithium was produced in the ﬁrst few min-
utes of the Universe. All heavier elements formed later in stellar interiors (ear-
liest  stars  ⬃0.3  billion  years  ABB)  and  were  spit  into  interstellar  space  by
supernovae detonations.10 Although helium can indeed be produced in stars,
calculations ﬁrst made by Fred Hoyle and Roger Taylor in 1964 showed that if

10The answer to the mass 5 puzzle was found in 1952 by E. E. Salpeter, who showed that in the hot,
dense cores of red giant stars there is an unstable A ⫽ 5 state which lasts barely long enough to
make A ⫽ 6 nuclei.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

20

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

all the helium were made in stars, galaxies would be 10 to 100 times brighter
than  they  are  observed  to  be — thus  conﬁrming  the  primordial  origin  of
cosmic helium.

The most important reactions considered in helium production at the tem-

peratures and densities of the ﬁrst few minutes ABB are

1H ⫹ 1
1
2
1H ⫹ 2
2
1H ⫹ 2
2
1H ⫹ 3
2
1H ⫹ 3

0n 9: 2
1H 9: 3
1H 9: 3
2He 9: 4
1H 9: 4

1H
2He ⫹ 1
0n
1H ⫹ 1
1H
2He ⫹ 1
1H
2He ⫹ 1
0n

Current  calculations  of  all  the  elements  made  in  the  ﬁrst  few  minutes  are
quite  sophisticated,  involving  shifting  numbers  of  protons,  neutrons,  and
other synthesized nuclei and hundreds of interdependent nuclear reactions of
nuclei  with  As  as  high  as  23.  Figure  16.15  shows  the  results  of  such  calcula-
tions, starting from thermal equilibrium values of neutrons and protons and
showing the production of hydrogen, helium, deuterium, lithium, and beryl-
lium as a function of time and temperature in the early Universe. In particu-
lar, most of the helium, deuterium, and lithium in the Universe today was pro-
duced shortly after the Big Bang, and the observed abundances agree with the
calculations shown in Figure 16.15.

10

1

Protons

Neutrons

Time (in seconds)

102

103

104

4
2He

s
s
a
m

 
l

a

t

o

t
 
f

o

 

n
o

i
t
c
a
r
F

10⫺2

10⫺4

10⫺6

10⫺8

10⫺10

10⫺12

2
1H

2
1H

3
2He

3
1H

Neutrons

7
4Be

7
3Li

6
3Li

3 ⫻ 109

1 ⫻ 109

3 ⫻ 108

1 ⫻ 108

Temperature (kelvins)

Figure  16.15 Light  element  abundances  in  the  ﬁrst  minutes.  (Courtesy  of  Robert
Wagoner, Stanford University)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.5

OTHER EVIDENCE FOR THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

21

Critical Density, ⍀m, and Dark Matter
A ﬁnal  point  on  nucleosynthesis  involves  the  strong  dependence  of  calcu-
lated  abundances  of  deuterium,  helium-3,  and  lithium-7  on  the  density  of
neutrons  and  protons  at  the  time  of  formation  of  these  three  elements  in
the early Universe. Since the density of n ⫹ p in the early Universe may be
extrapolated forward by using the expansion factor of the Universe, we can
obtain an estimate of the present cosmic mass density of neutrons and pro-
tons, which  is  difﬁcult to  measure  directly.  When  this  is  done,  one  ﬁnds a
value of 

␳p⫹n ⫽ (3 ⫾ 1) ⫻ 10⫺31 g/cm3

Cosmologists designate the ratio of the observed effective mass density (mass
density ⴙ energy  density/c 2)  of  the  Universe  to  the  calculated  critical  mass
density, ␳c,  by  ⍀m ⴝ ␳obs/␳c.  The  critical  density, ␳c,  is  the  calculated  mass
density  of  the  Universe  needed  to  gravitationally  halt  the  recession  of  one
galaxy from another at inﬁnite separation. ␳c depends on the somewhat uncer-
tain value of H0 (see Example 16.2 below) and has the value

␳c ⫽ (1.1 ⫾ 0.7) ⫻ 10⫺29 g/cm3

Thus  the  Big  Bang  model  of  nucleosynthesis  predicts  that  the  density  of
neutrons and protons (making up stars, black holes, intergalactic dust and
gas — ordinary matter) is only 1% – 10% of the critical density. Even the ef-
fective gravitational mass of all the photons and neutrinos in the Universe
adds only another 1% at most to the mass of the Universe. The largest con-
tribution  to  the  mass  of  the  Universe  is  believed  to  come  from  cold  dark
matter, which  is  inferred  to  exist  from  studies  of  the  motion  of  outlying
stars  orbiting  galaxies,  the  motion  of  galaxy  clusters,  and  from  images
formed  by  gravitational  lenses  (composed  of  clusters  of  galaxies)  of  back-
ground galaxies. All these cases show a massive halo of invisible matter ex-
tending well beyond the visible material in galaxies and contributing a fac-
tor  of  around  5  to  10  times  the  visible  mass  density  to  the  mass  of  the
Universe. Adding in dark matter makes the current value of the ratio of the
observed to critical mass density,  ⍀m, about 0.3.  The  actual  nature  of  cold
dark  matter  is  uncertain,  but  it  is  not  composed  of  ordinary  atoms  or  ele-
mentary particles, which interact with photons as described by the standard
model  (Chapter  15).  Most  likely,  dark  matter  consists  of  stable,  massive,
slow-moving exotic particles created at high energy in the first moments of
the  Big  Bang  and  predicted  by  grand  uniﬁed theories  like  Supersymmetry.
The neutralino is the most likely dark matter candidate predicted by Super-
symmetry. The neutralino is the lightest supersymmetric particle, hence the
most stable, and has no electric charge, so it is not affected by photons and
only  weakly  interacts  with  ordinary  matter.  Unfortunately,  this  makes  neu-
tralinos hard to detect, and no conclusive detection of dark matter in earth-
borne detectors has been reported to date.11

11For  more  information  on  the  detection  of  dark  matter,  see  “The  Search  for  Dark  Matter,”  by

David B. Cline, Sci. Am., March 2003, p. 50.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Dark Matter

22

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

EXAMPLE 16.2 Critical Density of 

the Universe

We can estimate the critical mass density of the Universe,
␳c, using classical energy considerations. The result turns
out to be in agreement with the rigorous predictions of
general  relativity  because  of  the  simplifying  assumption
that the mass of the Universe is uniformly distributed.

Solution Figure 16.16 shows a large section of the Uni-
verse with radius R with the critical density, containing a
total mass M, where M consists of the total mass of matter
plus the effective mass of radiation with energy E, E/c 2. A
galaxy of mass m and speed v at R will just escape to inﬁn-
ity  with  zero  speed  if  the  sum  of  its  kinetic  energy  and
gravitational potential energy is zero. Thus,

Etotal ⫽ 0 ⫽ K ⫹ U ⫽ 1

2 mv2 ⫺

GmM

R

1
2 mv2 ⫽
    v2 ⫽

Gm

4
3␲R3␳c
R
8␲G

R2␳c

3

Using H ⫽ 23 ⫻ 10⫺3 m/(s · lightyear),  where  1  light-
year ⫽ 9.46 ⫻ 1015 m and G ⫽ 6.67 ⫻ 10⫺11 N · m2/kg2,
yields  a  present  value  of  the  critical  density  ␳c ⫽ 1.1 ⫻
10⫺26 kg/m3. As the mass of a hydrogen atom is 1.67 ⫻
10⫺27 kg, ␳c corresponds to  about  7  hydrogen  atoms  per
cubic meter, an incredibly low density.

v

m

R

Because  the  galaxy  of  mass  m obeys  the  Hubble  law,
v ⫽ HR, the preceding equation becomes

H 2 ⫽

8␲G

3

␳c

or

␳c ⫽

3H 2
8␲G

Figure 16.16 (Example 16.2) A galaxy escaping from a
large  cluster  contained  within  radius  R.  Only  the  mass
within R slows the mass m.

16.6 FREIDMANN MODELS AND THE AGE 

OF THE UNIVERSE

Freidmann’s  work  established  the  foundation  for  describing  the  time  evolu-
tion  of  the  Universe  based  on  general  relativity.  General  relativity  must  be
used  in  cosmological  calculations  because  it  correctly  describes  gravity,  the
most important force determining the Universe’s structure, over immense cos-
mological distances. Newtonian theory can lead to errors when applied to the
Universe as a whole because it assumes that the force of gravity is always attrac-
tive  and  is  instantaneously  transmitted.  Although  Freidmann  did  consider
models both with and without Einstein’s repulsive form of gravity (cosmologi-
cal constant), it is easiest to see the general form of Big Bang behavior without
introducing repulsive gravitational forces at this point.

Freidmann  found  three  types  of  time-dependent  universes,  which  may  be
described in terms of the universal expansion scaling factor a(t). Figure 16.17
shows a(t )(the  separation  between  galaxies)  as  a  function  of  time  for  the
three cases labeled open universe, ﬂat universe, and closed universe. Note that
a(t) alone has a value of zero at the lower-left corner of the graph, not t, and
that  the  three  curves  start  at  different  times  in  the  past  in  order  to  give  the
same scaling factor at the present time, denoted t 0. Open universes have less
mass and energy than that needed to halt the expansion. They start with a scale
factor of zero and grow without limit, any given galaxy approaching a limiting

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.6

FREIDMANN MODELS AND THE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE

23

a(t )

Open

Closed

t 0 (Now)

Start of
closed universe

0
Start of
open universe

Flat

t

Figure  16.17 Time-dependent  Freidmann  universes.  The ﬁgure  shows  the  time  de-
pendence of the universal expansion scaling factor a(t ) (proportional to the distance
between galaxies) for the three cases of open, closed, and ﬂat universes. It also shows
that the Big Bang occurred at different times in the past for the different cases.

velocity  that  is  higher  the  lower  the  mass-energy  density  within  the  universe.
Thus,  the  curve  labeled  open  universe  shows  a  typical  case  and  really  stands
for a set of curves describing universes with different densities, all less than the
critical  density.  Closed  universes  have  so  much  gravitationally  attractive 
mass-energy that the expansion is actually stopped and the recessional motion
of  all  the  galaxies  reversed  so  that  the  universe  collapses  and  returns  to  the
state a(t ) ⴝ 0. Again  the  ﬁgure  shows  a  single  closed-universe  curve,  which
stands for a set of curves describing universes with densities greater than the
critical density. Both open and closed universes satisfy non-Euclidean geome-
tries. In between these two cases is the case of the ﬂat universe. A ﬂat universe
has  precisely  the  critical  mass-energy  density,  and  the  recessional  velocity  of
any  two  galaxies  approaches  zero  with  increasing  time.  A ﬂat  universe  is 
Euclidean.

The  connection  between  Freidmann  models  and  the  age  of  the  Universe  is
easiest to see in the simple hypothetical case shown by the straight line, which is
the tangent to the a(t) curves at the present moment, t0 (Fig. 16.18). This line
shows the behavior of a(t ) for the case where there is no gravity in the universe
to slow the expansion. Since the slope of this line is (da/dt)t 0 ⫽ a(t0)/␶and Hub-
ble’s constant H(t0) ⫽  (t0)/a(t0), ␶ ⫽ 1/H is the age of the Universe in this no-
gravity case. ␶is called the Hubble time, and we will show in the next section that
a ﬂat universe with gravity has an age of (2/3)␶or 2/3H. Since the effect of grav-
ity is to slow the expansion, as shown in Figure 16.18, an open universe has an
age between ␶ and (2/3)␶, and a closed universe has an age less than (2/3)␶.

a⭈

In order to treat accelerations (current epoch) and decelerations (previous
epoch) of the expansion most generally, and to get a ﬂavor of the equations of
general relativity describing an expanding Universe, we turn to the equations
themselves. One can show that general relativity requires the universal scaling
factor a(t) to obey the differential equations:12

12See  P.  J.  E.  Peebles,  Principles  of  Physical  Cosmology, Princeton,  NJ,  Princeton  University  Press,

1993, pp. 75 and 76.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

24

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

a(t )

a(t 0)

Freely expanding
Hubble case

0

␶

Open
Flat
Closed

t 0

t

Figure 16.18 The straight line is the tangent to the Freidmann a(t ) curves at the pre-
sent moment and models the case where there is no gravitational attraction in the Uni-
verse. For this case, the age of the Universe is 1/H. All the curves have steeper slopes than
the tangent, indicating that these cases including gravity expanded at faster rates in the
past and so reached the current size of the Universe more quickly. Consequently, open,
ﬂat, and closed universes have younger ages than the freely expanding Hubble case.

2
冣

冢

⫽

da
dt
d 2a
dt 2 ⫽ ⫺

8␲G␳a 2

3

4␲aG

3

⫺ kc2

冢␳ ⫹

3P
c 2 冣

(16.15)

(16.16)

In these equations, a and ␳ are functions of time, where ␳ is the effective mass
density of the Universe; that is, ␳ includes the density of ordinary matter like
hydrogen as well as the effective mass density of ﬁelds with energy density u,
u/c 2. k is  a  parameter  that  determines  whether  the  Universe  is  closed 
(k ⫽  ⫹1),  open  (k ⫽  ⫺1),  or  ﬂat (k ⴝ 0,  also  called  the  Einstein – de  Sitter
case), P is the internal pressure, and the other symbols have their usual mean-
ings. The ﬁrst equation comes from the conservation of energy, and the sec-
ond is a sort of Newton’s second law, giving the rate of change of the expan-
sion  in  terms  of  the  effective  mass  density  within  the  Universe.  The  unusual
part of Equation 16.16 is the appearance of the internal pressure P of a sub-
stance that apparently adds to the attractive mass density of matter in the Uni-
verse. P appears because general relativity treats matter in the Universe on the
average as an extremely dilute gas characterized by a mass density and an in-
ternal pressure, a measure of the gas’s kinetic energy. The amount of effective
mass density that P adds is much smaller than the contribution of the actual
mass density of a substance under ordinary conditions since P is divided by c2.
For example, the contribution of the internal pressure of 1 cubic meter of air
at standard temperature and pressure is about 10⫺12 of that of the mass den-
sity  of  the  air.  But  it  gets  even  more  interesting.  Freidmann  considered  the
Universe  to  have  P ⫽ 0  on  average,  which  would  be  the  case  for  a  universe
ﬁlled with cold, pressure-free dust particles. In  extreme  cases,  P can  be  posi-
tive  and  very  large  (inside  stars  and  in  the  Big  Bang)  or  even  negative  (for
dark  energy)  and  swamp  out ␳ to  actually  produce  an  acceleration  of  the  ex-
pansion, as shown by Equation 16.16. We will return to the dizzying subject of

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.6

FREIDMANN MODELS AND THE AGE OF THE UNIVERSE

25

the connection of mass density and internal pressure of different substances in
(␳ ⫹ 3P/c2)
the  next  section,  but  for  now  it  sufﬁces  to  realize  that  the  term 
allows  us  to  consider  both  attractive  and  repulsive  forms  of  gravity  in  the
Universe.

Equation 16.15 can be immediately solved for Hubble’s constant in terms of

fundamental parameters. Since 

H 2(t 0) ⫽ aB 2(t0)/a2(t0)

H 2(t0) ⫽

8␲G␳(t0)

3

⫺

kc 2
a 2(t0)

, 16.15 gives

(16.17)

Equation  16.15  also  may  be  used  to  show  that  the  scale  factor  in  the  simple
case of an Einstein – de Sitter Universe is proportional to  t 2/3, where  t is the
time since the Big Bang. For this case, Equation 16.15 becomes 

da
dt

⫽ √ 8␲G␳

3

a

(16.18)

In order to separate variables and integrate this equation, we need to express
␳(t ) as a function of a. We take t ⫽ 0 at the singularity a : 0 and ␳ : ⬁ and
assume a ﬁnite effective mass M in the ﬁrst instants of the Universe. If the Uni-
verse simply expanded and no matter left or entered through its surface

M ⫽ ␳(t)

4␲a 3(t)

3

or

␳(t) and a(t)

where 
16.19 into 16.18 gives 

␳(t) ⫽ 3M/4␲a 3(t)

(16.19)
are  the  density  and  scaling  factor  at  time  t.  Substituting

where 

B ⫽ √2GM

. Integrating 16.20 gives 

da
dt

⫽ Ba⫺1/2

a
冕
a⫽0

t

a1/2da ⫽ B冕
t⫽0

dt

and ﬁnally,

where 

C ⫽ 冢

2/3

冣

3B
2

.  Since 

H ⫽

a ⫽ Ct 2/3
a⭈
a

(16.20)

(16.21)

,  using  16.21  we  ﬁnd  that  the  Einstein –

de Sitter Universe has an age of 2/3H, as claimed.

Although we have mentioned that light emitted from astronomical objects
at increasingly distant time epochs means the light is increasingly redshifted as
we see it now, Equation 16.21 gives the exact connection between redshift and
past epoch for the Einstein – de Sitter model. The expansion of the universe
between now (t 0) and the time of emission (t e) of radiation now seen to be
redshifted by Z is described by 

For the Einstein – de Sitter model, this equation becomes

1 ⫹ Z ⫽

a(t0)
a(te)

1 ⫹ Z ⫽

2/3

2/3

t 0
te

(16.22)

(16.23)

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

26

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

Dark Energy

Thus, when we observe a supernova with a high Z of 2 in an Einstein– de Sitter
universe, we are looking at historical conditions in a universe which was 1/3 of
its  present  size  and  about  20%  of  its  present  age  when  the  supernova  deto-
nated.

16.7 WILL THE UNIVERSE EXPAND FOREVER?

In a current mythology the ultimate fate of the Universe may be viewed as a
cosmic struggle between two titans: the attractive gravitational force of matter
and the repulsive force of dark energy spread uniformly through the vacuum.
The  speciﬁc  nature  of  dark  energy  or  vacuum  energy  and  its  variation  with
time are unknown except that it has a negative pressure in our general relativ-
ity  Equation  16.16  and  so  acts  as  a  repulsive  gravitational  force.  In  fact,  the
term (␳ ⫹ 3P/c 2) in Equation 16.16 can be used to categorize the attractive or
repulsive  gravitational  nature  of  substances  both  common  and  exotic,  which
are summed in this term:

• For an ordinary gas at STP, the mass density term is 1012 times larger than
the internal pressure term, both terms are positive, so the effect of gases
is to produce gravitational attraction.

• For  photons,  which  are  mass  0  particles,  it  is  convenient  to  write 
(␳ ⫹ 3P/c 2) ⫽ 1/c 2(u ⫹ 3P ), where u is the energy density or energy per
unit volume of the photons. As the internal pressure of a photon gas is
given by P ⫽ u/3, 1/c 2(u ⫹ 3P ) ⫽ 2u/c 2, a positive term, so that photons
also exert a force tending to hold the Universe together.

• For cold dark matter, P ⫽ 0, and only the mass density of these exotic par-

ticles contributes to the attractive gravitational force.

• For all forms of dark energy, P ⬍ 0, and if P is sufﬁciently negative it will
dominate  all  positive  contributions  and  produce  a  net  repulsive  gravita-
tional force in the Universe, which is believed to be the case now. For a
“substance” called the quantum vacuum (to be discussed shortly) with an
energy density  uqv, P ⫽  ⫺u qv, so 1/c 2(u ⫹ 3P) ⫽  ⫺2u qv/c 2. The quan-
tum vacuum produces a strongly repulsive force term that may dominate
all attractive terms provided the quantum vacuum energy density is large
enough. In fact, examination of Equation 16.16 shows that observation of
accelerated  expansion  means  dark  energy  exists.  Denoting  the  energy
density and pressure of dark energy by ude and Pde, an observed accelera-
tion of the expansion means (␳ ⫹ 1/c 2(ude ⫹ 3Pde)) ⬍ 0 or Pde ⬍ ⫺ude/3
for any form of dark energy. Different models of dark energy predict dif-
ferent  time  variations  for  u de and  different  values  for  Pde,  where  Pde is
limited as ⫺ude ⱕ Pde ⱕ ⫺ude/3.13

It is very interesting that current observations show that dark energy actu-
ally exists and the effective mass density of dark energy, ude/c 2, dominates the
observed attractive mass density of the Universe ⍀m by a factor of about 2:1.
The  normalized  dark  energy  density  is  expressed  by  writing  ⍀⌳ ⫽ ude/uc,
where ude and uc stand, respectively, for the observed dark energy and critical
energy (mass) densities. When the constraint ⍀⌳ ⫹ ⍀m ⫽ 1 from inﬂationary

13See the article by Bertram Schwarzchild, Physics Today, June 2004, p. 19.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

16.8

PROBLEMS AND PERSPECTIVES

27

theory  is  imposed  on  the  most  recent  SN1e  data,  the  best-ﬁt  values  of 
⍀m ⫽ 0.29 ⫾ 0.04 and ⍀⌳ ⫽ 0.71 are found.14

The existence of dark energy had been suspected for several years, as well
as a transition from an earlier epoch of deceleration to the current period of
acceleration of the expansion. The transition was expected because the effec-
tive  mass  density  term  ␳ falls  as  1/a 3(t)  as  the  Universe  expands,  and  the
3P/c 2 dark energy term is believed to be constant or more slowly decreasing
than ␳. The actual observation of this expected switchover point provides con-
clusive evidence of the existence of dark energy and some information on how
it changes with time. The latest results show that the transition from decelera-
tion to acceleration occurred about 9 billion years ABB, or in terms of model-
independent redshift, at a time corresponding to Z transition ⫽ 0.46 ⫾ 0.13. The
time dependence of the dark energy is described by the Z dependence of the
dimensionless parameter  w, the ratio of the dark energy’s pressure to its en-
ergy density.

Writing 

w ⫽

Pde
ude

w(Z ) ⫽ w0 ⫹

dw
dZ

Z

兩
t 0

the best-ﬁt values to the new supernovae data have 

w(Z ) ⫽ ⫺1.31 ⫹ 1.48Z

(16.24)

(16.25)

(16.26)

To  place  these  results  in  context,  Einstein’s  cosmological  constant  has 
w 0 ⫽ ⫺1 and dw/dZ ⫽ 0. If the current large value of w ⫽ ⫺1.31 remains con-
stant or becomes more negative with time, the Universe will not only continue
to expand but the eventual unhappy fate of galaxies, solar systems, atoms, and
nuclei will be to be ripped apart.

16.8 PROBLEMS AND PERSPECTIVES

While particle physicists have been exploring the realm of the very small, cos-
mologists have been exploring cosmic history back to the ﬁrst moments of the
Big Bang. Observation of events that occur when two particles collide in an ac-
celerator is important for understanding the early moments in cosmic history,
but perhaps the key to understanding the early Universe is to ﬁnd a uniﬁed
theory of quantum mechanics and gravity. Such a theory is urgently needed to
adequately describe the ﬁrst instants of the Big Bang. Cosmologists and parti-
cle  physicists  now  ﬁnd  that  they  have  many  common  goals  and  are  joining
hands  to  attempt  to  understand  the  physical  world  at  its  most  fundamental
level.

Lest the reader be fooled by our simpliﬁed overview of cosmology, it is im-
portant  to  realize  that  understanding  is  far  from  complete.  There  are  many
questions remaining concerning our incredible Universe so ﬁnely tuned that
it has allowed the fragile and intricate complexities of life to arise 10 billion

14The  latest  SN1e  results  are  from  A.  G.  Riess  et  al.,  Astrophys.  J.  (in  press),  available  at

http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0402512

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

28

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

years ABB. The deepest questions concern the origin and observed size of the
dark energy described by ⍀⌳. Current observations show that the dark energy
density  is  surprisingly  small,  but  exquisitely  adjusted  to  just  barely  dominate
the attractive mass density of the Universe— permitting stars, galaxies, planets,
and people to form. Why surprisingly small? According to the most successful
elementary particle model, the Standard Model, the quantum vacuum ought
to be seething with ﬁelds and virtual particles constantly erupting into and dis-
appearing from existence. All the associated energy and momentum of these
ﬁelds and particles should produce a huge negative pressure or repulsive grav-
itation, yielding a dark energy density calculated to be as much as 10 120 times
the observed dark energy density. Leading physicists have identiﬁed this prob-
lem of dark energy as the most important one for 21st-century physics, liken-
ing  it  in  importance  to  the  problem  of  blackbody  radiation  in  the  20th  cen-
tury. Just as joint efforts of experimentalists and theorists were needed to solve
the blackbody problem, both new observations and theoretical insights will be
needed to unravel the secret of dark energy. We end with the words of Nobel
laureate  Steven  Weinberg  concerning  the  importance  of  discovering  the  na-
ture of dark energy:

The task of discovering the nature of the “dark energy” is of obvious importance to
cosmology. The apparent acceleration of the expansion of the universe is attributed
to a dark energy residing in space itself, which also balances the kinetic energy of
the expansion so as to give the universe zero spatial curvature, as observed in map-
ping ﬂuctuations in the cosmic microwave radiation background. If the dark energy
is a constant (the so-called cosmological constant) or growing, then the fate of the
universe is sealed: it will continue expanding forever. If the dark energy is decreas-
ing  (as  in  some  “quintessence”  theories)  then  it  was  even  more  important  in  the
past, and may have played a part in limiting the formation of the largest gravitation-
ally bound structures. In any case, through its effect on the expansion of the uni-
verse, the dark energy affects all observations of astronomical objects at large red-
shift.

The  problem  of  the  dark  energy  is  also  central  to  today’s  physics.  Our  best  at-
tempts  at  a  fundamental  theory  suggest  the  presence  of  a  cosmological  constant
that is many (perhaps as many as 120) orders of magnitude greater than the upper
bound set by astronomical observations. For decades the problem seemed to be to
ﬁnd a symmetry or cancellation mechanism of some sort that would make the cos-
mological constant precisely zero. The single greatest failure of our most promising
theories (such as string theories) is that they do not satisfy this requirement. Now
that a dark energy has apparently been found, the problem is even harder: not just
to explain why the dark energy is so tiny compared with what would have been ex-
pected theoretically, but also to explain why it happens to be of the same order of
magnitude  (roughly  twice)  as  the  energy  in  matter  at  the  present  moment  in  the
history  of  the  universe.  It  is  difﬁcult  for  physicists  to  attack  this  problem  without
knowing  just  what  it  is  that  needs  to  be  explained— a  cosmological  constant  or  a
dark energy that changes with time as the universe evolves — and for this they must
rely on new observations by astronomers. Until it is solved, the problem of the dark
energy  will  be  a  roadblock  on  our  path  to  a  comprehensive  fundamental  physical
theory.

— Steven Weinberg
Department of Physics
University of Texas at Austin

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

1. In  addition  to  the  magazine  articles  cited  in  the  foot-
notes the following articles are interesting, but note the
dates for the most current results:
G. Gamow, “The Evolutionary Universe,” Sci. Amer., Sep-
tember 1956.
G. Gamow, “Gravity,” Sci. Amer., March 1961.
A.  R.  Sandage,  “The  Red-Shift,” Sci.  Amer., September
1956.
C. Sagan and F. Drake, “The Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence,” Sci. Amer., May 1975.
F. Wilczek, “The Cosmic Asymmetry Between Matter and
Anti-Matter,” Sci. Amer., December 1980.
G. Veneziano, “The Myth of the Beginning of Time,” Sci.
Amer., May 2004, pp. 54 – 65.
J. D. Bekenstein, “Information in the Holographic Uni-
verse,” Sci. Amer., August 2003, pp. 58– 65.
A  special  report  of  four  articles  on  cosmology  in  the
February 2004 Scientiﬁc  American: W. Hu and M. White,

PROBLEMS

1.

⌬␭

␭

␭ ⫺ ␭0

␭

⫽

is the symbol used by astronomers 
Z ⬅ 
to denote the measured redshift of receding astronomi-
cal objects where ␭0 is the emission wavelength of a par-
ticular line measured in the lab and ␭ is the wavelength
of  the  same  line  measured  for  a  receding  source.  For
example,  type  Ia  supernovae  used  as  distance  markers
in expansion rate studies have Z’s as high as 2, galaxies
have been observed with Z’s in excess of 3, and quasars
(star-like  objects  formed  early  in  the  Universe  with
enormous energy output) take the cake with Z’s greater
than  5.  (a)  Use  the  relativistic  Doppler  shift  Equation
16.1 to show that the relation between red shift and re-
cession velocity v, valid at all velocities, is

where

Z ⫽ √ 1 ⫹ ␤

1 ⫺ ␤

⫺ 1

␤ ⫽

v
c

.

(b) Plot a graph of Z versus ␤ for values of Z ranging
from zero to ﬁve.

2. Show  that  the  relative  velocity  of  galaxies  is  directly
proportional  to  their  separation  in  a  homogeneous,
uniformly  expanding  Universe.  Consider 
three
collinear, equally spaced galaxies G 0, G 1, G 2, which are
adjacent galaxies spaced  L apart. An observer situated
on the leftmost galaxy G 0 will observe the distances to
G 1 and G 2 to be  L and 2L and, for an expanding uni-
verse, G 1 and G 2 will  have  instantaneous  velocities  v1
and v2 away from G 0. At a time ⌬t later, G 1 will be a dis-

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

PROBLEMS

29

“The  Cosmic  Symphony,”  pp.  44 – 53;  M.  A.  Strauss,
“Reading the Blueprints of Creation,” pp. 54 – 61; A. G.
Riess  and  M.  S.  Turner, “From  Slowdown  to  Speedup,”
pp. 62 – 67; and G. Dvali, “Out of Darkness,” pp. 68 – 73.

2. Several good nonmathematical books are:

J.  M.  Pasachoff,  Astronomy:  From  the  Earth  to  the  Universe,
6th ed., Brooks/Cole-Thomson Learning, Belmont, CA,
2002.
A. H. Guth, The Inﬂationary Universe, Helix Books, Addi-
son-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997.
L. Krauss, Quintessence, Basic Books, New York, 2000.
M. Rees, Just Six Numbers, Basic Books, New York, 2000.

3. Two books at the advanced undergraduate level are:

P. J. E. Peebles, Principles of Physical Cosmology, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1993.
E.  V.  Linder,  First  Principles  of  Cosmology, Prentice  Hall,
1997.

tance L ⫹  v1⌬t away from  G 0 and G 2 a distance 2L ⫹
v2⌬t. If the Universe is to remain homogeneous, all dis-
tances  between  galaxies  must  retain  the  same  propor-
tions  as  expansion  proceeds. This  means  we  require
the distance G 0G 2 to remain twice as large as G 0G 1 at
time ⌬t.  Thus,  2L ⫹  v2⌬t ⫽  2(L ⫹  v1⌬t)  or  v2 ⫽  2v1.
Show  that  Hubble’s  law  results  from  generalizing  to  p
collinear  galaxies  with  adjacent  distance  L,  provided
that all velocities are much less than c.

3. A  quasar  (believed  to  be  a  galaxy  in  formation  with  a
super-massive black hole at its center) is a pointlike ob-
ject that has tremendous energy output, is very distant
from the Earth, and has a large redshift. Its speed can
be  measured  from  Doppler-shift  measurements  of  the
light it emits. A certain quasar recedes from the Earth
at a speed of 0.55c. (a) How far away is it? (b) Assuming
that  the  quasar  has  moved  with  the  speed  0.55c ever
since the Big Bang, estimate the age of the Universe.

4. (a)  Show  that  if  Hubble’s  constant  H is  truly  constant
in time, the universe is undergoing inﬂationary expan-
sion, that is a(t ) ⫽ Ae bt.
(b)  Find  H as  a  function  of  time  for  the  case  of  an 
Einstein – de Sitter Universe.

5. Find the size and age of an Einstein–de Sitter Universe

probed by Z ⫽ 5 quasars.

6. Using Hubble’s law, estimate the wavelength of the 590-
nm  sodium  line  emitted  from  galaxies  (a)  2 ⫻ 106
lightyears away from Earth, (b) 2 ⫻ 108 lightyears away,
and (c) 2 ⫻ 109 lightyears away. (Hint: Use the relativis-
tic Doppler formula for light emitted from a receding
source):

30

CHAPTER 16

COSMOLOGY

␭⬘ ⫽

√1 ⫹ (v/c)
√1 ⫺ (v/c)

␭

(16.1)

7. A  distant  quasar  is  moving  away  from  Earth  at  such
high  speed  that  the  blue  434-nm  hydrogen  line  is  ob-
served at 650 nm, in the red portion of the spectrum.
(a)  How  fast  is  the  quasar  receding?  (b)  Using  Hub-
ble’s  law,  determine  the  distance  from  Earth  to  this
quasar.

8. Hubble’s  law  can  be  stated  in  vector  form  as  v ⫽ H R:
Outside the local group of galaxies, all objects are mov-
ing  away  from  us  with  velocities  proportional  to  their
displacements from us. In this form, it sounds as if our
location  in  the  Universe  is  specially  privileged.  Prove
that Hubble’s law would be equally true for an observer
elsewhere in the Universe. Proceed as follows: Assume
that we are at the origin of coordinates, that one galaxy
cluster is at location R1 and has velocity v1 ⫽ HR1 rela-
tive  to  us,  and  that  another  galaxy  cluster  has  radius
vector R2 and  velocity  v2 ⫽ HR2.  Suppose  the  speeds
are nonrelativistic. Consider the frame of reference of
an  observer  in  the  ﬁrst  of  these  galaxy  clusters.  Show
that  our  velocity  relative  to  her,  together  with  the  dis-
placement vector of our galaxy cluster from hers, satis-
ﬁes  Hubble’s  law.  Show  that  the  displacement  and  ve-
locity  of  cluster  2  relative  to  cluster  1  satisfy  Hubble’s
law.

e⫺E/kBT

9. Use the Boltzmann distribution function 

to cal-
culate the temperature at which 1% of a population of
photons will have energy greater than 1.00 eV. The en-
ergy required to excite an atom is on the order of 1 eV.
Thus, as the temperature of the Universe fell below the
value  you  calculate,  neutral  atoms  could  form  from
plasma, and the Universe became transparent. The cos-
mic  background  radiation  represents  our  vastly  red-
shifted view of the opaque ﬁreball of the Big Bang as it
was  at  this  time  and  temperature.  The  ﬁreball  sur-
rounds us; we are embers.

10. The  cosmic  background  radiation  is  blackbody  radia-
tion at a temperature of 2.73 K. (a) Use Wien’s law to
determine  the  wavelength  at  which  this  radiation  has
its maximum intensity. (b) In what part of the electro-
magnetic spectrum is the peak of the distribution?

11. It  is  mostly  your  roommate’s  fault.  Nosy  astronomers
have discovered enough junk and clutter in your dorm
room  to  constitute  the  missing  mass  required  to  close
the  Universe.  After  observing  your  ﬂoor,  closet,  bed,
and  computer  ﬁles,  they  extrapolate  to  slobs  in  other
galaxies and calculate the average density of the observ-
able Universe as 1.20␳c. How many times larger will the
Universe become before it begins to collapse? That is,
by what factor will the distance between remote galax-
ies increase in the future?

12. The early Universe was dense with gamma-ray photons
of  energy  ⬃k BT and  at  such  a  high  temperature  that

p

protons  and  antiprotons  were  created  by  the  process
␥ : p ⫹ as rapidly as they annihilated each other. As
the Universe cooled in adiabatic expansion, its temper-
ature  fell  below  a  certain  value,  and  proton  pair  pro-
duction  became  rare.  At  that  time  slightly  more  pro-
tons than antiprotons existed, and essentially all of the
protons  in  the  Universe  today  date  from  that  time. 
(a)  Estimate  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  tempera-
ture of the Universe when protons condensed out. (b)
Estimate the order of magnitude of the temperature of
the Universe when electrons condensed out.

13. If the average density of the Universe is small compared
to the critical density, the expansion of the Universe de-
scribed  by  Hubble’s  law  proceeds  with  speeds  that  are
nearly constant over time. (a) Prove that in this case the
age of the Universe is given by the inverse of Hubble’s
constant. (b) Calculate 1/H and express it in years.

14. The gravitational self-energy of an object is the energy
needed  to  assemble  the  object  from  individual  ele-
ments  initially  spaced  an  inﬁnite  distance  apart.  The
energy needed is the work done by an external force in
an  equilibrium  process,  that  is  an  element  of  mass  is
moved so that the external force is equal and opposite
to the gravitational force of attraction. Because the ex-
ternal force is opposite to the element’s displacement,
the work done or the gravitational self-energy is a nega-
tive quantity. The gravitational self-energy of N discrete
mass elements is given by the sum of the potential en-
ergy of all pairs of elements and may be written

U ⫽ ⫺G 兺

all pairs

i⫽j

m im j

rij

An equivalent form is

U ⫽ ⫺

1
2

N
G 兺
i ⫽1
i⫽j

N
   兺
j⫽1

m im j

rij

where  we  count  each  pair  twice  but  correct  with  the
factor  of  1/2.  (a)  Use  this  expression  to  calculate  the
self-energy  of  the  Milky  Way  Galaxy.  Our  Galaxy  con-
sists of N ⫽ 2 ⫻ 1011 stars with an average separation of
ri j ⫽ 1021 m and mass mi ⫽ 2 ⫻ 1030 kg.
(b) In the ﬁrst part of this problem we did not consider
the self-energy of individual stars. Remedy this problem
by  showing  that  the  gravitational  self-energy  of  a  uni-
form sphere of mass m and radius r is

Usphere ⫽ ⫺

3Gm 2

5r

(Hint: assemble the sphere from inﬁnitesimal shells of
thickness dr surrounding  a  solid  spherical  core  of  ra-
dius r.)
(c) Find the self-energy of the Sun if m s ⫽ 2 ⫻ 1030 kg
and rs ⫽ 7 ⫻ 108 m.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

15. Finding  the  temperature  inside  the  Sun  with  the  virial  theo-
rem. The  virial  theorem  is  a  powerful  result  which  ap-
plies  to  the  time  average  of  the  kinetic  and  potential
energies of a group of particles conﬁned within a ﬁnite
volume by mutual inverse-square forces. The virial the-
orem may be written

16. Collapse  of  a  dust  ball  under  Newtonian  gravity. Suppose
that  a  spherical  ball  of  dust  with  no  internal  pressure
and with an initial radius  R0 and total mass  M gravita-
tionally  collapses  from  rest.  (a)  Show  that  the  outer
shell  of  the  collapsing  dust  ball  obeys  the  equation  of
motion

SOLUTION FOR PROBLEMS 16

31

R¨ ⫽ ⫺

GM
R 2

(b)  Solve  this  equation  of  motion  and  show  that  the
time to collapse is given by

tc ⫽

3

␲

2 √ R0

2GM
law 

Hint: Write  Newton’s 
.  Let
sides  of
f(R) ⫽ dF(R)/dR
R¨ ⫽ dF/dR
. The resulting equation may be imme-
diately  integrated  with  respect  to  time  by  recognizing

and  multiply  both 

by 

as 

⭈
R

R¨ ⫽ f (R)

that 

R¨RB ⫽

d
dt

RB 2
2

冢

冣

. Integrating again with respect to

time, this general technique yields t as a function of R

where 

t ⫽ ⫺冕

dR

√2(F(R) ⫹ C)

⫹ C1

and  C and C1 are

constants determined by the initial conditions.

(c) Find the time of collapse of a dust ball with a mass
and radius equal to that of the Sun.
(R S ⫽ 6.96 ⫻ 1010 cm, MS ⫽ 1.99 ⫻ 1033 g, G ⫽ 6.67 ⫻
10⫺8 cgs units)
(d) What prevents the Sun from collapsing in this way?

具KEtotal典 ⫽ ⫺

1
2

具PE total典

where  the  brackets  indicate  time  averages  over  sufﬁ-
ciently long times. This result holds even if all particle
masses are not the same and if some of the particles si-
multaneously experience repulsive electric forces. The
theorem basically says that a gravitationally bound sys-
tem of particles, even a system starting with all particles
at  rest,  ultimately  develops  a  KE equal  to  one  half  of
the absolute value of its PE.

In  a  typical  star  like  the  Sun,  the  average  distance
between atomic nuclei is usually greater than 10⫺12 m,
so attractive nuclear forces (range  ⬇ 10⫺15 m) do not
hold  the  Sun  together.  Rather,  all  stars  are  held  to-
gether by gravity so the virial theorem applies. (a) Find
an  expression  for  the  average  temperature  inside  the
Sun from the virial theorem using  冓KE of a particle冔 ⫽
2/5r S as shown in prob-
3/2 kBT and 冓PE Sun冔 ⫽ ⫺3GmS
lem 14. Let mS and r S stand for the mass and radius of
the Sun. Let N be the number of atoms in the Sun and
m ⫽ mS/N be an average particle mass in the Sun.
(b)  Find  Tav for  the  Sun  assuming  m s ⫽  2 ⫻  1030 kg,
rs ⫽ 7 ⫻ 108 m, and that 60% of the Sun’s mass is hy-
drogen, the rest helium.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Best Known Values for
Physical Constants

APPENDIX A

There is an uncertainty in the last digit, typically of 1 to 7 parts.

speed of light, c
gravitational constant, G
Planck’s constant, h
Boltzmann constant, kB
Stefan-Boltzmann constant, ␴
Rydberg constant, R
ﬁne-structure constant, ␣
Bohr radius, a 0
Avogadro’s number, NA
mass of neutron, mn

mass of proton, mp

mass of electron, me

elementary charge, e
permeability of vacuum, ␮0

permittivity of vacuum, ⑀0

Coulomb constant, k

Bohr magneton, ␮B

Nuclear magneton, ␮n

Atomic mass unit, u

299 792 458 m/s (exact)
6.672 6 ⫻ 10⫺11 N ⭈ m2 ⭈ kg⫺2
6.626 068 76 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s
1.380 650 3 ⫻ 10⫺23 J ⭈ K⫺1
5.670 400 ⫻ 10⫺8 W ⭈ m⫺2 ⭈ K⫺4
10 973 731.568 549 m⫺1
1/137.035 989
5.291 772 083 ⫻ 10⫺11 m
6.022 141 99 ⫻ 1023 mol⫺1
1.674 927 16 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg
939.565 330 MeV/c 2
1.672 621 58 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg
938.271 998 MeV/c 2
9.109 381 88 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg
0.510 998 902 MeV/c 2
1.602 176 462 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
4␲ ⫻ 10⫺7 N/A2 (exact)
12.566 370 6 ⫻ 10⫺7 N/A2
1/␮0c 2C 2/N ⭈ m2 (exact)
8.854 187 817 ⫻ 10⫺12 C 2/N ⭈ m2
1/(4␲⑀0) (exact)
8.987 551 78 ⫻ 109 N ⭈ m2/C 2
9.274 008 99 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T
5.788 381 749 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/T
5.050 783 17 ⫻ 10⫺27 J/T
3.152 451 238 ⫻ 10⫺8 eV/T
931.494 013 MeV/c 2
1.660 538 73 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg

Values based on 1998 CODATA recommended values.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

A.1

 

APPENDIX B

Table of Selected 
Atomic Masses*

1 u ⫽ 931.494 013 MeV/c 2 ⫽ 1.660 538 73 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg

Atomic
Number

Z

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10

11

12
13
14

15

A.2

Element

Symbol

Mass

Number

A

Atomic 

Mass** (u)

(Neutron)
Hydrogen
Deuterium
Tritium
Helium

Lithium

Beryllium

Boron

Carbon

Nitrogen

Oxygen

Fluorine
Neon

Sodium

Magnesium
Aluminum
Silicon

Phosphorus

n
H
D
T
He

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F
Ne

Na

Mg
Al
Si

P

1
1
2
3
3
4
6
7
7
8
9
10
11
11
12
13
14
13
14
15
15
16
18
19
20
22
22
23
24
24
27
28
31
31
32

1.008665
1.007825
2.014102
3.016049
3.016029
4.002603
6.015122
7.016004
7.016929
8.005305
9.012182
10.012937
11.009306
11.011433
12.000000
13.003355
14.003242
13.005739
14.003074
15.000109
15.003066
15.994915
17.999160
18.998403
19.992440
21.991386
21.994437
22.989770
23.990964
23.985042
26.981538
27.976926
30.975363
30.973761
31.973907

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Percent

Abundance,

or Decay
Mode (if 

radioactive)†

␤⫺
99.985
0.015

␤⫺

0.00014

⬇100
7.5
92.5
EC, ␥
2␣
100

19.8
80.2
␤⫹, EC
98.89
1.11

␤⫺
␤⫹
99.63
0.37
␤⫹, EC
99.76

0.204

100

90.51
9.22

␤⫹, EC, ␥
100
␤⫺, ␥
78.99

100

92.23
␤⫺, ␥
100
␤⫺

Half-Life

(if radioactive)

10.6 min

12.33 yr

53.3 days
6.7 ⫻ 10⫺17 s

20.4 min

5730 yr
9.96 min

122 s

2.602 yr

15.0 h

2.62 h

14.28 days

 

Atomic
Number

Mass

Number

Z

16

17

18
19

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

28

29

30

31
32

33
34
35
36

37
38

39
40
41
42
43

44
45
46
47

48
49

Element

Symbol

Sulfur

Chlorine

Argon
Potassium

Calcium
Scandium
Titanium
Vanadium
Chromium
Manganese
Iron
Cobalt

Nickel

Copper

Zinc

Gallium
Germanium

Arsenic
Selenium
Bromine
Krypton

Rubidium
Strontium

Yttrium
Zirconium
Niobium
Molybdenum
Technetium

Ruthenium
Rhodium
Palladium
Silver

Cadmium
Indium

S

Cl

Ar
K

Ca
Sc
Ti
V
Cr
Mn
Fe
Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga
Ge

As
Se
Br
Kr

Rb
Sr

Y
Zr
Nb
Mo
Te

Ru
Rh
Pd
Ag

Cd
In

A

32
35
35
37
40
39
40
40
45
48
51
52
55
56
59
60
58
60
64
63
64
65
64
66
69
72
74
75
80
79
84
89
85
86
88
90
89
90
93
98
97 
98 
102
103
106
107
109
114
115

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

APPENDIX B

A.3

Percent

Abundance,

or Decay
Mode (if 

radioactive)†

95.0
␤⫺
75.77

99.60
93.26
␤⫺, EC, ␥, ␤⫹
96.94

Half-Life

(if radioactive)

87.4 days

1.28 ⫻ 109 yr

100

73.7
99.75
83.79

100

91.8

100
␤⫺, ␥
68.3
26.1

0.91

69.2
␤⫺, ␤⫹
30.8
48.6
27.9
60.1
27.4
36.5

100

49.8
50.69
57.0
␤⫺
72.17

9.8
82.6
␤⫺
100

51.5

100

24.1

␤⫺, ␥
31.6

100

27.3
51.83
48.17
28.7
95.7; ␤⫺

5.271 yr

12.7 h

3.2 min

28.8 yr

2.6 ⫻ 106 yr
4.2 ⫻ 106 yr

5.1 ⫻ 1014 yr

Atomic 

Mass** (u)

31.972071
34.969032
34.968853
36.965903
39.962383
38.963707
39.963999
39.962591
44.955910
47.947947
50.943964
51.940512
54.938049
55.934942
58.933200
59.933822
57.935348
59.930790
63.927969
62.929601
63.929766
64.927794
63.929146
65.926036
68.925581
71.922076
73.921178
74.921597
79.916522
78.918338
83.911508
88.917563
84.911792
85.909265
87.905617
89.907738
88.905849
89.904702
92.906376
97.905407
96.906364
97.907215
101.904349
102.905504
105.903484
106.905093
108.904756
113.903359
114.903879

A.4

APPENDIX B

 

Atomic
Number

Mass

Number

Z

50
51
52
53

54

55
56

57
58
59
60
61

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74

75
76

77

78
79
80
81
82

Element

Symbol

Tin
Antimony
Tellurium
Iodine

Xenon

Cesium
Barium

Lanthanum
Cerium
Praseodymium
Neodymium
Promethium

Samarium
Europium
Gadolinium
Terbium
Dysprosium
Holmium
Erbium
Thulium
Ytterbium
Lutecium
Hafnium
Tantalum
Tungsten 
(wolfram)
Rhenium
Osmium

Iridium

Platinum
Gold
Mercury
Thallium
Lead

Sn
Sb
Te
I

Xe

Cs
Ba

La
Ce
Pr
Nd
Pm

Sm
Eu
Gd
Tb
Dy
Ho
Er
Tm
Yb
Lu
Hf
Ta
W

Re
Os

Ir

Pt
Au
Hg
Tl
Pb

A

120
121
130
127
131
132
136
133
137
138
144
139
140
141
142
145
146
152
153
158
159
164
165
166
169
174
175
180
181
184

187
191
192
191
193
195
197
202
205
203
204
206
207
208
210
211
212
214

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Percent

Abundance,

or Decay
Mode (if 

radioactive)†

32.4
57.3
34.5; ␤⫺
100
␤⫺, ␥
26.9
8.9

100

11.2
71.7
␤⫺
99.911
88.5

100

27.2
EC, ␣, ␤⫺

26.6
52.1
24.8

100

28.1

100

33.4

100

31.6
97.39
35.2
99.988
30.7

62.60, ␤⫺
␤⫺, ␥
41.0
37.3
62.7
33.8

100

29.8
70.5
␤⫺
␤⫺, 1.48
24.1
22.1
52.3
␣, ␤⫺, ␥
␤⫺, ␥
␤⫺, ␥
␤⫺, ␥

Atomic 

Mass** (u)

119.902199
120.903822
129.906223
126.904468
130.906118
131.904155
135.907220
132.905447
136.905822
137.905242
143.922845
138.906349
139.905435
140.907648
141.907719
144.912743
145.914708
151.919729
152.921227
157.924101
158.925343
163.929171
164.930319
165.930290
168.934211
173.938858
174.940768
179.946549
180.947996
183.950932

186.955750
190.960928
191.961479
190.960591
192.962923
194.964774
196.966551
201.970625
204.974412
202.973375
203.973028
205.974449
206.975880
207.976636
209.984163
210.988735
211.991871
213.999798

Half-Life

(if radioactive)

2 ⫻ 1021 yr

8.04 days

11.9 s

17.7 yr
5.53 yr

4 ⫻ 1010 yr
15.4 days

51.9 h
1.4 ⫻ 1017 yr

22.3 yr
36.1 min

10.64 h
26.8 min

 

Atomic
Number

Mass

Number

Z

83

84

85

86

87
88

89
90

91

92

93

94

95

96

Element

Symbol

Bismuth

Polonium

Astatine

Radon

Francium
Radium

Actinium
Thorium

Protactinium

Uranium

Neptunium

Plutonium

Americium

Curium

Bi

Po

At

Rn

Fr
Ra

Ac
Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu

Am

Cm

97

Berkelium

Bk

A

209
211
207
208
209
210
214
218
210
211
211
220
222
223
223
224
225
226
228
227
228
230
232
231
233
231
232
233
234
235
236
238
239
237
239
239
242
244
241
243
243
244
245
246
247
248
247
248
249

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

APPENDIX B

A.5

Percent

Abundance,

or Decay
Mode (if 

radioactive)†

Half-Life

(if radioactive)

100
␣, ␤⫺, ␥
␤⫹
␣
␣, ␥
␣, ␥
␣

␤⫹
EC, ␣
␣, ␤⫹
␣, ␥
␣, ␥
␣, ␤⫺, ␥
␣
␣
␤⫺
␣, ␥
␤⫺
␣, ␤⫺, ␥
␣, ␥
␣, ␥
100, ␣, ␥
␣, ␥
␤⫺
EC
␣, ␥
␣, ␥

0.006, ␣, ␥
0.72; ␣, ␥

␣, ␥
99.275; ␣, ␥
␤⫺
␣
␤⫺, ␥
␣, ␥
␣
␣
␣
␣, ␥

␣
␣
␣, ␥
␣

2.15 min
5.8 h
2.9 yr
102 yr
138.38 days
164 ␮s
3.11 min
8.1 h
7.21 h
14.6 h
55.6 s
3.8235 days
22.0 min
11.43 d
3.66 d
14.8 days
1.599 ⫻ 103 yr
5.75 yr
21.773 yr
1.91 yr
7.54 ⫻ 104 yr
1.40 ⫻ 1010 yr
3.25 ⫻ 104 yr
27.0 days
4.2 days
68.9 yr
1.592 ⫻ 105 yr
2.45 ⫻ 105 yr
7.038 ⫻ 108 yr
2.342 ⫻ 107 yr
4.468 ⫻ 109 yr
23.5 min 
2.14 ⫻ 106 yr
2.36 days
2.41 ⫻ 104 yr
3.75 ⫻ 105 yr
8.00 ⫻ 107 yr
432.7 yr
7.37 ⫻ 103 yr
29.1 yr
18.1 yr
8.48 ⫻ 103 yr
4.76 ⫻ 103 yr
15.6 ⫻ 106 yr
3.48 ⫻ 105 yr
1.4 ⫻ 103 yr
9 yr
3.26 ⫻ 102 yr

Atomic 

Mass** (u)

208.980384
210.987258
206.981570
207.981222
208.982404
209.982848
213.995176
218.008966
209.987131
210.987470
210.990575
220.011368
222.017570
223.019731
223.018501
224.020186
225.023604
226.025402
228.031064
227.027747
228.028715
230.033128
232.038051
231.035880
233.040242
231.036264
232.037129
233.039628
234.040947
235.043924
236.045563
238.050785
239.054289
237.048168
239.052933
239.052158
242.058737
244.064198
241.056824
243.061372
243.0614
244.0627
245.0655
246.0672
247.070346
248.072343
247.070298
248.073107
249.0750

A.6

APPENDIX B

Atomic
Number

Mass

Number

Z

98

99

100

101

102

103
104
105
106
107

108

109

110
111
112
114
116

Element

Symbol

Californium

Einsteinium

Fermium

Mendelevium

Nobelium

Lawrencium
Rutherfordium
Dubnium
Seaborgium
Bohrium

Hassium

Meitnerium

Darmstadtium
Unununium‡
Ununbium‡
Ununquadium‡
Ununhexium‡

Cf

Es

Fm

Md

No

Lr
Rf
Db
Sg
Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds
Uuu
Uub
Uuq
Uuh

A

249
251
252
254
253
257
258
260
255
259
260
261
262
266
262
264
269
277
266
268
271
272
285
289
289

Percent

Abundance,

or Decay
Mode (if 

radioactive)†

␣
␣
␣, ␤⫹
␣, ␤⫺, ␥
EC, ␣, ␥
␣
␣

␣, ␤⫹
EC, ␣
EC, ␣
EC, ␣
EC, ␣
␣
␣
␣
␣

␣
␣
␣

Atomic 

Mass** (u)

249.074845
251.079579
252.082945
254.088019
253.085173
257.095099
258.098572
260.1037
255.093258
259.100932
260.105314
261.108685
262.113763
266.121955
262.123028
264.124746
269.134086

266.137950
268.138809
271.146081
272.1535

Half-Life

(if radioactive)

351 yr
9.0 ⫻ 102 yr
472 days
276 days
3.0 days
100 days
51.5 days
27.8 days
3.1 min
58 min
180 s
65 s
34 s
~21 s
102 ms
0.44 sec
9 s
16.5 min 
0.8 ms
70 ms
1.1 ms
1.5 ⫻ 10⫺3 s
15.4 min
30.4 s
0.60 ⫻ 10⫺3 s

*Data are taken from Chart of the Nuclides, 12th ed., General Electric, 1977, from C. M. Lederer and V. S. Shirley, eds., Table of Isotopes, 7th
ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1979, and from G. Audi and H. Wapstra, “The 1993 Atomic Mass Evaluation,” Nuclear Physics A565,
1,  1993,  the  International  Union  of  Pure  and  Applied  Chemistry  (IUPAC),  and  Nuclear  Wallet  Cards on  the  Web  at  http://www.nndc.
bnl.gov/wallet.
**The masses given are those for the neutral atom, including the Z electrons.
†The abbreviation EC stands for “electron capture.”
‡Elements 111, 112, 114, and 116 have not yet been named. The IUPAC provisional names are shown.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Nobel Prizes

APPENDIX C

All Nobel Prizes in physics are listed (and marked with a P), as well as relevant Nobel
Prizes  in  Chemistry  (C).  The  key  dates  for  some  of  the  scientiﬁc  work  are  supplied;
they often antedate the prize considerably.

1901
1902

1903

1904

1905
1906

1907

1908

1909

1910

1911

1912
1913

1914

1915

1917
1918
1919

(P) Wilhelm Roentgen for discovering x-rays (1895).
(P) Hendrik  A.  Lorentz for  predicting  the  Zeeman  effect  and  Pieter  Zeeman for
discovering the Zeeman effect, the splitting of spectral lines in magnetic ﬁelds.
(P) Antoine-Henri  Becquerel for  discovering  radioactivity  (1896)  and  Pierre and
Marie Curie for studying radioactivity.
(P) Lord Rayleigh for studying the density of gases and discovering argon.
(C) William Ramsay for discovering the inert gas elements helium, neon, xenon,
and krypton, and placing them in the periodic table.
(P) Philipp Lenard for studying cathode rays, electrons (1898 – 1899).
(P) J. J. Thomson for studying electrical discharge through gases and discover-
ing the electron (1897).
(P) Albert  A.  Michelson for  inventing  optical  instruments  and  measuring  the
speed of light (1880s).
(P) Gabriel Lippmann for making the ﬁrst color photographic plate, using in-
terference methods (1891).
(C) Ernest Rutherford for discovering that atoms can be broken apart by alpha
rays and for studying radioactivity.
(P) Guglielmo Marconi and Carl Ferdinand Braun for developing wireless telegra-
phy.
(P) Johannes D. van der Waals for studying the equation of state for gases and
liquids (1881).
(P) Wilhelm  Wien for  discovering  Wien’s  law  giving  the  peak  of  a  blackbody
spectrum (1893).
(C) Marie Curie for discovering radium and polonium (1898) and isolating ra-
dium.
(P) Nils Dalén for inventing automatic gas regulators for lighthouses.
(P) Heike Kamerlingh Onnes for the discovery of superconductivity and liquefy-
ing helium (1908).
(P) Max  T.  F.  von  Laue for  studying  x-rays  from  their  diffraction  by  crystals,
showing that x-rays are electromagnetic waves (1912).
(C) Theodore W. Richards for determining the atomic weights of sixty elements,
indicating the existence of isotopes.
(P) William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg, his son, for studying the
diffraction of x-rays in crystals.
(P) Charles Barkla for studying atoms by x-ray scattering (1906).
(P) Max Planck for discovering energy quanta (1900).
(P) Johannes  Stark, for  discovering  the  Stark  effect,  the  splitting  of  spectral
lines in electric ﬁelds (1913).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

A.7

A.8

APPENDIX C

 

1920

1921

1922

1923

1924
1925

1926

1927

1928

1929
1930

1932
1933

1935

1936

1937

1938

1939
1943

1944

1945
1946
1947

(P) Charles-Édouard Guillaume for discovering invar, a nickel-steel alloy with low
coefﬁcient of expansion.
(C) Walther Nernst for studying heat changes in chemical reactions and formu-
lating the third law of thermodynamics (1918).
(P) Albert  Einstein for  explaining  the  photoelectric  effect  and  for  his  services
to theoretical physics (1905).
(C) Frederick  Soddy for  studying  the  chemistry  of  radioactive  substances  and
discovering isotopes (1912).
(P) Niels Bohr for his model of the atom and its radiation (1913).
(C) Francis W. Aston for using the mass spectrograph to study atomic weights,
thus discovering 212 of the 287 naturally occurring isotopes.
(P) Robert A. Millikan for measuring the charge on an electron (1911) and for
studying the photoelectric effect experimentally (1914).
(P) Karl M. G. Siegbahn for his work in x-ray spectroscopy.
(P) James  Franck and Gustav  Hertz for  discovering  the  Franck-Hertz  effect  in
electron-atom collisions.
(P) Jean-Baptiste Perrin for studying Brownian motion to validate the discontin-
uous structure of matter and measure the size of atoms.
(P) Arthur  Holly  Compton for  discovering  the  Compton  effect  on  x-rays,  their
change  in  wavelength  when  they  collide  with  matter  (1922),  and  Charles  T.  R.
Wilson for inventing the cloud chamber, used to study charged particles (1906).
(P) Owen W. Richardson for studying the thermionic effect and electrons emit-
ted by hot metals (1911).
(P) Louis Victor de Broglie for discovering the wave nature of electrons (1923).
(P) Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman for studying Raman scattering, the scatter-
ing of light by atoms and molecules with a change in wavelength (1928).
(P) Werner Heisenberg for creating quantum mechanics (1925).
(P) Erwin  Schrödinger and Paul  A.  M.  Dirac for  developing  wave  mechanics
(1925) and relativistic quantum mechanics (1927).
(C) Harold Urey for discovering heavy hydrogen, deuterium (1931).
(P) James Chadwick for discovering the neutron (1932).
(C) Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie for synthesizing new radioactive elements.
(P) Carl D. Anderson for discovering the positron in particular and antimatter
in general (1932) and Victor F. Hess for discovering cosmic rays.
(C) Peter J. W. Debye for studying dipole moments and diffraction of x-rays and
electrons in gases.
(P) Clinton Davisson and George Thomson for discovering the diffraction of elec-
trons by crystals, conﬁrming de Broglie’s hypothesis (1927).
(P) Enrico  Fermi for  producing  the  transuranic  radioactive  elements  by  neu-
tron irradiation (1934 – 1937).
(P) Ernest O. Lawrence for inventing the cyclotron.
(P) Otto Stern for developing molecular-beam studies (1923), and using them
to discover the magnetic moment of the proton (1933).
(P) Isidor  I.  Rabi for  discovering  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  in  atomic  and
molecular beams.
(C) Otto Hahn for discovering nuclear ﬁssion (1938).
(P) Wolfgang Pauli for discovering the exclusion principle (1924).
(P) Percy W. Bridgman for studying physics at high pressures.
(P) Edward V. Appleton for studying the ionosphere.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

APPENDIX C

A.9

1948

1949
1950

1951

1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959
1960

1961

1962

1963

1964

1965

1966
1967

1968
1969
1970

(P) Patrick M. S. Blackett for studying nuclear physics with cloud-chamber pho-
tographs of cosmic-ray interactions.
(P) Hideki Yukawa for predicting the existence of mesons (1935).
(P) Cecil F. Powell for developing the method of studying cosmic rays with pho-
tographic emulsions and discovering new mesons.
(P) John D. Cockcroft and Ernest T. S. Walton for transmuting nuclei in an accel-
erator (1932).
(C) Edwin M. McMillan for producing neptunium (1940) and Glenn T. Seaborg
for producing plutonium (1941) and further transuranic elements.
(P) Felix Bloch and Edward Mills Purcell for discovering nuclear magnetic reso-
nance in liquids and gases (1946).
(P) Frits Zernike for inventing the phase-contrast microscope, which uses inter-
ference to provide high contrast.
(P) Max  Born for  interpreting  the  wave  function  as  a  probability  (1926)  and
other  quantum-mechanical  discoveries  and  Walther  Bothe for  developing  the
coincidence method to study subatomic particles (1930 – 1931), producing, in
particular, the particle interpreted by Chadwick as the neutron.
(P) Willis E. Lamb, Jr. for discovering the Lamb shift in the hydrogen spectrum
(1947) and Polykarp Kusch for determining the magnetic moment of the elec-
tron (1947).
(P) John Bardeen, Walter H. Brattain, and William Shockley for inventing the tran-
sistor (1956).
(P) T.-D. Lee and C.-N. Yang for predicting that parity is not conserved in beta
decay (1956).
(P) Pavel  A.  ˇCerenkov for  discovering  ˇCerenkov  radiation  (1935)  and  Ilya  M.
Frank and Igor Tamm for interpreting it (1937).
(P) Emilio G. Segrè and Owen Chamberlain for discovering the antiproton (1955).
(P) Donald  A.  Glaser for  inventing  the  bubble  chamber  to  study  elementary
particles (1952).
(C) Willard Libby for developing radiocarbon dating (1947).
(P) Robert  Hofstadter for  discovering  internal  structure  in  protons  and  neu-
trons  and  Rudolf  L.  Mössbauer for  discovering  the  Mössbauer  effect  of  recoil-
less gamma-ray emission (1957).
(P) Lev  Davidovich  Landau for  studying  liquid  helium  and  other  condensed
matter theoretically.
(P) Eugene  P.  Wigner for  applying  symmetry  principles  to  elementary-particle
theory  and  Maria  Goeppert  Mayer and J.  Hans  D.  Jensen for  studying  the  shell
model of nuclei (1947).
(P) Charles H. Townes, Nikolai G. Basov, and Alexandr M. Prokhorov for develop-
ing masers (1951 – 1952) and lasers.
(P) Sin-itiro Tomonaga, Julian S. Schwinger, and Richard P. Feynman for develop-
ing quantum electrodynamics (1948).
(P) Alfred Kastler for his optical methods of studying atomic energy levels.
(P) Hans Albrecht Bethe for discovering the routes of energy production in stars
(1939).
(P) Luis W. Alvarez for discovering resonance states of elementary particles.
(P) Murray Gell-Mann for classifying elementary particles (1963).
(P) Hannes Alfvén for developing magnetohydrodynamic theory and Louis Eu-
gène Félis Néel for discovering antiferromagnetism and ferrimagnetism (1930s).

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

A.10

APPENDIX C

 

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

involves 

(P) Dennis Gabor for developing holography (1947).
(C) Gerhard Herzberg for studying the structure of molecules spectroscopically.
(P) John Bardeen, Leon N. Cooper, and John Robert Schrieffer for explaining super-
conductivity (1957).
(P) Leo Esaki for discovering tunneling in semiconductors, Ivar Giaever for dis-
covering tunneling in superconductors, and Brian D. Josephson for predicting
the  Josephson  effect,  which 
tunneling  of  paired  electrons
(1958 – 1962).
(P) Anthony Hewish for discovering pulsars and Martin Ryle for developing ra-
dio interferometry.
(P) Aage  N.  Bohr,  Ben  R.  Mottelson, and James  Rainwater for  discovering  why
some nuclei take asymmetric shapes.
(P) Burton Richter and Samuel C. C. Ting for discovering the J/psi particle, the
ﬁrst charmed particle (1974).
(P) John H. Van Vleck, Nevill F. Mott, and Philip W. Anderson for studying solids
quantum-mechanically.
(C) Ilya Prigogine for extending thermodynamics to show how life could arise
in the face of the second law.
(P) Arno  A.  Penzias and Robert  W.  Wilson for  discovering  the  cosmic  back-
ground radiation (1965) and Pyotr Kapitsa for his studies of liquid helium.
(P) Sheldon  L.  Glashow,  Abdus  Salam, and Steven  Weinberg for  developing  the
theory that uniﬁed the weak and electromagnetic forces (1958 – 1971).
(P) Val  Fitch and James  W.  Cronin for  discovering  CP  (charge-parity)  violation
(1964),  which  possibly  explains  the  cosmological  dominance  of  matter  over
antimatter.
(P) Nicolaas  Bloembergen and Arthur  L.  Schawlow for  developing  laser  spec-
troscopy  and  Kai  M.  Siegbahn for  developing  high-resolution  electron  spec-
troscopy (1958).
(P) Kenneth  G.  Wilson for  developing  a  method  of  constructing  theories  of
phase transitions to analyze critical phenomena.
(P) William A. Fowler for theoretical studies of astrophysical nucleosynthesis and
Subramanyan  Chandrasekhar for  studying  physical  processes  of  importance  to
stellar  structure  and  evolution,  including  the  prediction  of  white  dwarf  stars
(1930).
(P) Carlo  Rubbia for  discovering  the  W  and  Z  particles,  verifying  the  elec-
troweak uniﬁcation, and Simon van der Meer, for developing the method of sto-
chastic cooling of the CERN beam that allowed the discovery (1982 – 1983).
(P) Klaus von Klitzing for the quantized Hall effect, relating to conductivity in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld (1980).
(P) Ernst Ruska for inventing the electron microscope (1931), and Gerd Binnig
and Heinrich  Rohrer for  inventing  the  scanning-tunneling  electron  microscope
(1981).
(P) J. Georg Bednorz and Karl Alex Müller for the discovery of high temperature
superconductivity (1986).
(P) Leon  M.  Lederman,  Melvin  Schwartz, and Jack  Steinberger for a collaborative
experiment that led to the development of a new tool for studying the weak
nuclear force, which affects the radioactive decay of atoms.
(P) Norman Ramsay for various techniques in atomic physics; and Hans Dehmelt
and Wolfgang  Paul for  the  development  of  techniques  for  trapping  single
charge particles.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

APPENDIX C

A.11

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

(P) Jerome Friedman, Henry Kendall, and Richard Taylor for experiments impor-
tant to the development of the quark model.
(P) Pierre-Gilles de Gennes for discovering that methods developed for studying
order  phenomena  in  simple  systems  can  be  generalized  to  more  complex
forms of matter, in particular to liquid crystals and polymers.
(P) George Charpak for developing detectors that trace the paths of evanescent
subatomic particles produced in particle accelerators.
(P) Russell  Hulse and Joseph  Taylor for  discovering  evidence  of  gravitational
waves.
(P) Bertram N. Brockhouse and Clifford G. Schull for pioneering work in neutron
scattering.
(P) Martin L. Perl for discovery of the tau particle, and Frederick Reines for ﬁrst
detection of a neutrino.
(P) David M. Lee, Douglas C. Osheroff, and Robert C. Richardson for developing a
superﬂuid using helium-3.
(P) Steven Chu, Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, and William D. Phillips for developing
methods to cool and trap atoms with laser light.
(P) Robert B. Laughlin, Horst L. Störmer, and Daniel C. Tsui for discovering a new
form of quantum ﬂuid with fractionally charged excitations.
(P) Gerardus  ’t  Hooft and Martinus  J.  G.  Veltman for  studies  in  the  quantum
structure of electroweak interactions in physics.
(P) Zhores  I.  Alferov and Herbert  Kroemer for  developing  semiconductor  het-
erostructures used in high-speed electronics and optoelectronics and Jack St.
Clair Kilby for participating in the invention of the integrated circuit.
(P) Eric A. Cornell, Wolfgang Ketterle, and Carl E. Wieman for the achievement of
Bose – Einstein condensation in dilute gases of alkali atoms.
(P) Raymond Davis Jr. and Masatoshi Koshiba for the detection of cosmic neutri-
nos and Riccardo Giaconni for contributions to astrophysics that led to the dis-
covery of cosmic x-ray sources.
(P) Alexei Abrikosov, Anthony Leggett, and Vitaly Ginzburg for their contributions
to  the  study  of  superconductivity  and  superﬂuidity,  which  shed  light  on  the
outlandish properties of matter at extremely low temperatures.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Answers to Odd Problems

CHAPTER 1
3.

In the rest frame, pi ⫽ pf ⫽ 0.9 kg ⭈ m/s. In the moving
frame, p⬘i ⫽ p⬘f ⫽ 1.9 kg ⭈ m/s.
0.866c
0.048c ⫽ 1.44 ⫻ 106 m/s
0.436L

5.
7.
9.
11. Moving clock runs slower by ⬵ 3.2 ns.
13.
15.
17.

(a) ⫽ 7.1 ␮s
(c) 1.5 ⫻ 107 m/s
(a) Galaxy A is approaching at v ⫽ 0.198c.
(b) Galaxy B is receding at v ⫽ 0.237c.

(b) ⬵ 1.1 ⫻ 104 muons

19. ⫹0.41c and ⫺0.41c
21. ⫺0.50c
23.

(a) ⫺0.33 ␮s
(b) 140 m
0.33 ␮s earlier than event 1.
(a) 39.2 ␮s
aged 1.78 ␮s less on each orbit.
0.789c

(c) No. Event 2 occurs 

(b) Accurate to one digit. More precisely, he

(a) 

2v

1 ⫹ v 2/c 2

(b) 

3v ⫹ v3/c 2
1 ⫹ 3v 2/c 2

(b) Yes 

(a) Yes
5.45 yr; Goslo 
B occurred 4.44 ⫻ 10⫺7 s before A.
(a) 26.6 Mm
(d) 5.29 ⫻ 10⫺10

(b) 3.87 km/s

(e) ⫹4.46 ⫻ 10⫺10

(c) ⫺8.34 ⫻ 10⫺11

25.

27.

29.

33.
35.
37.
39.

9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
27.

A.12

CHAPTER 2
1.

(b) 2.89 ⫻ 10⫺19 kg m/s
(d) for a, 9.38 MeV/c; for b,

(b) 2.9995 ⫻ 108 m/s

(b) 0.986c

(a) 5.01 ⫻ 10⫺21 kg m/s
(c) 1.03 ⫻ 10⫺18 kg m/s
540 MeV/c; for c, 1930 MeV/c
(a) 3.07 MeV
(a) 2.71 ⫻ 10⫺17 kg m/s
(a) 0.999997c
(a) ⬵ 0.412c
4.9 MeV
7.42 MeV
1.011 MeV, 1.422 MeV/c, ␪ ⫽ 45.3⬚
2.51 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg and 8.84 ⫻ 10⫺28 kg
1.47 km

(b) 3.744 ⫻ 105 MeV
(b) 0.422c

29.

31.

33.

(a) 3.65 MeV/c 2

(b) 0.589c

M ⫽

2m

3 √ 4 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

1 ⫺ (u2/c 2)

6.28 ⫻ 107 kg

CHAPTER 3
1.

(c) Yes

(b) 2.0 V

(c) ␭ ⫽ 10 m

(b) 0.5 cm⫺2

(b) ␭ ⫽ 0.03 m

(b) 5.4 ⫻ 1033

(c) ⌬␻ ⫽ 8.8 ⫻ 1010 rad/s; ⌬␻/␻ ⫽ 2.3 ⫻ 10⫺5
(d)  If  the  electron’s  plane  of  rotation  is  parallel  to  B,  the
magnetic ﬂux ␾B is always zero so that E and F are zero and
there is no ⌬v for the electron.
(a) E total ⫽ 2.0 J; f ⫽ 0.56 Hz
(c) 3.7 ⫻ 10⫺34 J
(a) x ⫽ 5(1 ⫺ e⫺x), where x ⫽ hc/␭maxk BT
(b) Solution to (a) is x ⫽ 4.965 or ␭maxT ⫽ 2.90 ⫻ 10⫺3 mK
(a) 10 modes
(d) For short
wavelengths, n is almost a continuous function of ␭.
(a) ␭ ⫽ 600 nm
9.45 ⫻ 1044 photons/s
2.04 eV
(a) 1.0 ⫻ 1015 Hz
(a) lithium and beryllium
beryllium ⫽ 0.23 eV
1.55 V
(a) 1.6 eV
(d) 3%
E ⫽ 2.48 eV, p ⫽ 1.32 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg m/s
(a) 3.25 ⫻ 10 ⫺4 nm
(a) ␪ ⫽ 41.5⬚
(a) 9.11 ⫻ 104 eV
(a) 17.4 keV
(d) 1.1 keV
4.49⬚, 9.00⬚, 13.6⬚
(a) d ⫽ 2.80 ⫻ 10⫺8 cm
units/mole
(a) 1500 m
(a)  3.77 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV
maximum energy transferred (␪ ⫽ 180⬚) is  insufﬁcient.
h ⫽ 6.5 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ S

(b) 6.13 ⫻ 1023 formula

(c) 55.4⬚
(c) 16.3 keV

(b) lithium ⫽ 1.83 eV, 

(b) 4.0 ⫻ 10⫺15 V ⭈ s

(c)  No,  because  the

(b) 2.78 ⫻ 105 eV

(b) 1.1 ⫻ 1017

(b) 0.679 MeV

(c) ⬵ 22 keV

(b) 8.90 keV

(b) 0.0760 nm

(b)  3.10 eV

(c) 775 nm

3.

5.

7.

9.
11.
13.
15.
17.

19.
21.

23.
25.
29.
31.
35.

37.
39.

41.
43.

45.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

CHAPTER 4
1.
3.

(b) proton

1.60 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
(a) 9.58 ⫻ 107 C/kg
(c) 2.19 ⫻ 106 m/s ⬃0.01c
(d) For a speed of 0.01c there is no need to use relativity.
(b) speed ⫽ 2.39 ⫻ 108 m/s ⫽ 0.795c. Using p ⫽ mv gives
r ⫽ 0.0769 m and y ⫽ 0.00408 m. Using p ⫽ ␥mv gives
r ⫽ 0.1267 m and y ⫽ 0.00243 m.

7. mass ⫽ 8.418 ⫻ 10⫺11 g, mg/E ⫽ 25.96 ⫻ 10⫺19 C,

5.

9.
11.
13.
15.

17.

19.
21.

23.

25.

29.
33.
35.
39.

(b) no

(b) 658 nm

(c) 4.56 ⫻ 1014 Hz

r Li2 ⫹ ⫽ 0.0177 nm
,

q ⫽ 1.661 ⫻ 10⫺19 C
6.00 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
656.112 nm, 486.009 nm, 433.937 nm
(a) 3
(a) En ⫽ (⫺13.6 eV) Z 2/n2 ⫽ (⫺54.4 eV)/n2
(b) 54.4 eV
r He⫹ ⫽ 0.0265 nm
,
r Be3 ⫹ ⫽ 0.0132 nm
(a) 1.89 eV
(a) ␭max ⫽ 1874.606 nm, ␭min ⫽ 820.140 nm
(b) E min ⫽ 0.6627 eV, E max ⫽ 1.515 eV
(a) 0.0529 nm
(c) 1.05 ⫻ 10⫺34 kg ⭈ m2/s ⫽
(e) ⫺27.2 eV
(a) 1.60 ⫻ 1014 Hz
f ⫽ 2.44 ⫻ 1014 Hz. For n ⫽ 4, f ⫽ 1.03 ⫻ 1014 Hz.
(b) 3.23 ⫻ 10⫺8 %
(a) 3.1 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
(b) ⫺18.9 MeV
rpositronium ⫽ 2r hydrogen, Epositronium ⫽ 1
(a) 4.9000134 eV
(c) 3.60 m/s

(b) 1.99 ⫻ 10⫺24 kg ⭈ m/s

ប
(f ) ⫺13.6 eV

(d) 3.68 ⫻ 10⫺11 eV

(b) For n ⫽ 3,

(d) 13.6 eV

2 Ehydrogen

(b) 1.31 ⫻ 106 m/s ⫽ 4.38 ⫻ 10⫺3c

41. ␭ ⫽ 634 nm, red
(a)⬃ ⫺106 m/s2
43.

(b) ⬃1 m

ANSWERS TO ODD PROBLEMS

A.13

2.25 to 1
9.5 ⫻ 1027 m

29.
31.
33. ⌬m/m ⫽ 5.6 ⫻ 10⫺8

35.

(a)

f (x) ⫽

A
␣√2

e⫺x2/4␣2

eik0x

(b)

Re f (x) ⫽

A
␣√2

37.

2.27 pA 

e⫺x 2/4␣2cos k 0x

(c) 

⌬k ⫽

1
2␣

CHAPTER 6
1.

(c) Acceptable.

(a) Not acceptable — diverges as x : ⬁.
(b) Acceptable.
able — not single-valued.
tion is discontinuous (as is its slope).
(a) 0.126 nm
ប2

(b) 5.26 ⫻ 10⫺24 kg ⭈m/s
2mL2 冦 4x2
L2 ⫺ 6冧
3ប2
冢0,⫺
mL2 冣

with its vertex at 

U(x) ⫽

.

3.

5.

(d) Not accept-

(e) Not acceptable— wavefunc-

(c) 95 eV

is a parabola opening upward 

9. ␭ ⫽ 2.02 ⫻ 10⫺4 nm, E ⫽ 6.14 MeV. This is the gamma-ray

region of the electromagnetic spectrum.

cos(␲x/L), P1(x) ⫽ (2/L)cos2 (␲x/L);
sin(2␲x/L), P2(x) ⫽ (2/L)sin2 (2␲x/L);
cos(3␲x/L), P3(x) ⫽ (2/L)cos2(3␲x/L)

√2/L
√2/L
√2/L

11. ␺1(x) ⫽
␺2(x) ⫽
␺3(x) ⫽
(a) 5.13 ⫻ 10⫺3 eV
(c) Much smaller electron mass
ប2

13.

15.

(a) 

U ⫽ ⫺

(b) 9.40 eV

(b) 

36 md 2

ke2
d

7
3
ប2

(c)

d ⫽

42 mke2 ⫽ 0.050 nm

CHAPTER 5
1.
3.
5.

(b) 150 eV

(c) 201 MeV.

7.
9.
11.

13.
17.

3.97 ⫻ 10⫺13 m
1.79 ⫻ 10⫺36 m
For electrons: (a) 0.0150 eV
(c) 1240 MeV. For alphas: (a) 2.06 ⫻ 10⫺6 eV
(b) 0.0206 eV
9.05 fm = 9.1 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
1.1 ⫻ 10⫺34 m
(a) ~100 MeV
(b) The kinetic energy is too large to ex-
pect that the electron could be conﬁned to a region the size
of the nucleus.
50th plane
vp ⫽ c(1 ⫹ me/ប2h2)1/2
vg ⫽ c(1 ⫹ me/ប2h2)⫺1/2;
vpvg ⫽ c 2. If vp ⬎ c, vg ⬍ c.
4.6 ⫻ 10⫺14 m
⌬x ⫽ √ប/2m ⭈
(a) ⌬v ⱖ 0.5 m/s

4√H/2g ⫽ 1.8 ⫻ 10⫺16 m.

19.
21.
23.
25. The intrinsic energy width, ⌬E, is given by

(b) 3.5 m

⌬E ⱖ 3.29 ⫻ 10⫺6 eV. It can’t be measured with a 
gamma detector that has a resolution of ⫾5 eV.
550 eV

27.

(d) Lithium spacing ⫽ a ⫽ 0.28 nm
(b) P1 ⫽ 0.200
(d) E1 ⫽ 0.377 eV; E2 ⫽ 1.51 eV
n ⫽ 4.27 ⫻ 1028; excitation energy ⫽ 4.69 ⫻ 10⫺32 J

(c) P2 ⫽ 0.351

17.

19.
21.

(x)␺

␺2␺

0

0

L

L

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

A.14

ANSWERS TO ODD PROBLEMS

 

23. ␺(x) ⫽ A sin kx for 0 ⱕ x ⱕ L and ␺(x) ⫽ Ce⫺␣x for

x ⬎ L, where 

k2 ⫽

energies satisfy 

2mE
ប2

kL

sin(kL)
2mUL2

solutions only if 

.
ប2 ⬎ 1

and 

␣2 ⫽

2m(U ⫺ E )

ប2

. Allowed 

⫽ 冤 2mUL2

ប2

冥1/2

, which has 

29.

31.

33.

35.

37.

(b) 0.693 nm

(a) 121/2 nm⫺1/2
(c) 具x 典 ⫽ 13/12 nm, 具x 典 is somewhat greater than the most
probable position.
具x典 ⫽ 0, 具x2典 ⫽ x0

⫽ 0.757

2/2, 

P ⫽ 1 ⫺ e⫺√2
⌬x ⫽ x 0/√2
, 
mប␻

(a) 具p典 ⫽ 0

(b) 

具p2典 ⫽

2

(c)

⌬p ⫽ 冢 mប␻

2 冣1/2

c and d, with eigenvalue បk

⌿(x, t) ⫽

1
√2

[␺1(x)e⫺iE1t/ប ⫹ ␺2(x)e⫺iE2t/ប]

, where

E1, E2 are the ground- and ﬁrst excited-state energies,
respectively.

CHAPTER 7
1.

(b) k2 ⫽ 2mE/ប2 to  the  left  and  k2 ⫽ 2m(U ⫺ E)/ប2 to  the
1
right of the step. E/U ⫽ .
2

(c) 1.44 fm

3. R ⫽ 0.146, T ⫽ 0.854 for both, provided their energies are

the same.
(b) (1) 0.90

5.
9. T ⫽ 0.33552, R ⫽ 0.66448, T(E ) ⫽ 0.333596 (exact value),

(2) 0.36

(3) 0.41

(4) ⬇ 0

11.

Thickness ⫽ 0.02334 Å for protons.
(a) The matter wave reﬂected from the front of the well 
(x ⫽ 0) suffers a 180⬚ change in phase; that reﬂected from
the rear is not phase shifted.
(b) ⌿(x1, t) ⫽ ␺(x) e⫺i␻t, where

␺(x) ⫽ Ae ik⬘x ⫹ Be⫺ik⬘x (region 1)
⫽ Ce⫺ikx ⫹ Deikx (region 2)
⫽ Fe ik⬘x ⫹ Ge⫺ik⬘x (region 3)

with

k ⫽ √2mE/ប2
k⬘ ⫽ √2m(E ⫺ U )/ប2
E 冣⫺1

E 冢1 ⫺

E0

E0

; 

13.

R ⫽ ⫺

and G ⫽ 0 for particle incident from the left.

T ⫽ 冢1 ⫺

E0

E 冣⫺1

; with 

E0 ⫽ ⫺

mS 2
2ប2

9.35 ⫻ 1020 Hz

17.
19. The ﬁrst transmission resonance occurs at about E ⫽ 0.08293

eV, where T(E ) is nearly unity. Transmission drops to about
50% at E ⫽ 0.08254 eV and again at E ⫽ 0.08332 eV, for a
width of about 0.0008 eV.

CHAPTER 8

1.

3.

E/E0 ⫽ 6, 9, 9, 12, 14, 14, where 

E0 ⫽

␲2ប2
8mL2

(a) 

E ⫽

11␲2ប2
2mL2

(1, 3, 1); (3, 1, 1).

(b) n1, n2, n3 can have values (1, 1, 3); 

19.

21.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

(b) ⌬L/L ⯝ 1/ᐉ ⫽ 2.18 ⫻ 10⫺66

, where V ⫽ L1L2L3 is the volume of the box.

(c) ␺113 ⫽ A sin(␲x/L)sin(␲y/L)sin(3␲z/L)
␺131 ⫽ A sin(␲x/L)sin(3␲y/L)sin(␲z/L)
␺311 ⫽ A sin(3␲x/L)sin(␲y/L) sin(␲z/L)
(a) E111 ⯝ 1.54 MeV
(b) The states ␺211, ␺121, ␺112 have
the same energy ⫽ 2E111 ⬇ 3.08 MeV. The states ␺221, ␺122,
and ␺212 have the same energy E ⫽ 3E111 ⯝ 4.63 MeV.
(c) Both states are threefold degenerate.
A ⫽ √8/V
ᐉ ⫽ 4
(a) ᐉ ⯝ 4.58 ⫻ 1065
(a) For n ⫽ 3, ᐉ can have the values of 0, 1, or 2. For ᐉ ⫽ 0,
m ᐉ ⫽ 0; for ᐉ ⫽ 1, m ᐉ ⫽ 1, 0, ⫺1; for ᐉ ⫽ 2, m ᐉ ⫽ 2, 1, 0, 
⫺1, ⫺2.
(b) helium ⫽ 164.1 nm (ultraviolet), positronium ⫽
1312.6 nm (infrared)
(a) 2.58 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s
(a) 9.88 ⫻ 1014 m⫺3/2
(c) 3.43 ⫻ 1010 m⫺1
(a) 137.036
(d) 4␲(137)
(3 ⫹ )a 0 ⯝ 5.236a 0 for 2s state and 4a 0 for 2p state.
13.1a 0 for 3s; 12.0a 0 for 3p; 9.00a 0 for 3d. Bohr theory 
predicts 9a 0 .

(b) 3.65 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s

(b) 9.75 ⫻ 1029 m⫺3

(b) E ⫽ ⫺6.04 eV

(b) 2␲ ⫻ 137

(c) 137/2␲

√5

5.

7.
9.
11.
13.

15.

17.
21.

23.

25.
27.

29. ⌬r ⫽ 0.866a0, more than half the average itself.

31. ␺(0) ⫽ 0;

En ⫽ ⫺

mA2

2ប2 冤 1

n2冥    (n ⫽ 1, 2, .  .  .)

33.

E ⫽ 4.3123 MeV, ᐉ ⫽ 1 for 1st excited state (degeneracy 3),
E ⫽ 7.0797 MeV, ᐉ ⫽ 2 for 2nd excited state (degeneracy 5),
E ⫽ 8.3882 MeV, ᐉ ⫽ 0 for 3rd excited state (non-degenerate).

(c) 18

(d) 32

(e) 50

CHAPTER 9
1.
3.

(b) 8

⫽ 0.387 T/m

f ⫽ 9.79 ⫻ 109 Hz
(a) 2
dBz
dz
v/c ⫽ 278.6
√15
2

兩 s 兩 ⫽

5.

7.

9.

11.

, ␪ ⫽ 140.8⬚, 105.0⬚, 75.0⬚, 39.2⬚. ⍀⫺ does
ប

obey the Pauli exclusion principle.
2 ( j ⫽ 5
j ⫽ 5
2, 3
2)
,
2
m j ⫽ ⫾3

m j ⫽ ⫾5
2 ( j ⫽ 3
2)

, and 
2, ⫾1

2, ⫾3

2, ⫾1

13.

(a) n ⫽ 4, ᐉ ⫽ 3, 

j ⫽ 5
2

(c) Jz ⫽ mj ប, where 

m j ⫽ ⫾5

√35
2

ប

(b) 
2, ⫾3

兩 J 兩 ⫽
2, ⫾1
2

15. ⌬Ecalc ⫽ 3.18 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV; ⌬Emeas ⫽ 5 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV
17.

(a) 394.8 eV, (n1, n2, n3) ⫽ (1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 2), 
(1, 2, 1), and (2, 1, 1)
(b) All eight particles go into the (n1, n2, n3) ⫽ (1, 1, 1) state,
and so the energy is 8 ⫻ E111 ⫽ 225.6 eV.
6s wavefunction has ﬁve nodes and E ⫽ ⫺8.64 eV. Ionization
energy is 8.64 eV vs. 9.22 eV from Table 9.2. Most probable
distance is 1.37a 0 compared with 1.00a 0 for the (outermost)
electron in hydrogen, suggesting that the gold atom is not
much larger even though it has 79 electrons.
⫾1
(a) 1s22s22p4
2
(2, 1, 0, 

), (2, 1, ⫾1, 

(b) (1, 0, 0, 

), (2, 0, 0, 

⫾1
2

),

)⫾1
2

⫾1
2

 

23.

[Kr] 4d 10 has the lesser energy, but [Kr] 4d 95s1 has two
more unpaired spins. Thus, Hund’s rule is violated in this
case (since ﬁlled subshells are especially stable). The ele-
ment is Pd.

25. Between 104 K and 105 K
36 冢 13.6 eV

√f ⫽ √ 5

(a)

27.

h

冣 (Z ⫺ 7)

(b) Theoretical: slope ⫽ 0.214 ⫻ 108 Hz1/2, intercept ⫽ 7
Experimental: slope ⫽ 0.21 ⫻ 108 Hz1/2, intercept ⫽ 6.3
(c) Z ⫺ I ⫽ Z ⫺ 6.3.

CHAPTER 10
3.
5.
7.

s v
P(E) ⫽ 0.385 e⫺(0.408 E/E1)
(b) 

2e⫺2p␧/kBT

(c) T ⫽ 2.83 K

⫽ 1.58 cm, srms ⫽ 1.45 cm, s mp ⫽ 1.78 cm

(d) 

E ⫽

2p␧
2e2p␧/kBT

1 ⫹ 1

(e) 

ETOTAL ⫽ NE

9.

(f) C is a maximum at 2p␧/kBT ⫽ 2.65 or T ⫽ 0.055 K
v
can be used:

⫽ 1.51 ⫻ 103 m/s, so the classical Doppler shift formula

⌬f
f0

⫽ 1.01 ⫻ 10⫺5

11.

13.

15.
17.
19.
21.

23.

n

n

n

n

n
(9E ) ⫽ 1.22, (10E) ⫽ 0.777,
n
n

(0E) through (5E) ⫽ 2, (6E) ⫽ 1.89, (7E) ⫽ 1.78,
n
(8E) ⫽ 1.55,
n
(11E) ⫽ 0.444, (12E) = 0.222,  (13E) ⫽ 0.111, and
n
(14E) ⫽ 0, E F(0) ⫽ 9E
n
(b) TE(lead) ⬇ 100 K, TE(aluminum) ⬇ 300 K, and 
TE(silicon) ⬇ 500 K
(a) 1.80 ⫻ 1029 free electrons/m3
EF ⫽ 33.4 MeV,  ⫽ 20 MeV
93.8%
(a) 2.54 ⫻ 1028 electrons/m3
(c) 1.05 ⫻ 106 m/s
3.40 ⫻ 1017 electrons

(b) 3.15 eV

(b) 3

E

CHAPTER 11
(a) 1.28 eV
1.
(c) 6.55 nN

(b) ␴ ⫽ 0.272 nm, ␧ ⫽ 4.65 eV

3. R 0 ⫽ (I/␮)1/2 ⫽ 1.13 Å, same as Example 11.1
5.
7.

(a) 8.10 cm, 3.70 GHz,
5.69 ⫻ 1012 rad/s

(b) 4.53 ⫻ 10⫺45 kg ⭈ m2

9.

11.
13.

ᐉ ⫽ 0 E rot ⫽ 0
ᐉ ⫽ 1 E rot ⫽ 2.62 ⫻ 10⫺3 eV
(a) ᐉ ⫽ 2 E rot ⫽ 7.86 ⫻ 10⫺3 eV
ᐉ ⫽ 3 E rot ⫽ 1.57 ⫻ 10⫺3 eV

(d) rotational: 473 ␮m;

(b) K ⫽ 480 N/m, f ⫽ 8.66 ⫻ 1013 Hz
(c) E0 ⫽ 0.179 eV, A0 ⫽ 0.0109 nm, E1 ⫽ 0.538 eV,
A1 ⫽ 0.0189 nm
vibrational 3.46 ␮m
2{ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)}, ᐉ ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . .
Erot ⫽ ប2/mR 0
3
(a) Rᐉ ⯝ R 0 ⫹ [ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2/(␮␻0)2]/R 0
2,
(b) U0 ⯝ ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2/2␮R 0
2 ⯝ ␻0
␻ᐉ

4
2 + 3[ᐉ(ᐉ ⫹ 1)ប2]/␮2R 0

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

ANSWERS TO ODD PROBLEMS

A.15

15. ⌬E ⫽ ប␻[1 ⫺ (v ⫹ 1)ប␻/2U0], 

v MAX ⫽

2U0
ប␻

,
⫺ 1

EMAX ⫽ U0 ⫺

(ប␻)2
16U0

17. When the energy of the rotation-vibration ground state 
(v ⫽ 0, 1 ⫽ 0) is taken into account (E ⫽ 0.268 eV from
Problem 16), the numerical results for 1 ⫽ 1, 2 agree with 

the predictions of Equation 11.10 with 

eV

. 

h2
ICM

h2
ICM

Discrepancies do arise for larger values of 1. E ⫽ 0.283 eV 
(v ⫽ 0, ᐉ ⫽ 1) and E ⫽ 0.313 eV (v ⫽ 0, ᐉ ⫽ 2)

19. Ground state: E ⫽ (2x2ប2/mL2), where x is the smallest root

of the equation tan x ⫽ ⫺(2ប2/mSL)x. First excited state: 
E ⫽ (2␲2ប2/mL2). As S : ⬁, x : ␲and the two energies co-
incide; as S : 0, x : ␲/2, and the energies reduce to the
ground and ﬁrst excited states of an inﬁnite well with no 
barrier.
(a) R 0 ⫽ 1.44 bohrs
(b) K ⫽ 1.03 Ry/bohr2 ⫽ 801 N/m

21.

23. The crossing takes about 6.1 fs (⫽ 6.1 ⫻ 10⫺15 s) for a cross-
ing frequency of 1.64 ⫻ 1014 Hz. The bonding and antibond-
ing states have energies E ⫽ 6.379 eV and E ⫽ 6.718 eV, re-
spectively, for a splitting ⌬E ⫽ 0.339 eV and a characteristic
frequency ⌬E/h ⫽ 8.20 ⫻ 1013 Hz, or about half the crossing
frequency.

CHAPTER 12
3.
7.
11.
13.
15.
19.

7.84 eV/ion pair
(a) 7.12 eV/ion pair
(c) 3.9 ⫻ 105 cm/s
(a) 3.80 ⫻ 10⫺14 s
(a) 2.75 ⫻ 1014 Hz
(b) 0.36 nm
cavity length.
(b) 10.7 kA
(a) 2.98 mA

21.
25.

(b) 6.39 eV/atom pair

(d) 0.36 ⍀m
(b) 52.7 nm
(b) 1090 nm (IR)

(c) L/d ⬇ 200

(c) 6.7 ⫻ 10⫺4 nm. The controlling factor is

(b) 67.1 ⍀

(c) 8.39 ⍀

(c) 3.92

(b) 6.03 ⫻ 106 m/s

(b) 7.44 fm

CHAPTER 13
(a) 1.9 fm
1.
8.57 ⫻ 1013
3.
(a) 4.55 ⫻ 10⫺13 m
5.
2.2 ⫻ 10⫺6 eV
7.
30% 63Cu
9.
2.657 MeV/nucleon
11.
(a) 139Cs with N/Z ⫽ 1.53
13.
(b) 139La, with 8.353 MeV/nucleon
(c) 139Cs, with a mass of 138.913 u
(a) 8.03 MeV/nucleon
(c) 8.66 MeV/nucleon
160 MeV

15.

17.

(b) 8.55 MeV/nucleon
(d) 7.92 MeV/nucleon

19.

(a) 

U ⫽ 3k

(Ze)2
5R

(b) 2.88 ⫻ 10⫺14 (A5/3) J

21.
23.

(c) 52.1 MeV
(a) 0.805 h⫺1
(a) ␭ ⫽ 1.55 ⫻ 10⫺5 s⫺1; T1/2 ⫽ 12.4 h
(b) 2.39 ⫻ 1013 atoms
(c) 1.87 mCi

(b) 0.861 h

A.16

ANSWERS TO ODD PROBLEMS

25.
27.
29.
31.

33.
35.
41.
43.

45.

(c) 4 ⫻ 103 counts/min

36.3 ⫻ 10⫺6 g
0.055 mCi
9.46 ⫻ 109
(b) ␭ ⫽ 0.25 h⫺1; T1/2 ⫽ 2.77 h
(d) 9.59 ⫻ 106
(a) 18.3 counts/min
11.8 decays/min ⭈ g
2.26 MeV
(d) The Po daughter 
(b) 4.79 MeV
carries off about 3 ⫻ 10⫺6 of the kinetic energy in the beta
decay.
(a) Q ⫽ ⫺1.82 MeV, so reaction cannot occur.
(b) Q ⫽ ⫺1.68 MeV, so reaction cannot occur.
(c) Q ⫽ 1.86 MeV, so reaction can occur.

(c) 0.08 MeV

51.
53.

47. Using the uncertainty principle, electrons in a nucleus are
found to have an energy of about 100 MeV. Since the most
energetic electrons emitted in beta decay have energies less
than 10 MeV, electrons are not present in the nucleus.
18.6 keV
(a) 3.96 ⫻ 109 yr
be younger if some Sr were initially present.
(b) R/␭
2.66 d
5400 yr to 6800 yr
(a) 4.00 Gyr

(b) 0.0199 and 4.60

(b) It could be no older. The rock could

55.
57.
59.
61.

CHAPTER 14
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.

(b) 0.0663

(b) 17.35 MeV

(b) 2.5751 MeV

(d) 0.1 to 10 eV

(b) 6 V ⫺1/3
(e) Parallelepiped

(c) ⬇ 1
(b) 6.1 ⫻ 1011 protons/s

(a) ⫺2.4386 MeV
5.70 MeV
17.35 MeV
(a) Q ⫽⫺ 1.19 MeV, Kth ⫽ 1.53 MeV
(b) 1.53 MeV
0.0266 b
(a) 0.0373
(a) 0.86
(c) 8.7 ⫻ 1010 protons/s
2.25 ⫻ 1012
25
200.6 MeV
(a) 4.84 V ⫺1/3
(d) Sphere
(a) 3333 MW
(d) 1.34 ⫻ 103 kg
(a) 2.70 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
(c) vF ⫽ v0mD/(mD ⫹ m T)
(e) Possibly by tunneling
(a) K n ⫽ 14.1 MeV, K ␣ ⫽ 3.45 MeV
neutron is uncharged, it is not conﬁned by the B ﬁeld, and
only K ␣ contributes directly to achieving critical ignition.
(a) 1.9 ⫻ 109 K
(a) 52 ⫻ 106 K
2.242 ⫹ 4.966 ⫽ 25.75 MeV
(c) Most energy is lost, since neutrinos have such low cross
sections for interaction with matter.
5.3 ⫻ 1023 J
(a) 3000 MW

(b) 355 kJ
(b) 1.943 ⫹ 1.709 ⫹ 7.551 ⫹ 7.297 ⫹

(e) 3.7 ⫻ 10⫺8 kg/s

(c) 6.30 V ⫺1/3

(b) 5.2 ⫻ 106 L

(b) Yes; since the

(b) 2333 MW

(d) 1.2 MeV

(b) 720 keV

(c) 1.04 ⫻ 1020 events/s

17.
19.
21.
23.

25.

27.

29.

31.
33.

35.
37.

(c) 2.35 T

(b) I/I 0 ⫽ 0.426

(b) 2.2 ⫻ 105 J/m3

(b) 0.14 MeV
(b) 119 billion years

(a) 2.3 ⫻ 10⫺19 Z1Z 2 J
(a) 2.63 ⫻ 1033 J
(a) 1014/cm3
(a) 1.4 ⫻ 10⫺3 cm
3.85 cm
(a) 0.0025 rem

39.
41.
43.
45.
47.
49.
51. The two workers receive the same dose in rad.
53.
55.
59.

18.8 J
(b) 108
(a) 10
(a) ⬃1 ⫻ 108 m3
(d) ⬃ 10 kilotons

(b) ⬃1 ⫻ 1013 J

(c) ⬃ 1014 J

(b) 38 times background of 0.13 rem/yr

CHAPTER 15
1.
3.
5.
9.

10⫺23 s
f min ⫽ 2.26 ⫻ 1023 Hz, ␭max ⫽ 1.32 ⫻ 10⫺15 m
2.2 ⫻ 10⫺18 m
(a) Does not occur (violates baryon number)
(b) Occurs
(c) Does not occur (violates baryon number)
(d) Occurs
(e) Occurs
(f) Does not occur (violates baryon number and muon –
lepton number)
(a) Electron and muon – lepton number
(b) Electron – lepton number
(c) Strangeness and charge
(d) Baryon number
(e) Strangeness
(a) 5.63 GeV
For Example 15.5, E ⫽ 48%; for Exercise 3, E ⫽ 48%,
E ⫽ 46%; for Problem 13, E ⫽ 33%.

(b) 5.64 GeV

11.

13.
15.

17. A neutron, udd
19. mu ⫽ 312.3 MeV/c 2, md ⫽ 313.6 MeV/c 2
21.

u

d

d

W –W

u

d

u

e–

νe

19 eV/c 2

9.3 cm

23.
25. Kp ⫽ 5.4 MeV, K␲ ⫽ 32.3 MeV
27.
29. A neutron
31.
33.

(b) A gluon
(b) Proton speed ⫽ 0.001266c ⫽ 380

(a) A Z0 boson
(a) 0.782 MeV
km/s, electron speed ⫽ 0.9185c ⫽ 2.76 ⫻ 108 m/s (c) The
electron is relativistic, the proton is not.
(a) p 兺
⫽ 686 MeV/c , p␲ ⫽ 200 MeV/c
(c) E␲ ⫽ 244 MeV, En ⫽ 1 130 MeV, E 兺
(d) 1 190 MeV/c 2, 0.500c
(b) 31/2Nmc
(a) 2Nmc

(c) Method (a)

(b) 627 MeV/c

⫽ 1 370 MeV

35.

37.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Index

Page numbers followed by “f” indicate ﬁgures; page numbers followed by “n” indicate footnotes; page numbers followed by “t” indicate
tables.

A proton, 466–467
Absorber, half-value thickness of, 530
Absorption

Einstein’s coefﬁcient of, 456
of radiation, 447 – 448
spectrum of, 386

of HCl molecule, 386, 387f

transition of, 387f

Absorption spectroscopy, 127 – 129
Acceleration

inertial frames for, 5
relative, 54 – 55

Acceptor, 434
Actinide series, 323
Actinium radioactivity, 492
Activation energy, 374
Agricultural research, radioactive tracers in,

536 – 537

Air

linear absorption coefﬁcients of gamma rays

in, 530t

linear absorption coefﬁcients of x-rays in, 529

Allowed energy

for hydrogenlike atoms, 279
for molecular rotation, 379 – 380
for Morse oscillator, 384
for vibration, 382 – 383

Allowed region, 232
Allowed transition, selection rule for, 281
Alloy, 409

quaternary, 454

␣ decay, 242 – 245, 484 – 487, 492t, 496

probability of, 487

␣ emitter, characteristics of, 242t
␣ particle, 466, 480

penetrating power of, 480 – 481
proton collision with, 121 – 122
range of, 527
scattering of, 120 – 121, 125, 144

large-scale, 122
theoretical versus experimental, 123

of unstable nucleus, transmission coefﬁcient

for, 243 – 244

␣particle-nucleus system, potential energy of, 486
Aluminum

linear absorption coefﬁcients of gamma rays

in, 530t

linear absorption coefﬁcients of x-rays in, 529
neutron capture by, 509
nucleus of, estimating radius of, 124

Ammonia

inversion of, 245 – 247, 249

molecule of, double oscillator potential for,

Atom force microscope (AFM), gold cluster

245 – 246

Ammonia maser, 247
Amorphous solid, 404 – 405

bonding in, 410 – 413
radial distribution function of, 412 – 413
technological applications of, 413

Anderson, Carl, 287 – 288, 550, 553, 590
Ångström, Anders, 129
Angular momentum, 584

in Bohr atom model, 140, 271
central force and, 267 – 271
conservation of, 280 – 281, 504, 559 – 560
nuclear, 469 – 470
orbital, 302 – 303, 328
orientations of, 271 – 272
quantization of, 139 – 141, 153 – 154, 270,

273 – 277

quantum number integer of, 305
of rotation, 306 – 307
rotational energy and, 378 – 379
total, 309 – 310, 329
uncertainty principle for, 267
vector model for, 310f

Angular momentum operators, 275
Angular separation, 181
Anharmonic effect, 384
Annihilation, decay products with, 288 – 289
Antibaryon, 575
Antibonding, 400
Antibonding orbital, 393, 394 – 395
total molecular energy for, 396f

Anticolor, 578
Antielectron, 287 – 288. See also Positron
Antihydrogen, 287 – 289
detection of, 288 – 289

Antilepton, 560 – 561
Antimuon, 561
Antineutrino, 488, 496
Antiparticle, 550 – 552, 583

for every particle, 552
of hydrogen atom, 287 – 289

Antiproton, 288, 575

cooling of, 593

Antiquark, 576
color of, 577
properties of, 575t

Antisymmetric electron, 315
Approach-to-equilibrium problem, 335 – 336
Argon, cohesive energy of, 410
Associated Legendre polynomial, 269, 

276

images of, 164f

Atom trapping, 368 – 371, 370 – 371
Atomic absorption spectroscopy, 129
Atomic cohesive energy, 407
Atomic electron, 67

space quantization for, 272 – 273

Atomic energy level, direct conﬁrmation of,

141 – 143, 141 – 145

Atomic force microscope (AFM), 163
Atomic fountain, 368
Atomic hydrogen ion, 277 – 287
Atomic mass, 465 – 466

discovery of, 119
unit of, 465, 466

Atomic moment, 300 – 301
Atomic number, 464, 495

values of, 123

Atomic resonance frequency, 368 – 369
Atomic separation, potential energy of, 381f
Atomic shell, 291

conﬁguration of, 320 – 322
spectroscopic notation for, 280t
volume of, 282

Atomic spectral line, ﬁne structure doubling of,

309, 329

Atomic structure theory, 119 – 120
Atomic subshell, 291

conﬁguration of, 320 – 322
spectroscopic notation for, 280t

Atomic transition, upward and downward, 449
Atomic volume, 324 – 325
Atomic wavefunction

antisymmetric form of, 392 – 394
molecular orbitals from, 391 – 392
symmetric combination of, 392, 394

Atom(s)

Bohr, 125 – 139
catastrophic collapse of, 131
chemical properties of, 319 – 320
composition of, 108 – 125
constituents of, 547
deﬁnition of, 547
discovery of, 107
discrete energy levels of, 142 – 143, 145
distribution of in space, 412 – 413
electron afﬁnity of, 374
electron conﬁgurations of, 320 – 321
electron microscopic examination of, 163
electrostatic forces between, 373
emission and absorption of radiation by,

447 – 448

I.1

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

I.2

INDEX

 

Atom(s) (Continued)

energy to ionize, 133 – 134
internuclear separation distance between,

373 – 374

laser manipulation of, 366 – 371
light absorption by, 366
in matter, 106 – 108
model of, 203
nuclear model of, 108, 110
orbital magnetism and normal Zeeman effect

of, 296 – 302

“plum-pudding” model of, 119
quantitized energy of, 145
quantum model of, 130 – 139
Rutherford’s model of, 119 – 125
structure of, 295 – 330
in successive planes, 87 – 88

Attenuation, 529
Avogadro, 107
Avogadro’s number, 108

B-hadron decay, 596
Background radiation, 532
Baker, C. P., 507n
Balmer, Johann Jakob, 129 – 130

empirical relation of, 134
hydrogen series for, 136, 137

Band theory, 455

isolated-atom approach to, 425 – 426
of solids, 425 – 433

Bardeen, John, 437 – 438, 445
Barium

electrolysis of, 109
kinetic energy of, 511

Barn, 507, 539
Barrier

coefﬁcients of, 248 – 249
ﬁeld emission microscopy and, 239 – 241
joining conditions at, 234 – 235
penetration depth of, 234
penetration of, 238 – 249 (See also Tunneling)
reﬂection coefﬁcient of, 233, 237
square, 231 – 238
transmission coefﬁcient of, 233 – 234

approximating, 238

Barrier potential energy, 231 – 232
Barrier wave, without propagation, 237 – 238
Barrier wavefunction, 236 – 237
Baryon, 556 – 557, 572, 575, 583

characteristics of, 571 – 572
color of, 577
patterns of, 571 – 572
properties of, 557t
quark compositions of, 575f
symbol of, 557

Baryon number, 583, 584

checking, 560
conservation law of, 560

BCS theory, 446, 456
Beat, 165
Becquerel, Henri, 463
Becquerel (Bq), 482
Bednorz, J. Georg, 446 – 447
Beryllium, electron conﬁguration of, 320
␤decay, 487 – 489, 492t, 496, 580, 593 – 594
␤particle, 467

penetrating power of, 480 – 481

Bevatron particle accelerator, 552
Big Bang, black holes formed at, 248
Binding energy, 472 – 476, 495
Binnig, Gerd, 254, 255
Biological organisms, radiation damage in,

531 – 532

Biomedical techniques, ﬂuorescence, 390
Black hole, 56, 97f

decay of, 247 – 248, 249
gravitational attraction from, 96 – 98

Blackbody

deﬁnition of, 68 – 69
emission curves of, theoretical versus

experimental, 73f

maximum power emission of, 69 – 70
spectral energy density of, 70 – 72

Blackbody cavity radiation, 76 – 77

spectral distribution for, 66
thermal equilibrium of, 77 – 78

Blackbody formula, 71 – 73, 80, 352
Blackbody law

Planck’s, 79 – 80
Rayleigh-Jeans, 77 – 79

Blackbody radiation, 68 – 77, 80, 351 – 352

apparatus for measuring, 71f
formula for, 99, 215
law of, 449
Planck’s experiments on, 72 – 77

Bohm model, quantization in, 153 – 154
Bohr, Niels, 125f

correspondence principle of, 139 – 141

Bohr atom

angular momentum quantization in, 271
classical limit of, 140f
Bohr atomic model, 547
Bohr atomic theory, 125 – 139

assumptions of, 132
postulates of, 144

Bohr magneton, 297, 328, 467
Bohr orbit, 153 – 154
Bohr radius, 133, 243 – 244
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 66, 335f, 365f
Boltzmann distribution, 137, 449 – 450
Boltzmann relation, 448
Boltzmann’s constant, 341, 435
Bond

chemical, 372
covalent, 374 – 376, 390 – 397, 399

energy of, 394

Bonding, 400

in complex molecules, 397 – 399
in hydrogen molecule, 396 – 397
molecular mechanisms of, 373 – 374

covalent, 374 – 375
hydrogen, 377
ionic, 374
van der Waals, 375 – 377

in solids, 405 – 413

Bonding-antibonding orbital pair, 397, 400
Bonding orbital, 393

of hydrogen ion, 394
total molecular energy for, 395f, 396f

Born, Max, 94, 191 – 192
Born interpretation, 191 – 194
Boron, electron conﬁguration of, 320
Bose, Satyendranath, 350f
Bose condensate, 370

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Bose-Einstein condensate, 371
Bose-Einstein condensation, 346, 347, 350,

370 – 371

Bose-Einstein distribution, 347–351, 354, 361, 424
Bose-Einstein statistics, 370
applications of, 351 – 356

Boson, 330, 346 – 347, 549, 575

exchange symmetry for, 314 – 316
Higgs, 581 – 582
integral spin of, 446
massive, 581
properties of, 577t
W and Z, 581
Bottomness, 576
Bound electron, 211
Box, particles in, 200 – 209
Box potential, 209
Box wavefunction, normalizing, 263 – 264
Bragg, William Henry, 87
Bragg, William Lawrence, 87
Bragg crystal x-ray spectrometer, 89f
Bragg equation, 87
Bragg scattering, 87 – 88
Brain, PET scan of, 552f
Brattain, Walter, 437 – 438
Bremsstrahlung, 88 – 89, 520, 528, 597, 598 – 599
Brookhaven National Laboratory, 576
Brown, Laurie M., 555
Brownian motion, 11, 108
Bubble chamber, 52, 535, 541

particle detection in, 563 – 564
photograph of, 562f

Bubble-chamber tracks, 551f

Cadmium, 322

neutron-capture cross section for, 508f

Calcium, electron conﬁguration of, 320
Calorimetry, 597 – 598
Cancer, radiation therapy for, 538 – 539
Carbon

activity of, 483
Compton shift for, 93
electron conﬁguration of, 320

Carbon-14 nucleus, radioactivity of, 482 – 483
Carbon atom

bonds in, 398 – 399
in diamond, 408f
frequency of vibration of, 356
on graphite surface, 258

Carbon dating, 489 – 491
Carbon dioxide, atmospheric, 388
Carbon monoxide molecule

rotational energy of, 380 – 381
vibration of, 383

Cartesian coordinates, 266
Cathode ray tube (CRT), 162

development of, 159

Cathode rays, identiﬁcation of, 108, 110 – 112
Causality, 31 – 35
Cavity resonator, Planck’s hypothesis for, 215
Center-of-mass frame, 569, 570
Central force, 266 – 271, 290

of hydrogen atoms, 278
particle energy degeneracy of, 270

Cerium, 322
CERN

colliding-beam areas at, 564f

 

Large Electron-Positron Collider (LEP) at,

Conduction

581 – 582

Cesium, 126
Chadwick, James, 125, 467
Chain reaction, self-sustained, 513 – 514
Chamberlain, Owen, 552
Charge, 571

atomicity of, 115
conservation of, 504
exchange of, 580 – 581

Charge-coupled device (CCD), 205 – 209

advantages of, 206 – 209
sensor of, 208f
single picture element in, 206f

Charge-coupled device (CCD) chip, 208f
Charge-to-mass ratio, 144
Charged-particle accelerator, 503
Charged particle tracking, 595 – 596
Charm, 575 – 576, 584
Chemical bond, 372
Chemical compound, basic unit of. See Molecule
Chernobyl reactor, 516 – 517
Chip technology, 442 – 443
Chlorine, electrolysis of, 109
Chromium, electron conﬁguration of, 321
Chu, Steven, 350, 366, 367
Clausius, Rudolf, 335

on statistical mechanics, 66

Clocks

Earth-based versus moving, 17 – 18
moving, 16 – 17
synchronized, 13
Cloud chamber, 535

in magnetic ﬁeld, 550

Cobalt

gamma rays from, 93
in medical therapy, 538 – 539
Cohen-Tannoudji, Claude, 367
Coherent photon, 447
Coherent population trapping, 367 – 368
Cohesive energy

atomic, 407
ionic, 406f, 407
of solid gas crystals, 410

Collective nuclear model, 479, 496
Collector-base junction, 438
Collider Detector (CDF), Fermilab, 595 – 599
Colliders, 581 – 582
Collision, conservation of mass-energy in, 

48 – 50

Color, 577
Color centers, 531
Color charge, 577, 578, 584

of gluons, 578 – 579
Color force, 578, 584
Compactiﬁed dimensions, 582
Complementarity, 180
Complementary error function, 215
Compton, Arthur Holly, 86, 89
Compton effect, 66, 86, 89 – 93

equation for, 90

Compton scattering, 540
Compton shift

for carbon, 93
formula for, 93, 100

Computer, integrated circuits in, 441
Condon, E. U., 242, 486

in insulators, 427, 428f
in metals, 426 – 427
in semiconductors, 428 – 429

Conduction band, 427
Conduction electron, 454

density of states for, 357 – 358

Conductivity, 454

free electron model of, 418
free electron theory of, 418 – 420

Conﬁnement time, 521, 540

in nuclear reaction, 520

Conservation

laws of, 559 – 561

of strangeness number, 562 – 563

of linear momentum, 6
of relativistic energy and momentum, 584

Constructive interference, 430 – 431
Continuous distribution functions, 348 – 349
Convergence limit, 129 – 130
Cooper, Leon N., 445
Cooper pair, 445, 456
Coordinates, Galilean transformation of, 4 – 5
Copper

linear absorption coefﬁcients of x-rays in, 529
resistivity of, 419f

Cornell, Eric, 370
Correlation diagram, 391

for hydrogen molecular ion, 392f

Correspondence principle, 139 – 141, 145, 203
Coulomb attraction, 390 – 391
Coulomb barrier, 124, 243, 540

overcoming, 519

Coulomb constant, 132f, 406
Coulomb energy, 394
Coulomb force, 266, 295, 468

of attraction, 132, 446n
repulsive, 474

Coulomb interaction, in ionic bonding, 405 – 406
Coulomb potential, 478
Coulomb repulsion, 316 – 317, 394

effect of, 477
energy of, 242 – 243

Coulomb repulsive energy, 486
Coulomb repulsive force, 495

in fusion reaction, 518f
Coulombic attraction, 203
Coulomb’s law, 122, 125
Covalent bond, 374 – 375, 399

classical orbit model for, 375f, 376f
electron sharing and, 390 – 397
quantum origins of, 393
spatial arrangement of, 376f
spatial electron distribution of, 375

Covalent crystal, 408 – 409
Covalent solid, 408 – 409, 454
Covariant physics laws, 3
Covariants, 5 – 6
CPT invariance, 289
Creation story, rewriting of, 65
Critical ignition temperature, 519 – 520, 540
Critical temperature, 443
Cross section, reaction, 506 – 508
Crystal

atoms in, 410f
color centers in, 531
covalent, 408 – 409

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.3

elastic scattering from, 155 – 156
formation of, 410
imperfections of, 455
ionic bonding in, 405 – 407
ions of, 407
metallic, 409
molecular, 409 – 410
potential energy of, 406 – 407
regularity of, 414

Crystal lattice

with atomic separation, 432f
electron wave scattering by, 429 – 433

Crystalline germanium, 412f
Crystalline gold, 253f
Crystalline iron, 411f
Crystalline platinum alloy, 241f
Crystalline solid, 405, 454

symmetry and regularity of, 404

Cubic box, 265t
Curie, Joliot and Irene, 464
Curie, Marie, 479 – 480
Curie, Pierre, 479 – 480
Curie (Ci), 482
Current density, 416 – 417
Current oscillation, frequency of, 66
Current-voltage relation, 435
Curved spacetime, 55 – 56
Cyclotron radiation, 520n
Cygnus X-1 black hole, 97 – 98

D-T fuel pellets, 524f
D-T fusion reaction, 524 – 525
Dalibard, Jean, 367
Dalton, John, 107, 547
Dark D-lines, 127 – 128
Darwin, Charles, 493 – 494
Data, detecting patterns in, 571
Daughter nucleus, 484 – 485
Davisson, Clinton J., 151, 154 – 155, 186
Davisson-Germer apparatus, 156f
Davisson-Germer experiment, 154 – 163
DC electric ﬁeld, 590
DC technique, 590
de Broglie, Count Louis, 151, 152

pilot waves of, 152 – 154

de Broglie formula, 157, 254
de Broglie relation, 186
de Broglie wave, transmission resonances of,

236 – 237

de Broglie wavelength, 152 – 153, 209
Dead Sea Scrolls, dating of, 490
Debye, Peter, 86, 355
Decay, 580, 584

of leptons, 560 – 561
processes of, 484 – 492
rate of, 482, 496

for carbon, 483
for radium, 483

of strange particles, 562, 563
of top quarks, 593 – 594
Decay constant, 481, 496
Decay equation, 52 – 53
Decay track length, 564 – 566
Deep water waves, 168
Degeneracy, 339
Degeneration, 290
Delta particle, lifetime of, 567

I.4

INDEX

 

Delta plus particle

decay of, 565 – 567
momentum and energy of, 566

Democritus, 107, 547
Density of states, 339
Depletion region, 434 – 435, 439 – 440
Deuterium, 464

fusion reaction with, 518 – 519
nuclei fusion of, 51

Deuterium-deuterium reaction, 519 – 520
Deuterium-tritium reaction, 519 – 520

criteria for, 521

Deuteron

binding energy of, 473
fusion of, 519

Diamond

speciﬁc heat of, 356
structure of, 408
Diatomic molecule

potential energy of versus atomic separation,

381f

rotation of, 378f
vibrational frequencies and effective force

constants for, 382

Diffraction, 154

of neutrons, 158

Dimensions, in string theory, 582 – 583
Diode, 456

characteristic curve for, 436f
current-voltage relation for, 435
forward and reverse currents in, 436
junction, 439
light-emitting and -absorbing, 436 – 437

Dipole-dipole attraction, ﬂuctuation-induced,

410

Dipole-dipole force, 376, 454
Dipole-induced force, 376
Dipole magnet, 592f
Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice, 287n, 307, 351f, 550
Dirac sea, 550
Dirac theory, 551 – 552
Disintegration energy Q, 50, 485, 512
Dispersion force, 376 – 377
Dispersive media, 168
Displacement law, Wien’s, 70 – 72
Dissociation energy, 374
for hydrogen ions, 394

Distribution function, 360 – 361
Donor atom, 433 – 434
Doping, 433
Doppler, Christian Johann, 25
Doppler formula, nonrelativistic, 178
Doppler shift, 22 – 23, 366

average, 366 – 367
double, 89n
formula for, 24 – 25
relativistic, 22 – 25, 36

Earth

cooling of core of, 493
determining age of, 493 – 495
measuring movement of, 7

Effective moment, 307
Effective one-dimensional wavefunction, 291
Effective spring, 381
Eigenfunction, 223

of momentum operator, 223 – 224

Eigenvalue

property of, 223
of sharp observables, 224

Eightfold way, 571 – 573
Einstein, Albert, 10, 66, 81f, 108, 125, 131, 350

biography of, 11
general relativity theory of, 54 – 59
light quantum theory of, 99
light speed and, 8
photoelectric effect theory of, 80 – 85
relativity theory, 1
revolutionary papers of, 80
special theory of relativity of, 1, 2 – 3
speciﬁc heat theory of, 352 – 355
time relativity theory of, 14 – 15
twins paradox of, 21 – 25

Einstein temperature, 354 – 355
Einstein’s coefﬁcient, 448, 456

of absorption, 447

Einstein’s equation, 554
Elastic collision, momentum changes with, 

261f

Elastic scattering, 155 – 156
Electric charge, 584

conservation laws of, 559 – 560
positive, 549

Electric ﬁeld, 549

applied to metals, 427
estimating strength of, 429
negative particle deﬂection by, 111f
net effect of, 415 – 416
zero, 443 – 444

Electrical conductivity
of metals, 417 – 418
of selected substances, 414t
variation in, 426 – 429

Electrolysis, law of, 108 – 109, 143
Electromagnetic disturbance, 66
Electromagnetic ﬁeld, 549
Electromagnetic force, 548, 583

mediation of, 549

Electromagnetic interaction, 549, 553 – 554, 580

between leptons, 557 – 558

Electromagnetic radiation, 383

absorbed by blackbody, 68 – 69
of decelerated charged particles, 528
transitions in, 385
travel of, 2

Double-slit electron diffraction experiment,

Electromagnetic spectrum, infrared portion of,

180 – 181, 183f

view of, 184 – 185
Drag force, 117, 118
Drift chamber, 536, 541, 596
Drift speed, 415 – 417
Drift time measurement, 595 – 596
Drift velocity, 595 – 596
Drude, 413 – 414
Dynamic equilibrium, 448

388

Electromagnetic wave detector, 57f
Electromagnetic waves

versus gravitational waves, 56 – 57
properties of, 66
radiation of, 67
relativistic Doppler shift for, 36
standing polarized, 78

Electromagnetism, theory of, 11

Electron, 547, 558

accelerated charges of, 131
antisymmetric, 315, 316
average distance of from nucleus, 293
charge of, 82, 109
colliding with photon, 176 – 177
collision of with photons, 91 – 93
conﬁgurations of, 320 – 321, 323t
de Broglie wavelength for, 154
diffraction lines from, 158
in double-slit experiment, 184 – 185
dual article-wave nature of, 152
electromagnetic interaction between, 553–554
energetic, 540
energy levels from bombardment of, 142 – 143
energy loss of, 598 – 599
energy of, 47
exclusion principle of, 312 – 314
force binding, 548
g factor of, 329
high-energy, collected by scanning electron

microscope, 162

identiﬁcation of, 110, 594
indistinguishability of, 313 – 314, 315
inelastic collisions of, 141 – 142
interactions of

in detector, 598f
with matter, 528
screening effects and, 316 – 319

jump of, 137
lepton numbers of, 560 – 561
mass of, 465, 467
matter waves of, 153 – 154
maximum speed of, 82
momentum of, 44
mutual repulsion of, 313f
in negative energy states, 550
within nucleus, 178
orbital angular momentum of, 132f
orbital motion of, 132
orbits of

Bohr’s sketches of, 138f
large, 140

particle properties of, 179 – 180, 186
in positive energy state, 550
probability for in hydrogen, 284
properties of, 557t
quantum mean free path of, 423 – 425
random successive displacements of, 415f
spin and magnetic moment of, 467t
spin angular momentum of, 306 – 307
spin of, 295

properties of, 305
semiclassical model for, 307 – 308

spin quantum number for, 305
spin resonance of, 470 – 471
spinning, 303 – 309
stable orbits of, 132, 144
in superposition state, 183
symbol of, 557
total magnetic moment of, 307
transport bottleneck of in metals, 421
velocity of, 143 – 144
velocity of in cathode tube, 110 – 112
wave nature of, 154 – 163
wavelength of, 181
x-ray scattering from, 90f

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Electron afﬁnity, 374
Electron-atom collision, 88
Electron beam

bombardment of, 145
deﬂection of, 112 – 113, 143 – 144
in food preservation, 539

Electron capture, 489, 492t, 496
Electron charge, 465

determination of, 144
measurement of, 108, 113 – 119

Electron diffraction

from stellar hydrogen, 340

Emission spectroscopy, 128
Emission wavelengths, 134
Endothermic reaction, 504
Energy, 584

activation, 374
carried from particle to particle, 549
conservation of

laws of, 504, 559 – 560, 584
of photons, 95 – 96
of scattered photons, 91 – 93

description of, 179 – 183
experiments of, 151
pattern of in amorphous and crystalline iron,

continuous distribution of, 360 – 361
density of, 78, 351
discrete, for particle in three-dimensional box,

411f

Electron-electron repulsion, 397
Electron jumps, 132
Electron-lepton number, 560 – 561
Electron microscope, 159 – 163
Electron-neutrino, 558

lepton numbers of, 560 – 561
properties of, 557t

Electron-positron annihilation, 551
Electron-positron pair, 550 – 551

bubble-chamber tracks of, 551f

Electron probability distribution, 286f
Electron-proton pair, 467
Electron-proton separation, 284
Electron sharing, 390 – 397
Electron volts, 47
Electron wavelengths, Davisson-Germer

experiments on, 154 – 163

Electron waves

out-of-phase, 430 – 431
probability densities of, 432f
reﬂections of, 429 – 433
strong reﬂections of, 423

Electronic energy, molecular, 377 – 378
Electronic heat capacity, 359 – 360
Electronic shell theory, 138
Electronic spectrum, 389
Electronic states, 400
Electronic transition, 330

of hydrogen, 135

Electrostatic force, 373
Electroweak force, 549, 584
Electroweak theory, 580 – 582
Elementary particles. See also speciﬁc particles

classiﬁcation of, 556 – 559
current theory of, 548
discoveries of, 547 – 548
energetic, recording paths of, 207
fundamental forces binding, 548 – 550
measuring properties of, 564 – 571
production of, 563 – 564
properties of, 557t
stability of, 563
types of, 550 – 600

Elements

electron conﬁgurations of, 320 – 323
ionization energies of, 323 – 325
periodic table of, 319 – 325
spectroscopic analysis of, 126 – 130

Elsasser, Walter, 154 – 155
Emission, radiation, 447 – 448
Emission lines

splitting of, 302 – 304

263

disintegration, 50
dissociation, 374
equipartition of, 343 – 344
in fusion reaction, 51
ionization, 323 – 325
kinetic, 44 – 46, 45f, 47, 50 – 53, 59, 82, 84,
132 – 133, 278, 372, 488, 504 – 505,
568 – 569

loss of

electrons in, 528
photons in, 528 – 530
rate of, 527

mass as measure of, 48 – 52
measurement of, 597 – 598
molecular absorption of, 372
for particle in box, 202
in particle production, 568 – 570
photon of, 552
potential, 132
quantization of, 225
quantization of for macroscopic object,

202 – 203

quantum of, 74 – 77
relativistic, 44 – 47

conservation of, 52 – 53

rest, 45 – 46, 47, 59
threshold, 504
total, 46, 47, 60
versus wavenumber, 430

Energy band

continuous, 426
electrical conductivity of metals, insulators,
and semiconductors and, 426 – 429

from electron wave reﬂections, 429 – 433
3s, 427f
in semiconductors, 451 – 453
of solids, 425 – 433
splitting of, 426

Energy-conserving optical transition, 280 – 281
Energy gap, 427, 455

values of, for semiconductors, 428t

Energy level

degeneration of, 264
degeneration of in hydrogenlike atoms, 287
quantum numbers and degeneracies of, 

265t

for quantum oscillators, 215 – 217
3s band of, 426

Energy-mass relationship, 554
Energy-momentum relation, 46 – 47
Energy operator, 221 – 222, 223
eigenvalue condition for, 276

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.5

Energy state

density of, 339
negative, 287n, 550
positive, 550

Energy-time uncertainty principle, 175, 476
Energy-time uncertainty relation, 567
Equilibrium

in ammonia molecule, 245 – 246
potential energy at, 212 – 213
ratio of, 448
stable, 212
unstable, 212 – 213

Equilibrium separation, 374
Equipartition of energy, 343 – 344
Equipartition theorem, 415
Equivalence principle, 60, 95
Eta particles, 557t
Ether, 6 – 7

velocity of, 7

Ether frame, 6 – 7, 8
Ether wind, 7
Euler’s identity, 431
Exchange force model, 475 – 476
Exchange particle, mass of, 476
Exchange symmetry, 312, 314 – 316
Excitation energy, 378n
Excited state, 202

ﬁrst, 285
of hydrogenlike atoms, 284 – 287
second, 264 – 265, 285
splitting of, 300 – 301

Exclusion principle, 295, 312 – 314, 315, 321f,

330, 346 – 347, 358, 361, 375, 397

nuclear energy level and, 478

Exothermic reaction, 504
Expectation value, 216 – 220, 224
Exponential decay, 481

Fairchild Camera and Instrument, 441
Falling-photon experiment, 95f
Faraday, Michael, 108 – 109
Faraday’s law of electrolysis, 143
Faraday’s law of induction, 443 – 444
Fermi, Enrico, 350f, 351, 466, 489
Fermi-Dirac distribution, 347 – 351, 359, 361,

421, 455

function of, 356 – 357

Fermi-Dirac probability, 427f
Fermi-Dirac statistics, 370
application of, 356 – 360

Fermi energy, 349, 350, 358, 361, 421

of gold, 360
of metals, 427

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, 568

accelerator at, 590 – 593, 594f
aerial view of, 591f
research of, 576
Tevatron accelerator at, 582

Fermi speed, 357, 421 – 422, 455
Fermi sphere displaced, 421f
Fermi temperature, 358 – 359
Fermi velocity, 414
Fermion, 314 – 315, 330, 346, 347, 348, 397, 576

half-integer spins of, 446
Fermion superpartner, 582
Fermtometer, 466
Ferromagnetic substance, 444f

I.6

INDEX

 

Fertilizer tag, 536 – 537
FET. See Field-effect transistor
Feynman, Richard P., 307n, 553 – 554, 555, 

576f

Feynman diagram, 553 – 554, 579
Field, 549. See also speciﬁc ﬁelds
Field-effect, 440
Field-effect transistor, 439 – 440
Field emission, 239 – 241

transmission coefﬁcient for, 240 – 241

Field emission microscopy, 239 – 241
Field particle, 549, 583. See also Force-carrying

particle

properties of, 577t

Fine structure doubling, 309, 329
Finite square well, 209 – 212

energy quantization for, 211 – 212

First excited state, 133 – 134

hydrogen in, 137

Fission, 503, 539 – 540

distribution of products of, 511f
rough mechanism for, 513
steps leading to, 478f
of 235uranium isotope, 513 – 515

Fission fragments, 510 – 511

converting kinetic energy of, 516
energies of, 527
mass number and, 511 – 512

Fission reaction, 50 – 51, 60
Fitzgerald, George F., 10
Fluorescence, 389 – 390, 400
Fluorescent probe, 390
Food preservation, 539
Forbidden energy region, 426
Forbidden region, 232, 238

classic, 249

Forbidden transition, 281
Force. See also speciﬁc forces

wavefunctions in presence of, 197 – 200

Force-carrying particle, 548
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 493
Fourier integrals, 170 – 173
Fourier transform, 412
Franck, James, 141 – 145
Franck-Hertz apparatus, 141, 141f
Franck-Hertz experiment, 141 – 145
Franklin, Melissa, 576, 590f
Fraunhofer, Joseph, 127 – 128
Fraunhofer D-line, 127 – 129
Free electron model, 454

of conductivity in solids, 418
of metals, 413 – 420
Free electron theory

of gas, 356 – 360
of heat conduction, 418 – 420

Free particle

plane wave representation for, 194 – 195
wavefunction of, 194 – 197

Free pat, 415
Freedman, Roger A., 253 – 259
Frequency, continuously varying set of, 170
Fringe pattern, 7 – 8, 10
Frisch, Otto, 510
Frustrated total internal reﬂection, 238
Fundamental force, 548 – 550
Fusion, 503, 517 – 526

advantages and problems of, 526

Fusion power reactor
design of, 524 – 525
generic, 526f
requirements for, 521

Fusion reaction, 51 – 52, 518 – 521

thermonuclear, 518

Fuzzy observable, 216, 223, 225
angular momentum and, 267

Fuzzy operator, 224
g factor, 329
Galaxy, rapidly receding, 25
Galilean addition law for velocities, 5, 6 – 7, 12
Galilean transformation, 4 – 5, 10, 12, 25, 35

covariant under, 6
versus Lorentz transformation, 28
velocity, 29, 30

Galileo, 4
Gallium arsenide p-n junction laser, 452
Gamma decay, 491 – 492, 492t, 496
Gamma detector, 551
Gamma radiation

damage from, 532
in food preservation, 539

Gamma ray, 480, 552

absorption of in lead, 528 – 529
damage from, 531
in ionization, 540
linear absorption coefﬁcients of, 530t
nucleus-photon interaction of, 550 – 551
penetrating power of, 481
speed of, 12

Gamow, George, 242, 486
Gas

atoms in, 410f
molecules of

energy of, 399
Maxwell speed distribution for, 341 – 344

Gaussian wave packet, 196 – 197
Gaussian wavefunction, 174 – 175
Geiger, Hans, 108, 119, 120, 122, 463
Geiger counter, 533, 541

diagram of, 534f

Gell-Mann, Murray, 555, 571f, 572 – 573
Genetic radiation damage, 531
Gerlach, Walter, 303, 304
Germanium, radial distribution function of, 412f
Germer, Lester H., 151, 154 – 155, 186
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 66, 335, 336f
Glaser, Donald A., 535
Glashow, Sheldon, 580
Glass

atoms in, 410f
metallic, 410 – 411

Global positioning system (GPS) units, 3
Global warming, 388
Glucose, metabolism of, 551
Glue-ball, 578
Gluino, 582
Gluon, 548, 549, 578
blue-antired, 578
color charge of, 578 – 579
properties of, 577t
virtual, 579

Goeppert-Mayer, Maria, 478
Gold

Fermi energy of, 360
␣ particle scattering from atoms of, 144

Goudsmit, Samuel, 304
Grand uniﬁcation theory (GUT), 582
Graphite surface atom, 258

STM image of, 259f

Gravitational attraction, 53 – 55, 96 – 98
Gravitational ﬁeld, 60, 549

redshifted, 55
transformed away, 55

Gravitational force, 549, 583

mediator of, 556

Gravitational interaction, 583
Gravitational photon mass, 94
Gravitational radiation, 56 – 59
Gravitational redshift, 96 – 99
Gravitational theory

Newton’s versus Einstein’s, 55
universal, 1

Gravitational torque, 297 – 298
Gravitational wave, 60
detection of, 57 – 58
Graviton, 549, 556, 583
Gravity, 11

light and, 95 – 98
Gravity imaging, 56f
Gray (Gy), 532
Greenhouse effect, 388
Greytak, Tom, 370
Ground quantum state, 370
Ground state, 133, 142 – 143, 202

of helium atoms, 316
of hydrogenlike atoms, 282 – 284
for three-dimensional box, 264
wavefunction for, 214f

Group velocity, 167

in deep water waves, 168
in dispersive medium, 168

Gurney, R. W., 242, 486
Gyromagnetic ratio, 297, 328

Hadron, 556 – 557, 576, 583
compositions of, 574 – 576
energy of, 597 – 598
identiﬁcation of, 594
properties of, 557t
quark compositions of, 575f
substructure of, 573 – 576

Hadronic calorimeter, 597 – 598
Hafele, J. C., 18n
Hahn, Otto, 510
Half integral spin, 347
Half-life, 482, 496

of ␣ emitters, 242
of strange particles, 562
for thorium and polonium, 244

Half-value thickness, 530
Hamiltonian energy operator, 222, 223, 276 – 277
Hänsch, Theodore, 366
Hansma, Paul K., 253 – 259
Harmonic approximation, 213
to molecular vibration, 381

Harmonic oscillator, 225

energy levels for, 215 – 217

Harmonic waves, inﬁnite number of, 170
Hartree-Fock methods, 319
Hartree theory, 318 – 319
Hartree’s self-consistent ﬁelds, 319
Hau, Lene Vestergaard, 371

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Hawking, Stephen, 247, 248f
Hawking radiation, 248, 249
He-Ne gas laser, 450 – 451
Heat conduction, free electron theory of,

418 – 420

Heated body

intensity versus wavelength for, 126f
universal character of, 68

Heisenberg, Werner, 173 – 174, 175
Heisenberg microscope, 176f
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 173 – 178, 368
Helium

atoms of, ground state in, 316
electron conﬁguration of, 320
ions of, 278
nucleus stability in, 469
wavefunction of, 315
Hertz, Gustav, 141 – 145
Hertz, Heinrich, 67 – 68, 80 – 82

experiments of, 66 – 68

Hertzian wave, 67
Heschel, William, 493
Hess, Harold, 370
Heteronuclear molecule bonding, 397 – 398
Hexagonal pattern, 572, 572f
Higgs, Peter, 581
Higgs boson, 581 – 582
Higgs ﬁeld, 581
High-energy particle collisions, 563 – 564
Hole, 429, 456
Holloway, M. G., 507n
Homonuclear molecule, 400

bonding in, 397
Hubble, Edwin, 25
Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced Camera for

Surveys technology of, 206f

Hulse, Russell, 58, 59f
Hund’s rule, 316, 320, 321f
Hydra galaxy, speed of recession of, 25
Hydrocarbon bond, 398 – 399
Hydrogen

Balmer series for, 136, 137
electron conﬁguration of, 320
electron-proton separation in, 284
electronic transition of, 135
electrons of

magnetic energy of, 300
wavefunctions of, 291

emission spectrum of, 129
emission wavelengths of, 134
energy-level diagram of, 134f
energy levels of, 133
in ﬁrst excited state, 137
ground state of, 395
ions of, electrolysis of, 112
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics valid for, 345
n = 2 level of, 281 – 282
nucleus of, 464
fusion of, 518

probability for electron in, 284
stellar, 340
Zeeman spectrum of, 308 – 309

Hydrogen atom

Bohr’s model of, 132f
central force problem of, 278
spectral series for, 130t
structure of, 295

wave mechanics of, 277 – 287
wave pattern of, 153
Zeeman spectra of, 301 – 302
Hydrogen bond, 377, 399, 410
Hydrogen chloride molecule, 386, 387f
Hydrogen diﬂuoride ion bond, 377
Hydrogen molecular ion, 390 – 395

antibonding orbital of, 395
bond energy of, 394
bonding and antibonding orbitals of, 393 – 395
correlation diagram for, 391, 392f

Hydrogen molecule
bond of, 396 – 397
bonding and antibonding orbitals of, 396f

Hydrogenlike atom

excited states of, 284 – 287
ground state of, 282 – 284
probability density for, 286f
radial probability density for, 285f

Hydrogenlike energy, 315
Hydrogenlike ion, 277 – 287

wavefunctions of, 291

IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, 446
Ice man, dating of, 490
Ideal gas, Maxwell speed distribution for, 341
Incompatible observable, 273n
Independent-particle model, 396, 496
Independent-particle nuclear model, 478 – 479
Induction, Faraday’s law of, 443 – 444
Inelastic collision

energy of, 141 – 142
between equal mass particles, 41 – 42
kinetic energy lost in, 48 – 49

Inelastic scattering, cross sections for, 507 – 508
Inert gas, van der Waals forces in, 375 – 376
Inert gas crystal, 410
Inertia, 53 – 55
Inertial conﬁnement, 523 – 524
Inertial frame of reference, 3, 4 – 5, 10, 19 – 20, 41

different, 21 – 22

Inertial mass, effective, 95
Inﬁnite square well, 201
Inﬁnite wave, 164 – 165
Infrared radiation, 388
Injection laser, 456
Injection pumping, 452
Insulator, conduction in, 427, 428f
Inteference patterns, 184
Integral spin, 347
Integrated circuit, 441 – 443, 456
Intel microprocessor, 442 – 443
Interference effects, 180 – 182
Interference fringe

accumulation of, 181f
schematic of, 9f

Interference pattern, 7 – 8

in double-slit experiment, 184 – 185
of matter waves, 187

Interferometer, 7 – 8, 9, 178

atom, 368

International Thermonuclear Experimental

Reactor (ITER), 523

Internuclear separation distance, 373 – 374
Invariants, 5 – 6
Iodine

inelastic scattering of neutrons from, 507

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.7

radioactive isotope of, 484

Ion chamber, 533
Ionic bond, 374, 399
Ionic cohesive energy, 406f, 407
Ionic crystal, 407
Ionic solid, 454

bonding in, 405 – 407

Ionization, 540

electrons in producing, 528
in energy loss, 527
energy of, 133 – 134, 323 – 325
of potential, 138

Ions

concentrations of in living cells, 390
density of, 521, 540

in nuclear reaction, 520

electrostatic forces between, 373
equilibrium separation between, 406–407
separation of, 406 – 407
thermal displacements of, 454 – 455

Iron

electron diffraction patterns of, 411f
linear absorption coefﬁcients of gamma rays

in, 530t

photoelectric effect of, 85

Isolated-atom approach, 425 – 426
Isotope, 464, 495

properties of, 465

Jeans, James, 77
Jensen, Hans, 478
Jets

identiﬁcation of, 594
interacting in detector, 598f

Joining conditions

at square barrier, 234 – 235
transmission resonance and, 236

Jordan, Pascual, 174
JT-60U tokamak, 523
Junction transistor, 437 – 439

K capture, 489
K shell, 330
K shell electron, 325 – 326, 489
Kaon (K), 561

properties of, 557t

Keating, R. E., 18n
Kelvin, Lord, 494
Kestenbaum, David, 576, 590f
Kilby, Jack, 439, 441
Kinetic energy, 132 – 133

of beta decay, 488
calculation of, 47
for emitted electrons, 84
of ﬁssion fragments, 516
in ﬁssion reaction, 50
in fusion reaction, 51
of hydrogen ions, 278
loss of in subatomic reactions, 52 – 53
lost in inelastic collision, 48 – 49
of low-energy nuclear reactions, 504 – 505
nonrelativistic form of, 45f
in particle production, 568 – 569
of photoelectrons, 82
relativistic, 44, 45 – 46, 45f, 59
of rigid rotating molecule, 378
of rotation, 372

I.8

INDEX

 

Kinetic energy operator, 221, 277

in three dimensions, 261

Kinetic temperature, in nuclear reaction, 520–521
Kinetic theory, 1
Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert, 68, 126

spectroscopic studies of, 127 – 128

Kirchhoff theorem, 69 – 70
Kleppner, Dan, 370
Knoll, Max, 159, 161
Krypton, kinetic energy of, 511
Kunsman, C. H., 154 – 155
Kurlbaum, Ferdinand, 71, 72

L shell, 330
Lambda particle, 561
properties of, 557t

Lanthanide series, 322
Laplace, Pierre Simon de, 493
Laplace-Herschel theory, 493
Laplacian, 261, 267 – 268
spherical form of, 277

Large Electron-Positron Collider (LEP),

581 – 582

Larmor frequency, 298 – 299, 301 – 302, 309, 328
Larmor precession, 298, 299
Larmor precessional frequency, 470
Laser

absorption, spontaneous emission, and

stimulated emission of, 447 – 448

applications of, 447
cavity modes in, 450f
low-intensity, 369
low-power gas, 450 – 452
population inversion and, 449 – 451
semiconductor, 451 – 454

Laser beam, counterpropagating, 367
Laser cooling, 366 – 368, 370 – 371
Laser fusion, 524
Laser-interferometric gravitational-wave

observatories (LIGO), 58

Lavoisier, Antoine, 107
Lawsin, J. D., 520
Lawson’s criterion, 520 – 521, 523, 540
Layered material, 257
Lead

gamma ray absorption in, 528 – 529
linear absorption coefﬁcients of gamma rays

in, 530t

linear absorption coefﬁcients of x-rays in, 529

Lederman, Leon, 576
Legendre polynomials, associated, 269, 276
Lenard, Philip, 82, 84, 119
Length contraction, 18 – 21, 36

equations for, 19
examples of, 20 – 21
Lorentz transformation in, 29

Lepton, 548, 557 – 558, 573, 576, 583 – 584

properties of, 557t, 577t

Lepton ﬂavor conservation, 560 – 561
Lepton ﬂavor-violating reaction, 561
Lepton number, 584

checking, 561
conservation law of, 560 – 561
positive and negative, 560 – 561

Leptoquark, 582
Leucippus, 107
Lewis, G. N., 138f

Light

absorption of by atoms, 366 – 367
ampliﬁcation of, 456
complementary view of, 100
dual nature of, 94
frequency of, 82
in gravitational ﬁeld, 55
gravity effect on, 95 – 98
intensity of, 82
momentum of, 86
photoelectric effect and quantization of, 80–85
polarization, reﬂection, and interference of,

100

quantum theory of, 65 – 100
speed of, 6 – 7, 12

constancy of, 10
detecting small changes in, 7 – 10

understanding of, 8
wavelengths of, 9 – 10

Light-absorbing diode, 436 – 437
Light beam

horizontal and vertical speed of, 8 – 9

Light-emitting diode (LED), 436 – 437, 456
Light quantum, 80 – 85

localized, 80 – 85
theory of, 99

Light wave

electromagnetic waves and, 67
frequencies of, 23 – 24, 131
photon picture of, 84f
versus sound waves, 23
speed of, 2 – 3
traveling, classical view of, 83, 84f

Line spectra, 119 – 120
Linear absorption coefﬁcient, 529, 540

of gamma rays, 530t

Linear accelerator (LINAC), 590 – 593
Linear momentum, 584

conservation laws of, 559 – 560
conservation of, 6, 504

Linear restoring force, 211 – 212
Liquid-drop model, 495 – 496
Liquid-drop nuclear model, 476 – 477, 478f
Liquid hydrogen bubble chamber, 563–564
Lithium

atoms of, electron loss of, 138 – 139
electron conﬁguration of, 320
ions of, 278
neutron capture by, 525

Lorentz, Hendrik A., 10, 25, 413 – 414
Lorentz coordinate transformation, 26

inverse, 26

Lorentz number, 420, 422
Lorentz transformation, 12, 25 – 28, 35

calculations of, 27 – 28, 29 – 31
derivative of, 26
inverse, 28, 29 – 30
relative particle speeds in, 43
time dilation in, 28

Lorentz velocity transformation, 26 – 27, 42
Lummer, Otto, 71
Lutetium, 322
Lyman series, high-energy, 137

M-theory, 583
Macroscopic object, energy quantization for,

202 – 203

Madelung constant, 406
Magic numbers, 469, 495
Magnet

effects of, 309 – 311
properties of, 295
Stern-Gerlach, 304 – 305, 307
Magnetic dipole moment, t296
Magnetic energy, 300
Magnetic ﬁeld, 296f

conﬁnement of, 521 – 523
external, 471f
in Fermilab accelerator, 591 – 592
gradient in, 471 – 472
magnetic moment in, 297 – 298
magnitude of, 444 – 445
nonuniform, 304
orientation in, 299
spherical quadrupole, 369f
of superconductor surface current, 445

Magnetic ﬁeld line, 456
Magnetic ﬂux, 444
Magnetic lens, electronic microscope, 159 – 161
Magnetic moment, 297 – 298, 328, 467t, 469 – 470

energy of, 299
of orbiting charge, 297
of rotation, 302 – 304
total, 307

Magnetic potential energy, 299, 329
Magnetic quantum number, 268, 275 – 276, 279,

290, 297, 329

Magnetic resonance imaging, 471 – 472
Magnetic torque, 328
Magnetism, orbital, 296 – 302
Magnetization, ferromagnetic, 444f
Manhattan Project, 555
Marsden, Ernest, 108, 119, 120, 122, 463
Mass

dual properties of, 53 – 55
energy in creation of, 569
as measure of energy, 48 – 52
moment of inertia about, 379
nuclear, 467
offspring versus parent, 50
total energy of, 60

Mass-energy conservation, 48–49, 52–53, 60
Mass number, 464, 495
conservation of, 504

Matter

atomic nature of, 106 – 108
constituents of, 581
particle interaction with, 526 – 530
particle nature of, 106 – 145
radiation damage in, 530 – 532
wave-particle duality of, 151
wave properties of, 151 – 187

Matter wave

dispersion of, 197
effective one-dimensional, 278 – 279
group velocity of, 167
groups and dispersion of, 164 – 170
interference patterns of, 187
representing particle with, 164f
wave equation for, 200
wavelength and frequency of, 152 – 153
wavelengths of, 186 – 187

Matter wave packet, 169, 172 – 173

moving, 173

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Matthiessen’s rule, 424 – 425
Maxwell, James Clerk, 99, 107 – 108, 130 – 131,

335f

classical theory of, 83
light speed measurement of, 6
proving theory of, 67
on statistical mechanics, 66
velocity distribution of, 70

Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, 335 – 344, 348,

350f, 361, 370, 455

assumptions of, 336
conditions for, 344 – 345
law of, 78

Maxwell-Boltzmann rms thermal speed, 414, 417
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics, 421

applications of, 345
criteria for validity of, 344 – 345
Maxwell law of radiation, 140 – 141
Maxwell speed distribution, 335 – 336

for gas molecules, 341 – 344

Maxwell’s equations, 25
Maxwell’s theory, 1
Mean free path, 415

of electrons, 423 – 425

Mean free time, 415
Medicine

radiation therapy in, 538 – 539
radioactive tracers in, 536, 537f

Meissner, W. Hans, 444
Meissner effect, 443, 444 – 445, 456
Meitner, Lise, 510
Melt spinning, 411
Mendeleev, Dmitri, 547
Mercury, 322

visible light from, 93

Meson, 553, 556 – 557, 573, 574, 575, 583

charmed, 576
colorless, 577
measuring mass of, 52 – 53
patterns of, 571 – 572
properties of, 557t
quark compositions of, 575f
spin-zero, 571

Mesos, 53
Metal

calculated values of parameters for, 359t
causes of resistance in, 423
classical free electron model of, 413 – 420
conductivity of, 426 – 427, 454
electrical conductivity of, 417 – 418
ﬁeld emission from surface of, 240f
free electron gas theory of, 356 – 360
free electron model of, 409f, 454
interatomic distance of, 455
quantum theory of, 420 – 425
radiation damage to, 530 – 531
resistivity of, 424 – 425
thermal conductivity of, 414
undergoing photoelectric effect, 83 – 85

Methane

bonds in, 398 – 399
solid, 410

Michelson, Albert A., 7, 9
Michelson-Morley experiment, 7 – 10, 12
Microprocessor, 442 – 443
single-chip 64-bit, 441f

Microstate, 336

distinguishable, 337 – 338
Maxwell-Boltzmann number of, 336–337

Microwave frequency range, 380
Millikan, Robert, 85, 108, 116f, 144

electron charge experiments of, 113 – 119

Minimum energy principle, 319
Minkowski, Hermann, 31 – 32

diagrams of, 32, 33 – 34

Mirror reﬂection, 580
Mobile charge carrier, 434 – 435
Moderator, 509, 539
Molecular crystal, 454

bonding in, 409 – 410

Molecular orbital, 391 – 392
Molecule

activation energy of, 374
bonding mechanisms of, 372, 373 – 377
bonds between, 375 – 377
bonds within, 373 – 375
complex, bonding in, 397 – 399, 400
complex stable, 375
deﬁnition of, 372
diatomic, 374 – 375
electron sharing and covalent bond of,

390 – 397

in gaseous phase, 377 – 378
reduced mass of, 379
rotation of, 372, 377 – 381
spectra of, 372, 385 – 390
vibration of, 372, 377, 381 – 384

Molybdenum, x-rays from, 93
Moment of inertia, 379
Momentum

angular, quantitation of, 139 – 141
average, 220
carried from particle to particle, 549
changes in with elastic collisions, 261f
conservation laws of, 559 – 560, 584
conservation of, 42–43, 49, 50, 52–53, 504, 569
energy and, 46 – 47
of gamma-ray photons, 552
of light, 86
linear, 59
of photons, 91 – 93
relativistic, 41 – 44, 152 – 153
in three-dimensional box, 262 – 263
total energy and, 60
of x-ray photons, 89 – 93
Momentum operator, 222t

eigenfunctions of, 223 – 224

Momentum-position uncertainty principle,

Metal crystal

particle interaction with, 186
properties of, 409t

Metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistor,

439 – 440

Metallic cylinder, aligned, 232f
Metallic glass, 410 – 411
Metallic solid, 409, 454

174 – 175

Moore, Gordon, 443
Moore’s law, 443
Morley, Edward W., 7, 9
Morse potential, 384
Moseley, Henry G. J., 326f, 328
Moseley plot, 328
Moseley’s law, 326 – 328, 330

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.9

MOSFET devices, 439 – 441
Motion

covariant, 3
Newton’s laws of, 1

Motion constants, classical, 273
Müller, K. Alex, 446
Multielectron atom, 295
Muon, 553, 558

decay curves for, 17
decay of, 561
decaying, 19 – 20
identiﬁcation of, 594
identifying, 598 – 599
interacting in detector, 598f
mass and momentum of, 52 – 53
properties of, 557t
symbol of, 557

Muon-lepton number, 561
Muon-neutrino, 558
properties of, 557t

Nagaoka, Hantaro, 125n
National Spherical Torus Experiment (NSTX),

522, 523f

Nature, fundamental forces in, 548 – 550
Ne’eman, Yuval, 572
Negative charge, 550
Neptunium

production of, 513 – 514
radioactivity of, 492
Nernst, Hermann, 355
Neutrino, 52, 496, 576

ﬂavors of, 559
identiﬁcation of, 594
identifying, 598 – 599
oscillations of, 558 – 559
properties of, 488
types of, 558

Neutron, 467, 495, 547

decay of, 580
diffraction patterns of, 158
discovery of, 464
inelastic scattering for, 507 – 508
interactions involving, 508 – 509
leakage of, 515
mass of, 465, 467t
momentum and energy of, 566 – 567
monochromatic, 159
nuclear interactions of, 561 – 563
properties of, 557t
regulating energies of, 515
spin and magnetic moment of, 467t
thermal, 158 – 159, 539

Neutron activation analysis, 537 – 538
Neutron capture, 515

by lithium, 525
process of, 508 – 509, 539

Neutron-capture cross section, 508f
Neutron detector, 536
Neutron number, 464, 469f, 495
Neutron-proton system, 474f
Neutron velocity selector, 159f
Newtonian mechanics, 2, 13, 194
Newtonian relativity, 3 – 7
Newton’s gravitational theory, 55
Newton’s laws

of mechanics, 12

 

I.10

INDEX

Newton’s laws (Continued)

of motion, 1
relativistic form of, 41 – 44

Nitrogen

atoms of

in equilibrium in ammonia molecule,

245 – 246

vibration amplitude of, 247

sigma bond in molecules of, 397, 398f

Nobelium, 323
Nondispersive media, 168
Noninertial frame, 3n
Normalization, 209
condition of, 224
of oscillator ground state wavefunctions, 

214

of three-dimensional box wavefunctions,

263 – 264

Normalization coefﬁcient, 339

of Maxwell speed distribution for gas

molecules, 341 – 342

Normalization constant, 339
Nova facility, Lawrence Livermore National

Laboratory, 524
Noyce, Robert, 439, 441
npn transistor, 438
Nuclear atom, classical model of, 131f
Nuclear charge, intensity of, 323 – 325
Nuclear cross section, 539
Nuclear energy, release of, 50 – 51
Nuclear ﬁssion, 60, 510 – 513, 539 – 540

discovery of, 464
stages in, 512f

Nuclear force, 463, 468 – 469, 495, 556, 583

attractive, 474
binding energy and, 472 – 476
charge independence of, 475
mesons in, 52 – 53
saturation of, 474 – 475
in terms of quarks, 579

Nuclear fusion, 517 – 526, 540

control of power level in, 515 – 516
ﬁrst, 514f
inertial conﬁnement in, 523 – 524
main components of, 516f
neutron leakage from, 515
safety and waste disposal for, 516 – 517
thermal neutrons in, 158 – 159

Nuclear spin, 469 – 470
Nuclear spin-orbit effects, 479
Nuclear-spin quantum number, 495
Nuclear structure models, 495 – 496
Nuclear surface effect, 477
Nuclear volume effect, 477
Nucleon, 468

binding energy per, 473 – 474
energy of, 472
ﬂuctuations of, 554
orbital state of, 478
in square-well potential, 479f
surface of, 477

Nucleus

average distance of electron from, 293
binding energy of, 472 – 476, 477, 495 – 496
charge and mass of, 465 – 466
Coulombic attraction of, 203
decay processes of, 484 – 492, 496
electrons within, 178
interaction with gamma-ray photon, 550
light and heavy, 517 – 518
parent and daughter, 484 – 485
positive and negative charges of, 124–125
properties of, 464 – 472
radius of, 467 – 468
size and structure of, 466 – 468
stability of, 468 – 469, 495
structure of, 463 – 496
unstable, transmission coefﬁcient for,

243 – 244

volume and density of, 468

advantages and problems of, 526
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁnement in, 521 – 523

Object brightness, 206
Observables, 221 – 222, 225

Nuclear ground state, low-energy, 479
Nuclear interaction, 580f

producing strange particles, 561 – 563

Nuclear magnetic resonance, 470 – 472
experimental arrangement for, 471f

Nuclear magneton, 467, 470, 495
Nuclear model, 119 – 120, 476 – 479
Nuclear physics

applications of, 503 – 541
birth of, 463
milestones in, 463 – 464

Nuclear potential energy, 486 – 487
Nuclear reaction, 503 – 505, 584

conﬁnement time in, 520
critical ignition temperature in, 519–520
cross section of, 506 – 508
energy from, 503
formula for, 504
kinetic temperature of, 520 – 521
low-energy, 504 – 505
observation of, 464
probability of, 506 – 507
Q values of, 504, 505t
rate of, 506

plane waves and, 223 – 224
quantum uncertainty for, 222 – 223
sharp, 260

Occhialini, Guiseppe P. S., 553
Ochsenfeld, Robert, 444
Ohm’s law, 414 – 418, 443, 454
Oil-droplet experiments, 113 – 117
Omega, 557t
Omega facility, 524
Omega minus particle, 572 – 573
Omega target bay, 525f
Operand, 221
Operator, 221 – 222

plane waves and, 223 – 224

Optical pumping, 449
Optical transition, 280 – 281, 385, 399 – 400

selection rules for, 385 – 386
selection rules of, 400

Orbital angular momentum, 328

projections of, 272f

Orbital magnetic moment, 298f
Orbital magnetism, 296 – 302
Orbital moment, Larmor precession of, 298
Orbital motion frequency, 140 – 141

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Nuclear reactor, 513 – 517, 539

Orbital quantum number, 269, 276, 279, 290

for stone, 270 – 271

Orbiting charge, magnetic moment of, 297
Oscillating electric current, 67
Oscillation

at barrier, 235
wavenumber of, 201 – 202

Oscillator

double, 245 – 246
energies of

of carbon atoms, 356
continuous distribution of, 77 – 79, 99
discrete, 77, 99

frequency of, 67

quantum, 74 – 77

frequency of motion of, 66
ground state wavefunctions of, 225

normalizing, 214

Morse, 384
one-dimensional, 78, 354
quantum, 212 – 217

versus classical, 75 – 76

vibration limits for, 214

Oxide layer

transmission coefﬁcient for, 235
tunneling current through, 236

p-n junction, 405, 433 – 436, 456

converting electrical input to light output,

436 – 437

physical arrangement of, 435f

p-n junction laser, 451 – 452
Pair annihilation, 288
Pair generation, 453
Pair production, 529, 540, 550 – 551, 552

of strange particles, 561 – 562

Parabola, 4f
Parallel-plate capacitor, tunneling in, 241
Parent nucleus, 484 – 485
Partial differential equations, 199n
Particle exchange model, 475 – 476
Particle in box, 224 – 225
location of, 219 – 220
sharp observables for, 223 – 224

Particle-matter interaction, 526 – 530
Particle physics, 553 – 556
Particle-wave complementarity, 94
Particle(s)

average momentum of, 220
average position of, 218 – 220
in box, 200 – 209
classiﬁcation of, 556 – 559
decaying of, 549 – 550

in black holes, 247 – 248
diffraction and size of, 154
distinguishable, 336, 337f, 346 – 347
energies of

with conservative central force, 266 – 267
in ﬁnite well, 211 – 212
quantization of, 273 – 277
in well of ﬁnite height, 209 – 210

heavy charged, 526 – 527
hypothetical positions of, 217t
indistinguishable, 336, 337f, 346, 348 – 349
interactions of, 549
measuring energy of, 597 – 598
numbers of, 571 – 572

 

patterns of, 571 – 573
positively versus negatively charged, 550
production of

energy considerations in, 568 – 570
process of, 568 – 569

range of, 526 – 527
of spin, 548
standard deviation of data points for, 

219

in three-dimensional box, 260 – 266
uncertainty in position of, 344 – 345
wave properties of, 151 – 187
zigzag movement of, 108
Paschen, Friedrich, 70 – 71
Paschen-Back effect, 309
Patterson, Clair Cameron, 494, 495f
Pauli, Wolfgang, 312, 351, 488
Pauli exclusion principle, 446, 550. See Exclusion

principle

Pendulum

frequency of, 75 – 76
period of, 18

Penetration depth, 210

for square barrier, 234

Periodic table, 319 – 325, 571
Perrin, Jean, 108
Phase stability, 591
Phase velocity, 165 – 167
of matter waves, 169

Phillips, William, 367
Phonon, 349, 424
Phosphorescence, 389, 400
Photino, 582
Photocurrent, instantaneous response of, 

82 – 83

Photoelectric effect, 540

discovery of, 68
light quantization and, 80 – 85

Photoelectron

kinetic energy of, 82
threshold frequency of, 82 – 83

Photoelectron effect, 99 – 100
Photoemission, time lag for, 83
Photographic emulsion, 535, 541
Photomultiplier, 534
Photon, 548, 549

absorption of, 528 – 529, 540
in box, 352
CCD detection of, 206 – 209
coherent, 447
concept of, 131
containing within laser, 450
electron collision with, 176 – 177
energy density of, 351
energy of, 540, 597

conservation of, 95 – 96
loss of, 388 – 389

exchange of, 553
exchange symmetry for, 314 – 315
frequencies of, 385 – 386
high-energy, 480
interaction of with matter, 528 – 530
in ionization, 540
kinetic and potential energy of, 96
momentum of, 86, 95, 552
properties of, 577t
resonance between, 385

scattering of, 388, 400

energy from, 92f

virtual, 554
wave and particle characteristics of, 152
wavelength of, 142 – 143
x-ray versus visible, 93

Photon beam, 540

attenuation of, 529
Photon cascade, 247
Photon-electron collision, 91 – 93
Photon-electron pair momentum, 86
Photon-particle collision, 86
Photon theory, 100
Photovoltaic device, 437
Physical laws, covariance of, 5 – 6
Physical processes, observed from moving

reference frame, 16 – 17

Physics

pillars of, 65 – 66
statistical, 334 – 371

Pi bond, 397
Pi meson. See Pion
Pilot wave, 152 – 154
Pines, David, 555
Pion, 288, 553

with annihilation, 288 – 289
decay of, 52 – 53
mass of, 554
momentum and energy of, 566 – 567
nuclear interactions of, 561 – 563
properties of, 557t
proton and, 554
rest energy of, 554
virtual, 570

Pion-exchange model, 580f
Pion exchange theory, 579
Pixel, 208

cross section of, 208f

Planar drift chamber, 596f
Planck, 1, 131

blackbody solution of, 68
versus Rayleigh-Jeans law, 77 – 79

Planck, Max, 66, 73f

blackbody formula of, 71 – 73

Planck distribution, 80
Planck formula, 352
Planck length, 582, 583
Planck’s blackbody radiation law, 449
Planck’s cavity resonator theory, 215
Planck’s constant, 99, 131
Planck’s law, 79 – 80
Plane wave, 225

representation of for free particle, 194 – 195
sharp observables and, 224
superposition of, 195f

Plasma, 519, 540

fusion-related, 521 – 523
temperature of, 521

Plutonium, 513 – 514
pnp transistor, 438
Point particle, 577t
Polarization gradient, 367f
Polonium, 244
Population inversion, 449 – 451, 457
Position-momentum uncertainty principle,

186 – 187

Position operator, 222t

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.11

Positive charge, 550
Positron, 287 – 288, 480, 550 – 552

discovery of, 550

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan, 551

of brain, 552f

Potassium electron conﬁguration, 320
Potential energy

for alpha particle-nucleus system, 486
of crystal versus ion pair, 406 – 407
curve for, 255
at equilibrium, 212 – 213
in hydrogen molecular ion, 390 – 391
for Morse oscillator, 384
for neutron-proton, 474f
in square barrier, 231 – 232
of two-atom system, 373 – 374
Potential energy diagram, 209f
Potential energy operator, 221
Potential function, general, 212 – 213
Powell, Cecil Frank, 553
Princeton Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor, 521
Principal quantum number, 279 – 280, 290 – 291
in hydrogenlike atoms in excited states, 284

Pringsheim, Ernst, 71
Probability

calculation of, 193
for particle in box, 204 – 205
static, 200
wavefunction and, 191 – 192

Probability density, 192, 205, 224
for ground-state particle, 214f
for hydrogenlike atoms, 285f, 286f
for low-energy wavefunctions, 210f
for oscillator states, 215 – 216
for particle in three-dimensional box, 265f
for particle positions, 217 – 218
radial, 282 – 283, 291
of standing waves, 432f
Proportional counter, 533
Proton, 547

Coulomb energy and repulsion of, 394
energy of, 47
force binding, 548
mass of, 465, 467t
nuclear interactions of, 561 – 563
␣ particle collision with, 121 – 122
plus pion, 554
positive charge of, 465
properties of, 557t
range of, 527
repulsive force between, 468
separation of, 391
spin and magnetic moment of, 467t
Proton accelerator, Fermilab, 590 – 593
Proton-antiproton collider, 556
Proton-antiproton collision, 575
Proton-electron combination, 467
Proton-neutron force, 53
Proton-neutron interaction, 580f
Proton-proton cycle, 518
Proton-proton system, 474f
Pulses, uncertainty or reciprocity relations of, 167
Pythagorean theorem, 16

Q values

calculation of, 505
of nuclear reaction, 504, 505t

I.12

INDEX

 

Quadrupole magnet, 593f
Quanta, 84
Quantum chromodynamics, 548, 577 – 579, 584
Quantum defect, 318
Quantum electrodynamics, 307n, 555
Quantum ﬁeld theories, 549
Quantum mean free path, 423 – 425
Quantum mechanics, 11, 547

of hydrogen and hydrogenlike ions, 277 – 287
observables and operators in, 221 – 222
in one dimension, 191 – 225
in three dimensions, 260 – 291
Quantum number, 133 – 134, 290
Quantum of energy, 74 – 77
Quantum oscillator, 212 – 217

versus classical oscillator, 75 – 76
energies of, 77
in nonclassical region, 214 – 215

Quantum statistics, 346 – 351
Quantum theory

of light, 65 – 100
light quantization in, 80 – 85
of metals, 420 – 425
particle-wave complementarity in, 94
predictions of, 139 – 141, 145
Quantum uncertainty, 222 – 224
Quark, 548, 574 – 576, 584

bottom, 576
charmed, 575 – 576
colored, 577 – 579
compositions of, 575f
decay of, 575
experimental evidence for, 578 – 579
ﬂavors of, 584
in hadrons, 556
nuclear force in terms of, 579
original model of, 574 – 575
properties of, 574t, 577t
strong color force between, 556
strong force binding, 548
top, 575, 590 – 600
up, down, and strange, 574

Quark-antiquark pair, 578 – 579
Quark pairs, 580f
Quasar, quadruply lensed, 208f

Rabi, I. I., 590
Rad, 531
Radial distribution function (RDF), 412 – 413
Radial probability density, 291

for any state, 282 – 283
for hydrogenlike atoms, 285f

Radial wave, 279
Radial wave equation, 270, 276 – 277, 278 – 279
Radial wavefunction, 280t
Radiation. See also Gamma ray; X-ray

blackbody problem of, 68 – 77
damage to matter from, 530 – 532
dosage units of, 531, 532t
with electron jumps, 132
emission and absorption of, 447 – 448
in food preservation, 539
law of, 140 – 141
thermal equilibrium with, 68n
types of, 480 – 481
uses of, 536 – 539

Radiation-emitting oscillator, 66
Radiation equivalent in man (rem), 

532

Radiation therapy, 538 – 539
Radio wave, 67f
Radioactive dating, 489 – 491
Radioactive element decay, 242 – 245
Radioactive isotope

in fertilizer, 536 – 537
of iodine, 484

Radioactive material

activity of, 496
decay processes of, 484 – 492

Radioactive nucleus

activity of, 482
beta decay of, 487 – 489
decay of, 50
␣ decay of, 242 – 244
radiation emitted by, 463
Radioactive series, 492 – 493
Radioactive tracers, 536 – 537
Radioactivity, 479 – 484

artiﬁcial, 464, 492
natural, 492 – 495
phenomenon of, 464

Radiofrequency signals, 472
Radium

activity of, 483
energy liberated with decay of, 486

Radium-226 decay, 484 – 485
Raman, Chandrasekhara V., 388
Raman effect, 388
Raman scattering, 388 – 389, 400
Raman shift, 389
Ramsauer-Townsend effect, 237
Random successive displacements, 415f
Rare earth, 322
Rayleigh, Lord. See Strutt, John William
Rayleigh-Jeans law, 77 – 79, 99
Rayleigh scattering, 388
Reaction energy, 539
Reactor core, 515 – 516
Reactor fuel, transport of, 517
Recession, speed of, 25, 31
Rectangular box, quantization in, 266
Red quark, 578f
Redshift, 25, 55

from high-density star, 96f

Reference frame, 3 – 4

inertial, 21 – 22
length contraction and, 19 – 20
moving, 16 – 17
in relative acceleration, 54 – 55
in relativistic momentum, 41 – 44
for special relativity, 13
in time interval measurement, 14 – 15

Reﬂection coefﬁcient

of barriers, 248 – 249
of square barriers, 233

Relative biological effectiveness (RBE) factor,

531 – 532

Relativistic energy, 44 – 47, 152 – 153

conservation of, 52 – 53

Relativistic momentum, 41 – 44

conservation of, 52 – 53
deﬁnition of, 43

Radiation detectors, 532 – 536, 541

Relativistic theory of electron, 287n

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

Relativity. See also Special relativity

general theory of, 53 – 59, 60

momentum and energy conservation and,

52 – 53

postulates of, 55, 60

practical applications of, 3
principle of, 3 – 7, 10, 12
reference frame for, 13
of simultaneity, 36
special, 1, 2 – 3
theory of, 11
of time, simultaneity and, 14 – 15

Reproduction constant, 514 – 515, 540
Repulsive force

between atoms, 373
at equilibrium separation distance, 374
between protons, 468
Resistance, in metal, 423
Resistivity

classical expression for, 417 – 418
of copper, as function of temperature, 

419f

for insulators, 427
temperature-dependent, 424 – 425

Resonance, numbers of, 571
Resonance particle, 564 – 567
Resonator, 66

total energy of, 74

Response time-bandwidth formula, 167
Rest energy, 45 – 46, 59

in particle production, 568 – 569
subtracted from total energy, 47
RF electromagnetic ﬁelds, 591 – 592
RF signal, 590
Richter, Burton, 576
Roentgen, 531
Roentgen, Wilhelm, 86 – 87
Rohrer, Heinrich, 254, 255
Rotation

allowed energies for, 379 – 380
angular momentum of, 306 – 307, 378 – 379
magnetic moments of, 302 – 304
spacing between levels of, 380

Rotation-vibration spectrum, 385 – 386
Rotation-vibration transition, 399 – 400
Rotational energy, 372, 377

of molecule, 378 – 381

Rotational quantum number, 379 – 380, 399
Rubbia, Carlo, 556, 580
Rubens, Heinrich, 71 – 72
Rubidium

discovery of, 126
electron conﬁguration of, 321
velocity distribution of atoms of, 370, 371f

Ruska, Ernst, 159
Rutherford, Ernest, 108, 110, 119, 131, 144, 463,

464f, 466, 493, 494

atomic model of, 119 – 125
observation of nuclear reaction by, 503
␣ scattering apparatus of, 120f
scattering experiments in, 467 – 468

Rydberg constant, 125 – 126, 130, 134, 135

s-p bond, 398 – 399
s-p hybridization, 398 – 399
Salam, Abdus, 580
Salt, electrolysis of, 108 – 109

 

Scanning electron microscope (SEM), 161 – 162

blood cell micrograph of, 162f
working parts of, 163f

for particle in box, 224
plane waves and, 223 – 224

Sharp variable, 216

Scanning tunneling microscope (STM), 239

angular momentum and, 267

applications and function of, 253 – 259
commercially available, 258 – 259
constant current mode of, 256 – 257
constant height mode of, 257
crystalline gold image of, 253f
designs of, 254 – 255
images of, 257 – 258
modes of operation for, 256 – 257
resolution of, 254, 256

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), 163
Scatter radiation, 388
Scattering

intensity versus angle of, 156f
by potential step, 237

Schardt, B., 258
Schawlow, Arthur, 366
Schreiffer, J. Robert, 445
Schrödinger, Erwin, 198
Schrödinger equation, 194, 224, 278 – 279
for barrier transmission coefﬁcient, 238
describing quantum oscillator, 212 – 213
energy operators in, 221 – 222
equation solutions to, 225
indistinguishability of electrons in, 314
for molecular rotation and vibration, 383 – 384
separating variables in, 267 – 268
for stationary states in three dimensions,

261 – 262

for time-dependent waveform, 244 – 245
time-independent, 209, 224, 234, 262,

276 – 277, 289

Schrödinger wave equation, 197 – 200
Schwinger, Julian S., 555
Scintillation counter, 534, 541

diagram of, 535f

Screening effect, 316 – 319, 323 – 325
Segré, Emilio, 552
Selection rule, 281, 400
Self-consistent ﬁeld, 319
Semiconductor, 405, 455

conduction in, 428 – 429
containing acceptor atom, 434f
double-heterojunction, 454
energy band in, 451 – 453
extrinsic, 434
impurity, 434
injection pumping in, 452
intrinsic, 429
n-type, 434, 439 – 440, 456
p-type, 434, 439 – 440, 456
population inversion in, 453f
two-dimensional representation of, 433f

Semiconductor devices, 433 – 443
Semiconductor diode detector, 533 – 534, 541
Semiconductor laser, 451 – 454
Semiempirical binding energy formula, 477, 496
Separated atom limit, 391
Separation constant, 262, 268 – 269
Separation of variables, 199n
Sharp momentum value, 289 – 290
Sharp observable, 224, 225, 260

in angular momentum quantization, 275 – 276
classical motion constants as, 273

Shell, 279 – 280, 291

conﬁguration of, 320 – 322
electronic transitions in, 330
quasi-periodic recurrence of structure of,

319 – 320

spectroscopic notation for, 280t
volume of, 282

Shell model, 478 – 479, 496
Shock wave, compressive, 524
Shockley, William, 437 – 438
Sievert (Sv), 532
Sigma bond, 398f
Sigma particle, 561

properties of, 557t

Sigma-type molecular bond, 397
Silicon, 452 – 453
Silicon chip, 442
Silver, resistivity of, 424f
Simultaneity

relativity of, 36
relativity of time and, 14 – 15

Sinusoidal wave, 164

inﬁnite and truncated, 170 – 172

Sisyphus cooling, 370
Slar cell, 436 – 437
Slepton, 582
Soddy, Frederick, 494
Sodium

atoms of

condensate of, 371
quantum defects for, 318

D lines of, 309
doublet of, 311
energy bands of, 426
idealized wavefunctions of, 426f
photoemission from, 83
3s band of, 427f
Zeff for electrons of, 317 – 319

Sodium chloride (NaCl)

crystal

ionic bonding of, 405 – 406
structure of, 405f

ions of, total energy versus internuclear

separation for, 374, 375f

Solar cell, 456
Solar electron neutrino, ﬂux of, 558 – 559
Solar neutrino mystery, 558 – 559
Solar spectrum, dark D-lines in, 127 – 128
Solar System, origin of, 493 – 494
Solid

amorphous, 410 – 413
band theory of, 425 – 433, 455
bonding in, 405 – 413
origin of energy bands in, 429 – 433

Solid elements, speciﬁc heat of, 353 – 354
Solid solution, 409
Solid state, 404
Somatic radiation damage, 531
Sonnenfeld, R., 258
Sound wave, analysis of, 23 – 25
Space quantization, 271 – 273, 290

Stern-Gerlach experiment to detect, 

304 – 305

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.13

Spacetime

causality and, 31 – 35
curvature of, 55 – 56
one-dimensional, 33 – 34
pairs of events in, 34 – 35

Spacetime diagrams, 32, 33 – 34
Spacetime interval, 33

invariant, 33
timelike and lightlike, 35

Spark chamber, 535 – 536, 541
Spark gap oscillator, 67
Spark gap transmitter, 67 – 68
Sparticle, 582
Special relativity, 554

consequences of, 13 – 25, 36
inertial frames of reference in, 21 – 22
postulates of, 10 – 12, 35
second postulate of, 15 – 18

Speciﬁc heat

dependence of on temperature, 353 – 354
of diamond, 356
theory of, 352 – 355

Spectra, Bohr’s quantum theory of, 125
Spectral content, harmonic wave, 170 – 171
Spectral energy density
of blackbody, 70 – 72
calculation of, 79

Spectral lines

sequences of in minerals, 126 – 130
from star, 135
width of, 178

Spectral quantum series, 126 – 130
Spectroscopic notation, 280t, 311
Spectroscopy, 126 – 130
Spherical coordinate, 274
Spherical harmonics, 269, 277, 290
Spherical quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld, 369f
Spherical symmetry, 270
Spin

angular momentum of, 306 – 307
of neutron, 467
nuclear, 469 – 470
patterns of, 572f
Zeeman spectrum of, 308 – 309

Spin-down state, 305
Spin magnetic moment, 303, 304, 306–307
Spin magnetic quantum number, 329
Spin moment, 329
Spin-orbit interaction, 309 – 311
Spin quantum number, 305, 329
Spin-spin correlation, 316
Spin-up state, 305
Spinning electron, 303 – 309
Spontaneous transition, 448
Square barrier, 231 – 238

joining conditions at, 234 – 235
penetration depth of, 234
reﬂection coefﬁcient for, 233
transmission coefﬁcient for, 233 – 234

Squark, 582
Standard Model, 580 – 582, 584, 590
Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC), 576

experiments at, 578

Stanford Linear Collider, 581 – 582
Stanford University research, 576
Star

gravitational redshift from, 96f

I.14

INDEX

 

Star (Continued)

spectral lines from, 135

Starlight deﬂection, 56f
Stationary state, 131, 144, 200, 224, 289

for particle in box, 204
for particle in three-dimensional box, 263
in three dimensions, 261 – 262
wavefunctions in, 209, 276

separation of variables for, 267 – 268

waves of

attributes of, 225
in presence of square barrier, 233f

Statistical mechanics, 65 – 66

postulates of, 338

Statistical physics, 334 – 362
Statistical weight, 339
Statistics

Bose-Einstein, 351 – 356
Fermi-Dirac, 356 – 360
Maxwell-Boltzmann, 341 – 345, 421
quantum, 346 – 351

Stefan, Josef, 69
Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 69
Stefan’s law, 69

derivation of from Planck distribution, 80
Stellar hydrogen, emission lines from, 340
Stern, Otto, 303, 304
Stern-Gerlach experiment, 304 – 305, 307
Stimulated emission, Einstein’s coefﬁcient of,

456

Stimulated Raman cooling, 367 – 368
Stoke’s law, 113 – 114, 117, 118 – 119
Stoke’s shift, 389, 390f
Stone, orbital quantum number for, 270 – 271
Straggling, 528
Strange particle, 561 – 563
Strangeness, 552, 562 – 563, 571, 584
Strangeness number, 562 – 563
Strassmann, Fritz, 510
String theory, 582 – 583
Strong color force, 556
Strong force, 548, 584

particles interacting through, 556 – 557

Strutt, John William, 77
Subatomic particle, 52 – 53

charge of, 109
identiﬁcation of, 110 – 112
weak interaction between, 555

Subshell, 280, 291

ordering of by energy, 321 – 322
spectroscopic notation for, 280t
structure of, 319 – 320

Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, 558, 559
Sum rule, 233 – 234, 249
Sun

ﬂux of electron neutrinos of, 558 – 559
hydrogen reactions in, 518
mass of, 56
spectrum of, 128f
Stefan’s law applied to, 69

Super Kamiokanda detector, 558
Super Proton Synchrotron, 581 – 582
Superconducting magnet accelerator, 

592 – 593

Superconductivity, 405, 443 – 446, 456
Superconductor, 443, 444f

copper oxide-based, 445 – 446

critical temperatures for, 443t
magnetic ﬂux in, 444
surface current of, 445

Superpartner, 582
Superposition state, 183
Supersymmetry (SUSY), 582
Symmetric pattern, 572
Symmetry breaking, 581
Symmetry condition, 213 – 214
Synchronization, 13
Synchrotron, 593
Synchrotron Booster, 591 – 592

Tantalum disulﬁde, surface atoms of, 257f
Tau, 558

properties of, 557t
symbol of, 557
Tau-neutrino, 558

properties of, 557t
Taylor, Joseph, 58, 59f
Telegdi, Valentine L., 555
Telescope, with eyepiece scale, 115f
Tersoff, J., 255
Tetrahedral structure, 408
Tevatron accelerator, 582, 592 – 593
Texas Instruments, 441
Thermal conductivity

free electron theory of, 418 – 420
of metals, 414

Thermal energy, 359

of oscillator, 354

Thermal equilibrium, 68n, 77–78, 334, 339

Maxwell speed distribution for gas molecules

in, 341 – 344
particles in, 344 – 345
radiation and oscillators in, 449

Thermal neutron, 158 – 159, 508 – 509, 539
Thermal vibration, 423
Thermodynamic bulk properties, 334
Thermodynamics, 65 – 66, 334

laws of, 1
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution in, 335 – 344

Thermonuclear reaction, 518

critical parameters in, 519 – 521

Thomas-Fermi atom, 317 – 318
Thomas-Fermi screening, 317 – 318
Thompson, William (Lord Kelvin), 494
Thomson, George P., 155
Thomson, J. J., 82, 108, 110 – 112, 125n, 131,

143 – 144

apparatus of, 114f
“plum-pudding” model of, 119

Thomson’s free electron theory, 413 – 414
Thorium

estimating half-life of, 244
radioactivity of, 492 – 493

Three-dimensional box, particle in, 260 – 266
Three Mile Island accident, 516
Threshold energy, 82 – 83, 504

kinetic, 569 – 570
in particle production, 568

Time

dilation of, 15 – 18, 36

deﬁnition of, 16
equation for, 16
in Lorentz transformation, 28
reference frame and, 19

evolution of, nonstationary state, 244 – 245
relativity of, 14 – 15

Time-independent Schrödinger equation, 200
Time interval measurement, 14 – 16
Ting, Samuel, 576
Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR), 521

diagram of, 522f

Tomonaga, Shinichiro, 555
Top quark

detector of, 593 – 599
how to ﬁnd, 590 – 600
mass distribution of, 599f
mass of, 593 – 594
pair production of, 594f
reconstructing, 599 – 600

Topness, 576
Total energy operator, 220
Tracing technique, radiation in, 536 – 537
Track detector, 534 – 535
Transformation, 4 – 5
Transformation equations, 5 – 6
Transistor, 437 – 439, 456

base of, 438
emitter of, 438
ﬁeld-effect, 439 – 441

Transition probability, 449
Transition series, 321 – 322
Translational energy, 377 – 378
Transmission coefﬁcient

approximation of, 238 – 239
of barrier, 248 – 249
for ﬁeld emission, 240 – 241
for oxide layer, 235
for ␣ particles of unstable nucleus, 243 – 244
for square barrier, 233 – 234

Transmission electron micrograph (TEM), of

tuberculosis bacteria, 161f

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 159,

161

schematic drawing of, 160f
Transmission resonance, 235
at square barrier, 236 – 237

Tritium, 464

fusion reaction with, 518 – 519
production of, 525

Tu-lepton number, 561
Tunneling

ammonia inversion and, 245 – 247
at barrier, 238 – 249
␣ decay in, 242 – 245
deﬁnition of, 231
for ﬁeld emission, 239 – 241
of hydrogen ion, 391 – 392
in parallel-plate capacitor, 241
phenomena of, 231 – 259
through Coulomb barrier, 243
through square barrier, 232 – 238

Tunneling current

density of, 255
monitoring of, 255 – 256
through oxide layer, 236

Twins paradox, 21 – 22

relativistic Doppler shift and, 22 – 25

Uhlenbeck, George, 304
Ultraviolet catastrophe, 77
Uncertainty, 222 – 224, 225

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Uncertainty principle, 173 – 178, 225, 368, 554

Wave

for angular momentum, 267
energy-time, 476
origin of, 175 – 177
in particle position, 344 – 345
physical properties leading to, 177
for position and momentum, 186 – 187
violation of, 185

Uncertainty relationships, 170
Uniform gravitational ﬁeld, 54f
Uniform speed, 21
United atom limit, 391
Universe, expanding, 25
Uranium

energy released in ﬁssion of, 513
ﬁssion of, 510 – 511, 512
ﬁssion reaction of, 50 – 51
radioactivity of, 492 – 493

Uranium-258 decay of, 484 – 485
Uranium-235 isotope, ﬁssion of, 513 – 515

Vacuum tube, 110
Valence band, 427, 429, 434, 455
van der Meer, Simon, 556, 580
van der Waals bond, 375 – 377, 399
van der Waals force, 375 – 376, 409 – 410

dipole-dipole, 376
dipole-induced, 376
dispersion, 376 – 377

Velocity

of ether wind, 7
Galilean addition law for, 5, 6 – 7, 12
relative, 30

Velocity selector, 110 – 111
Velocity space, 341
Velocity transformation, 35, 42

Galilean, 5
Lorentz, 29 – 31

inverse, 28, 29 – 30

Vibration

energy of, 372, 377

quantization of, 216

frequencies of for diatomic molecules, 382
molecular, 381 – 384

allowed energies for, 382 – 383
harmonic approximation to, 381
longitudinal, 381
as radial waves, 383 – 384

Vibration-rotation spectrum, 372
Vibrational quantum number, 382, 399
Vibrational state, 387f
Vibrational transition, 385 – 386
Virtual particle, 475 – 476
making real, 570 – 572

von Bunsen, Robert Wilhelm, 126, 127f
von Helmholtz, Hermann, 493
von Laue, Max, 87
von Weizsächer, C. F., 476

W boson, 575, 581, 593 – 594
Waste disposal, nuclear reactor, 

516 – 517

Water

linear absorption coefﬁcients of gamma rays

in, 530t

linear absorption coefﬁcients of x-rays in, 529

classic propagation of, 237
high-frequency, 166
superposition of, 166f

Wave group, 164 – 170, 225
presenting particle, 195
time duration of, 167
velocity of, 167

Wave mechanics. See Quantum mechanics
Wave packet, 225

changing shape with propagation, 195 – 196
constructing, 196
spectral content of, 196

Wave-particle duality, 151, 179 – 185
Wavefunction, 178 – 179, 187, 191

antisymmetric two-electron, 315, 316
of atomic electrons, 299
Born interpretation of, 191 – 194
Bose-Einstein condensation and Pauli

exclusion principle for, 346 – 347

in box, 225
in determining interference effects, 180 – 181
on different sides of square barrier, 232 – 233
effective one-dimensional, 291
exchange symmetry of, 314
expectation values of, 216 – 220
for free particle, 194 – 197
Gaussian, 196 – 197
hydrogen-like, 391
interior and exterior, 211 – 212
for low-energy states, 210f
mathematical expression for, 199
normalizing, 193
normalizing in three-dimensional box,

263 – 264

for particle ground state, 214f
in presence of forces, 197 – 200
probabilities and, 191 – 192
smooth, 192, 200
in square barrier, 234
in stationary states, 209
of surface electron, 255f
symmetric, 193, 330
in three dimensions, 261
time-independent, 200, 201 – 202

Wavelength

de Broglie, 152 – 153
of matter waves, 186 – 187
redshift of, 25
of spectral line, 178

Wavenumber, 430
Weak force, 549, 583
Weak interaction

between leptons, 557 – 558
of strange particles, 562

Weber, Joseph, 57
Weber bar detector, 57 – 58
Wedgwood, Thomas, 68
Weinberg, Steven, 580
Weisskopf, Victor, 303, 312
Weizsächer semiempirical binding energy

formula, 477

Wheeler, John, 55
White dwarf, gravitational redshift for, 96 – 98
Wiedemann-Franz law, 419 – 420, 420, 455

quantum form of, 422

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

INDEX

I.15

Wiedemann-Franz relation, 414
Wieman, Carl, 370
Wien’s displacement law, 70 – 71
Wien’s exponential law, 71

Planck’s blackbody formula and, 71 – 73

Wilson, Charles, 113
Wino, 582
Wire chamber, 536, 541
Work-energy theorem, 44 – 45
Work function, 82 – 83

of selected metals, 84t

X-ray, 86 – 89

biological damage from, 532
collected by scanning electron microscope,

162

damage from, 531
in food preservation, 539
linear absorption coefﬁcients of, 529
production of, 87f
scattering of, 87 – 89, 90f

angle of, 91
intensity and wavelength of, 89 – 93

spectra of, 325 – 328

origin of, 325f

X-ray electron scattering, 100
X-ray emission spectrum, 88
X-ray photon

behavior of, 89 – 93
versus visible photons, 93

X-ray spectrometer, 89f
Xenon, 507
Xi particle, 557t

Y meson, 575
Yttrium, 322
Yukawa, Kideki, 553

Z boson, 581
Z electron, 124, 317
mass of, 472 – 473

Z elements, 328

inner electrons of, 325

Z proton, 466 – 467, 495

mass of, 124

Zeeman, Pieter, 67, 301
Zeeman effect, 67, 329

anomalous, 302 – 303, 307
internal, 309
normal, 296 – 302

Zeeman energy, 367, 369
Zeeman spectral lines, 301f
Zeeman spectrum, 308 – 309
Zeeman splitting, 301 – 302

anomalous, 303
Zeeman state, 370
Zeff, 317 – 319
Zero energy level, 347

fermions in, 348

Zero magnetic ﬁeld, 299n
Zero-point energy, 202
Zinc, photoelectric effect of, 85
Zweig, George, 574 – 575

 

Some Fundamental Constants*

QUANTITY

SYMBOL

VALUE

Atomic mass unit

Avogadro’s number

Bohr magneton

Bohr radius

Boltzmann’s constant

Coulomb constant

Electron charge

Electron mass

Gravitational constant

Hydrogen ground state 
energy
Neutron mass

Nuclear magneton

Permeability of free
space
Permittivity of free
space
Planck’s constant

Proton mass

Rydberg constant

u

NA

␮B ⫽

e ប
2me

ប2
mee 2k

a0 ⫽

k B

1.6605 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg
931.49 MeV/c 2
6.022 ⫻ 1023 particles/mole

9.274 ⫻ 10⫺24 J/T
5.788 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/T

0.5292 ⫻ 10⫺10 m

1.381 ⫻ 10⫺23 J/K
8.617 ⫻ 10⫺5 eV/K

k ⫽ 1/(4␲⑀0)

8.988 ⫻ 109 N ⭈ m2/C2

e

me

G

E0 ⫽ ⫺

mee4k2
2ប2

m n

␮n ⫽

e ប
2m p

␮0

⑀0

h

ប ⫽ h/2␲

mp

R ⫽

mek2e4
4␲c ប3

1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 C

9.109 ⫻ 10⫺31 kg
5.486 ⫻ 10⫺4 u
0.5110 MeV/c 2

6.673 ⫻ 10⫺11 N ⭈ m2/kg2

⫺13.61 eV

1.675 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg
1.009 u
939.6 MeV/c2

5.051 ⫻ 10⫺27 J/T
3.152 ⫻ 10⫺8 eV/T

4␲ ⫻ 10⫺7 N/A2

8.854 ⫻ 10⫺12 C2/N ⭈ m2

6.626 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s
4.136 ⫻ 10⫺15 eV ⭈ s
1.055 ⫻ 10⫺34 J ⭈ s
6.582 ⫻ 10⫺16 eV ⭈ s

1.673 ⫻ 10⫺27 kg
1.007 u
938.3 MeV/c2

1.097 ⫻ 107 m⫺1

Speed of light in vacuum
Stefan-Boltzmann constant

c
␴

2.998 ⫻ 108 m/s
5.6705 ⫻ 10⫺8 W/m2 K4

* More precise values of physical constants are provided in Appendix A.

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

 

Useful Conversions and Combinations

1 eV ⫽ 1.602 ⫻ 10⫺19 J

1 cal ⫽ 4.184 J

1 u ⫽ 931.5 MeV/c2

1 MeV/c2 ⫽ 1.073 ⫻ 10⫺3 u ⫽ 1.783 ⫻ 10⫺30 kg

1 Å ⫽ 10⫺10 m ⫽ 0.1 nm

1 fm ⫽ 10⫺15 m
1 in ⫽ 2.540 cm
1 mi ⫽ 1609 m

hc ⫽ 1.240 ⫻ 103 eV⭈nm ⫽ 1.986 ⫻ 10⫺25 J⭈m
បc ⫽ 1.973 ⫻ 102 eV ⭈nm ⫽ 3.162 ⫻ 10⫺26 J ⭈m

kBT ⫽ 0.02525 eV at T ⫽ 300 K
ke 2 ⫽ e 2/4␲⑀0 ⫽ 1.440 eV ⭈nm

1 barn ⫽ 10⫺28 m2

1 curie ⫽ 3.7 ⫻ 1010 decays/s

1 MeV/c ⫽ 5.344 ⫻ 10⫺22 kg⭈m/s

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

p
u
o
r
G

0

p
u
o
r
G

I
I
V

p
u
o
r
G

I
V

p
u
o
r
G

V

p
u
o
r
G

V
I

p
u
o
r
G

I
I
I

s
t
n
e
m
e
l
e
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
n
a
r
T

2

e
H
1

H

6

 

2
0
0

.

4

9

 

7
0
0

.

1

0
1

2
s
1

e
N
9

1
s
1

F

8

O
7

N
6

C

5

B

8
1

r
A

7
1

l

C

6
1

S

5
1

P

4
1

i
S

3
1

6

p
2

5

p
2

4

p
2

3

p
2

2

p
2

1

p
2

l

A

8
4
9

.

9
3

3
5
4

.

5
3

6
6
0

.

2
3

4
7
9

.

0
3

6
8
0

.

8
2

2
8
9

.

6
2

6

p
3

5

p
3

4

p
3

3

p
3

2

p
3

1

p
3

0
8
1

.

0
2

8
9
9

.

8
1

9
9
9

.

5
1

7
0
0

.

4
1

1
1
0

.

2
1

1
1
8

.

0
1

n
o

i
t
a
r
u
g
i
f
n
o
c
 
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

2
s
4

r
e
b
m
u
n
 
c
i
m
o
t
A

0
2

a
C

l
o
b
m
y
S

8
7
0

.

0
4

†
 
s
s
a
m
 
c
i
m
o
t
A

6
3

r
K

5
3

r
B

4
3

e
S

3
3

s
A

2
3

e
G
1
3

a
G
0
3

n
Z

9
2

u
C

8
2

i

N
7
2

o
C

6
2

e
F

5
2

n
M

4
2

r
C

3
2

V

2
2

i

T

1
2

c
S

0
2

a
C

9
1

4
5

6

p
4

e
X

3
5

5

p
4

0
8

.

3
8

4
0
9

.

9
7

I

2
5

e
T

1
5

b
S

0
5

n
S

9
4

n
I

8
4

d
C

7
4

g
A

6
4

d
P

5
4

h
R

4
4

u
R

3
4

c
T

2
4

o
M

1
4

b
N
0
4

r
Z

9
3

Y

8
3

r
S

7
3

6
9

.

8
7

4

p
4

2
2
9

.

4
7

3

p
4

1
6

.

2
7

2

p
4

3
2
7

.

9
6

9
3

.

5
6

6
4
5

.

3
6

1

p
4

2
s
4
0
1

d
3

1
s
4
0
1

d
3

3
9
6

.

8
5

2
s
4
8

d
3

3
3
9

.

8
5

2
s
4
7

d
3

5
4
8

.

5
5

2
s
4
6

d
3

8
3
9

.

4
5

2
s
4
5

d
3

6
9
9

.

1
5

1
s
4
5

d
3

2
4
9

.

0
5

2
s
4
3

d
3

7
6
8

.

7
4

2
s
4
2

d
3

6
5
9

.

4
4

2
s
4
1
d
3

8
7
0

.

0
4

8
9
0

.

9
3

9
2

.

1
3
1

0
9

.

6
2
1

0
6

.

7
2
1

6
7

.

1
2
1

1
7

.

8
1
1

2
8

.

4
1
1

1
4

.

2
1
1

7
8

.

7
0
1

2
4

.

6
0
1

1

p
5

2
s
5
0
1

d
4

1
s
5
0
1

d
4

0
1

d
4

1
9

.

2
0
1

1
s
5
8

d
4

7
0

.

1
0
1

1
s
5
7

d
4

2
s
5
5

d
4

1
s
5
5

d
4

)
8
9
(

4
9

.

5
9

6
0
9

.

2
9

1
s
5
4

d
4

4
2
2

.

1
9

2
s
5
2

d
4

6
0
9

.

8
8

2
s
5
1
d
4

6
8

n
R

5
8

t
A

4
8

6

p
5

5

p
5

4

p
5

o
P

3
8

3

p
5

i

B

2
8

)
2
2
2
(

6

p
6

)
0
1
2
(

5

p
6

)
9
0
2
(

4

p
6

8
9

.

8
0
2

3

p
6

2

p
5

b
P

2

.

7
0
2

2

p
6

8
3

.

4
0
2

9
5

.

0
0
2

7
9

.

6
9
1

1

p
6

2
s
6
0
1

d
5

1
s
6
0
1

d
5

8
0

.

5
9
1

1
s
6
9

d
5

2
s
6
7

d
5

2

.

2
9
1

3
2

.

0
9
1

2
s
6
6

d
5

1
2

.

6
8
1

2
s
6
5

d
5

4
8

.

3
8
1

2
s
6
4

d
5

5
9

.

0
8
1

2
s
6
3

d
5

.

9
4
8
7
1

2
s
6
2

d
5

1
8

l

T

0
8

g
H
9
7

u
A

8
7

t
P

7
7

r
I

6
7

s

O
5
7

e
R

4
7

W

3
7

a
T

2
7

f

H

*
1
7
7
5

-

6
5

2
s
7
1
d
6

2
s
7
0

d
6

2
s
7
0

d
6
3
1
f
5
2
s
7
0

d
6
2
1
f
5
2
s
7
0

d
6
1
1
f
5

2
s
7
0

d
6
0
1
f
5

2
s
7
1
d
6
8
f
5

2
s
7
1
d
6
7
f
5

2
s
7
0

d
6
7
f
5

2
s
7
0

d
6
6
f
5

2
s
7
1

d
6
4
f
5

2
s
7
1
d
6
3
f
5

2
s
7
1
d
6
2
f
5

)
2
6
2
(

)
9
5
2
(

)
8
5
2
(

)
7
5
2
(

)
2
5
2
(

)
1
5
2
(

)
7
4
2
(

)
7
4
2
(

)
3
4
2
(

)
4
4
2
(

)
7
3
2
(

3
0

.

8
3
2

4
0

.

1
3
2

4
0

.

2
3
2

2
s
7
2

d
6

)
7
2
2
(

2
s
7
1
d
6

2
s
6
4
1
f
4
1
d
5

2
s
6
4
1
f
4

2
s
6
3
1
f
4

2
s
6
2
1
f
4

2
s
6
1
1
f
4

2
s
6
0
1
f
4

2
s
6
8
f
4
1
d
5

2
s
6
7
f
4
1

d
5

7
9

.

4
7
1

4
0

.

3
7
1

3
9

.

8
6
1

6
2

.

7
6
1

3
9

.

4
6
1

0
5

.

2
6
1

3
9

.

8
5
1

5
2

.

7
5
1

6
9

.

1
5
1

2
s
6
7
f
4

6
3

.

0
5
1

2
s
6
6
f
4

)
5
4
1
(

2
s
6
5
f
4

4
2

.

4
4
1

2
s
6
4
f
4

1
9

.

0
4
1

2
1

.

0
4
1

2
s
6
3
f
4

2
s
6
1
f
4
1
d
5

.

1
9
8
3
1

2
s
6
1
d
5

1
7

u
L

0
7

b
Y

9
6

m
T

8
6

r
E

7
6

 

o
H
6
6

y
D

5
6

b
T

4
6

d
G
3
6

u
E

2
6

m
S

1
6

m
P

0
6

d
N
9
5

r
P

8
5

e
C

7
5

a
L

s
e
i
r
e
s
 
e
d
i
n
a
h
t
n
a
L
*

3
0
1

r
L

2
0
1

o
N
1
0
1

d
M

0
0
1

m
F

9
9

s
E

8
9

f
C

7
9

k
B

6
9

m
C

5
9

m
A

4
9

u
P

3
9

p
N
2
9

U
1
9

a
P

0
9

h
T

9
8

c
A

s
e
i
r
e
s
 
e
d
i
n
i
t
c
A
*
*

c
i

m
o
t
a
/
v
o
g
.
t
s
i

n
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p

†
†
4
1
)1
9
8
2
(

†
†
2
1
1

†
†
1
1
1

0
1
1

s
D

9
0
1

t

M

8
0
1

s

H
7
0
1

h
B

6
0
1

g
S

5
0
1

b
D

4
0
1

f
R

*
*
3
0
1
9
8

-

8
8

a
R

7
8

)
5
8
2
(

)
2
7
2
(

)
1
7
2
(

)
8
6
2
(

)
9
6
2
(

)
4
6
2
(

)
6
6
2
(

)
2
6
2
(

)
1
6
2
(

2
s
7
3

d
6

2
s
7
2

d
6

)
6
2
2
(

2
s
7

s
t
n
e
m
e
l
E
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
e
l
b
a
T
 
c
i
d
o
i
r
e
P

p
u
o
r
G

I
I

p
u
o
r
G

I

1

H

9

 

7
0
0

.

1

4

e
B

3

2
2
1
0
9

.

2
s
2

2
1

g
M

1
1

1
4
9

.

6

1
s
2

a
N

s
1

i

L

5
0
3

.

4
2

0
9
9

.

2
2

2
s
3

2
s
4

1
s
3

K

1
s
4

b
R

2
s
6

2
6

.

7
8

8
6
4

.

5
8

2
s
5

a
B

5
5

1
s
5

s
C

.

3
3
7
3
1

.

1
9
2
3
1

1
s
6

r
F

)
3
2
2
(

1
s
7

Copyright 2005 Thomson Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  

